ROCKLIN, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Rocklin, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 15, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The Rocklin, California, Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1981, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Russell A. Hildebrand, city attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 15, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 1117, passed August 13, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title , then chapter , and ending with section . Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 15 a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 15, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 15 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 15, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 15, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - City council findings. 
The city council finds and determines, as a result of study and investigation by the city and its city attorney, that the municipal code of the city of Rocklin is an approved code for adoption by reference within the meaning of Government Code Section 50022.1 
(Ord. 489 § 1, 1982).  
1.01.020 - Code adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 50022.1 and 50022.2, inclusive, the city council adopts by reference the municipal code of the city of Rocklin, together with those ordinances passed subsequent to the compilation of the Rocklin Municipal Code and prior to its adoption, and together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code. Three copies of the Rocklin Municipal Code, together with the above mentioned ordinances and secondary codes, certified to be true copies by the city clerk, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk at least fifteen days preceding the hearing hereinafter provided for; and shall be kept there for public inspection while the code is in force. 
(Ord. 489 § 2, 1982).  
1.01.030 - Public hearing and notice. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 50022.3, after the first reading of the title of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the title of the code to be adopted hereby, a public hearing shall be held thereon on the sixth day of December, 1982, and notice thereof shall be given in accordance with Government Code Section 6066 by publication of a notice in The Press-Tribune, a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the county and circulated within the city. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and shall state that copies of the Rocklin Municipal Code being considered for adoption are on file with the city clerk and are open to public inspection. The notice shall contain a description sufficient to give notice to interested persons of the purpose of the code to be adopted by reference and the subject matter thereof. The city council hereby finds and determines that the following is a sufficient description to be incorporated in the notice to give notice to interested persons of the purpose of the code and the subject matter thereof: 
 A municipal code entitled, "Rocklin Municipal Code" comprising all general ordinances of the City of Rocklin up to and including Ordinance No. 467, passed and adopted March 1,1982, and further including Ordinance Nos. 468 through 488, inclusive, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 467 but prior to the adoption of the Rocklin Municipal Code and those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 489 § 3, 1982).  
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in the Rocklin Municipal Code was Ordinance No. 467, passed March 1, 1982. Ordinance Nos. 468 through 488, inclusive, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 467, but prior to adoption of the ordinance codified herein, are adopted and made a part of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 489 § 4, 1982).  
1.01.050 - Amendments. 
In accordance with Government Code Section 50022.7, the city council may propose and adopt amendments to the municipal code and, in the discretion of the city council, such amendments may be adopted by reference as provided in Government Code Section 50022.7, or an ordinance may be enacted in the regular manner, setting forth the entire text of such amendment. 
(Ord. 489 § 5, 1982).  
1.01.060 - Repeal of ordinances in conflict with code. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the Rocklin Municipal Code, as adopted by this ordinance and including those ordinances incorporated in said code by Section 1.01.040, and those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. 489 § 9, 1982).  
1.01.070 - Penalty where none provided. 
Whenever in the Rocklin Municipal Code or in any other ordinance of the city any act, is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or any offense, or the doing of any act, is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of said code or any other ordinance of the city shall be punished according to the punishment prescribed for a misdemeanor in the general laws of the state. 
(Ord. 489 § 6, 1982).  
1.01.080 - Each day of violation constitutes separate offense. 
Every day any violation of the Rocklin Municipal Code or any other ordinance of the city continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 489 § 7, 1982).  
1.01.090 - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of the ordinance codified herein and the code hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of said ordinance and the code hereby adopted are declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, sections and subsections of this chapter or the code hereby adopted. 
(Ord. 489 § 8, 1982).  
1.01.100 - Effective date. 
The provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code shall be in full force and effect on and after thirty days after the adoption thereof. 
(Ord. 489 § 10, 1982).  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
In the construction of this code and of all the ordinances of the city of Rocklin, California, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the language or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  "Building official," "building inspector," "administrative authority" or "authority." All references to the building official, building inspector, administrative authority or authority in this code or in any of the codes hereinafter set forth, shall be construed to refer to the city manager or his duly authorized representative. Such codes are: Uniform Building Code, Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Sign Code, Uniform Housing Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Mechanical Code and Uniform Swimming Pool Code. 
B.  "The city" or "this city" means the city of Rocklin, California, a municipal corporation, all the territory within the boundaries thereof, and all territory outside the boundaries thereof over which it has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
C.  "The code" or "this code" means the code of the city. 
D.  "Council" means the city council of the city. 
E.  "County" means the county of Placer, state of California. 
F.  "Enforcement officer" means the city manager or his or her designee, unless under another provision of this code another officer is given the authority to enforce specified provisions of this code or another ordinance enacted by the city. 
G.  "Health officer" means the health officer of the county or any of his duly authorized representatives. 
H.  "Oath" includes affirmation. 
I.  "Owner" includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part. 
J.  "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
K.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
L.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
M.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
N.  "Shall" is mandatory, "must" is mandatory, "may" is permissive. 
O.  "State" means the state of California. 
P.  "Tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
(Ord. 817 § 2, 1999; Ord. 431 § 1 (part)(A, B, C, E—P). 1980).  
1.04.020 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to common approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and others as may have acquired a particular and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 431 § 2, 1980).  
1.04.030 - Grammatical interpretation. 
A.  Designation of the form of any gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Words used in the present tense include the past and future, and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
D.  Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and the approved usage of the language. 
(Ord. 431 § 3(A), 1980).  
1.04.040 - Prohibited acts. 
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 431 § 3(B), 1980).  
1.04.050 - Computation of time—Days. 
The time in which any act provided by law is done is to be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a holiday or a Sunday, and then such day shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 431 § 3(D), 1980).  
1.04.060 - Official time—Hours. 
Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the state. 
(Ord. 431 § 4, 1980).  
Chapter 1.08 - ENFORCEMENT OF THE ROCKLIN MUNICIPAL CODE AND OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1090, § 4, adopted March 13, 2018, repealed Ch. 1.08 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1.08, §§ 1.08.010, 1.08.020 pertained to general penalty, and derived from Ord. 431 § 5(A), (B), adopted in 1980; and Ord. 621 § 1, adopted in 1990. 
 
1.08.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city of Rocklin hereby adopts the procedures and remedies set forth in this title for the enforcement of the Rocklin Municipal Code and Uniform Codes adopted by the city. The purpose of Chapters 1.08 through 1.18 is: 
A.  To provide standards for the enforcement of the Rocklin Municipal Code and other applicable laws; 
B.  To establish administrative sanctions for violations of the Rocklin Municipal Code and other applicable laws as an alternative to criminal or civil enforcement penalties; 
C.  To establish a hierarchy of administrative sanctions and a prescribed method for enforcement through administrative hearings consistent with constitutional protections; 
D.  To provide for administrative abatement to remedy code violations and to provide for the recovery of costs incurred in administrative abatement as allowed for by state law; and 
E.  To provide for judicial review of final administrative orders or decisions made pursuant to this title in accordance with the procedures set forth in Code of Civil Procedure sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge or modify the authority of the city manager or other designated person to enforce the Rocklin Municipal Code through criminal or civil penalties where such remedies are designated by ordinance as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 4, 3-13-2018)  
1.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Administrative citation" means the notice issued by the enforcement authority of an alleged infringement of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. 
B.  "Administrative penalty" means the penalties set forth in this chapter for violation of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. 
C.  "Administrative sanctions" means the sanctions set forth in this chapter for violation of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. 
D.  "Administrative violation" means any infringement or alleged infringement of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws for which enforcement is to be handled through the administrative procedures established in this title. 
E.  "Applicable laws" means any provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code, any Uniform Code adopted by the city of Rocklin, design standards adopted by the city of Rocklin, conditions imposed on any entitlement or environmental document issued or approved by the city of Rocklin, and those state laws enforced by the city of Rocklin which also have been designated by ordinance for enforcement pursuant to the procedures established in this title. 
F.  "Citizen complaint" means a report of an alleged violation of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws by any person or entity. "Citizen complaint" means and includes a complaint by a city official or city employee only to the extent such official or employee is able to demonstrate a direct effect on his/her person or property as a result of the alleged violation. 
G.  "Design standards" means written design standards, design guidelines or development standards that may be adopted by resolution or ordinance from time to time by the city council and/or planning commission, or that may be adopted as part of the conditions of approval on any project, that govern development of land within the city and that are on file with the city clerk. 
H.  "Enforcement authority" means the city manager or designated department head, building official, code enforcement officer, or public official charged with responsibility for enforcement under this title. 
I.  "Entitlement" means any project approval issued by the city council, the planning commission, or any other committee, commission, or department as allowed for under procedures established by the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
J.  "Mediation" means a meeting held between the enforcement authority and a responsible person under the supervision of an impartial third party to informally resolve issues relating to alleged violations of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. 
K.  "Notice of violation" means a notice issued by the enforcement authority for required action to achieve compliance with the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. 
L.  "Reasonable time(s)" for purposes of right of entry for inspection under Section 1.14.027 means between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive, unless otherwise required by: (1) an emergency impacting the safety or preservation of life or property; or (2) the fact that the alleged violation of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws only occurs at some other hour or on a weekend. 
M.  "Responsible person" means any person or entity charged with or found to have violated the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. "Responsible person" includes the parents and/or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen who is charged with a violation of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. 
N.  "Stop order" means a written order issued by the enforcement authority or his/her designee that any and all work on a project, improvement or other development must cease on the terms and conditions set forth in the order. 
O.  "Uniform Codes" means those codes that have been adopted and amended from time to time by ordinance by the Rocklin city council, as set forth in Rocklin Municipal Code Section 15.04.010. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 4, 3-13-2018)  
1.08.030 - Public nuisance. 
Any violation of any ordinance of the Rocklin Municipal Code, of any provision of any Uniform Codes adopted by the city, or of any design standards is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to redress as provided for in this title. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 4, 3-13-2018)  
1.08.035 - Cost and fee recovery. 
Any person violating any provision of this code resulting in the city filing an administrative, civil action, or special proceeding to obtain code compliance or remedy, such violation shall be liable for the costs of such matter, including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, abatement, court costs, and costs of monitoring compliance. In addition, in any administrative, civil, or special proceeding to abate an administrative violation, the city may, at the initiation of the proceeding, seek an award of attorney's fees. If the city seeks an award of attorney's fees, the award shall be made to the prevailing party. Provided, however, that no award may be made to a prevailing party that exceeds the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 4, 3-13-2018)  
1.08.040 - Procedures for enforcement. 
The city of Rocklin shall enforce the provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws through any of the following procedures: 
A.  Administrative action concerning an administrative violation as provided for in Chapter 1.14; 
B.  Criminal action prosecuted in the name of the people of the state of California when a criminal violation is expressly provided for by ordinance; 
C.  Civil action instituted by the city attorney in the name of the city of Rocklin; or 
D.  Abatement as authorized by Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 4, 3-13-2018)  
Chapter 1.14 - ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 1090, adopted March 13, 2018, repealed former Ch. 1.14 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1.14, §§ 1.14.010—1.14.120, pertained to administrative citation, and derived from Ord. 817 § 1, adopted in 1999. 
 
Article I. - Administrative Violations 
 
1.14.010 - Designation of administrative violations. 
A.  The following shall be designated as administrative violations and shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  All violations of the Rocklin Municipal Code, unless otherwise excepted by ordinance; 
2.  All violations of Uniform Codes adopted by the city of Rocklin; 
3.  All violations of design standards adopted by the city council and/or the planning commission and on file with the city clerk; 
4.  All violations of conditions imposed on any entitlement, permit, contract, or environmental document issued or approved by the city of Rocklin; 
5.  All violations of state laws enforced by the city of Rocklin that have been designated for enforcement through this chapter by ordinance. 
B.  An administrative violation may only be adjudicated pursuant to the administrative enforcement procedures established in Sections 1.14.020 through 1.14.054 of this chapter. Each responsible person shall have the right to request an administrative hearing and subsequent judicial review pursuant to the procedures established in Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 before the city will take action to collect any administrative penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.011 - Administrative enforcement is not an exclusive remedy. 
The remedies and penalties provided by this chapter are cumulative to each other and to the remedies and penalties available under other sections of this code or under other laws. Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or prohibit the enforcement of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws through civil or criminal process. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
Article II. - Administrative Enforcement Procedures 
 
1.14.020 - Responsibility and authority. 
The city manager shall have overall responsibility and authority to enforce the provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. The city manager may delegate to appropriate subordinates the authority to enforce any of the provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.021 - Purpose of enforcement. 
The purpose of administrative enforcement is to obtain fair and uniform compliance with the provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.022 - Notice of violation and/or stop order. 
Whenever a violation is discovered which can be corrected and the responsible person has not been issued a notice of violation or administrative citation for the same violation within the past twelve months, the enforcement authority shall issue a notice of violation in order to notify the responsible person of the violation and to order that the violation be corrected within a reasonable time. Unless a different time period is specifically set forth in the Rocklin Municipal Code, a responsible person shall be given a reasonable time to correct any violation based upon the facts and circumstances. The notice of violation shall be in writing and shall set forth the facts that constitute the violation, the specific provisions of the law which have been violated, the specific acts required to correct the violation, the time allowed to correct the violation, and the rights to appeal the notice of violation. If the violation is related to a permit, license or other city approval of a project, the notice of violation may be accompanied by a stop order which orders the responsible person to immediately stop any and all work on the project that is subject to the permit, license or approval until the violation is corrected. The notice of violation shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.14.029. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.023 - Administrative citation. 
An administrative citation may be issued under any of the following circumstances: 
A.  When the violation cannot be corrected; 
B.  When the violation can be corrected, a notice of violation has been served, and the specified time has passed without adequate correction of the violation; 
C.  When a stop order has been issued and has not been complied with by the responsible person; 
D.  When the same violation has been committed by the same responsible person within the past twelve months and a notice of violation or administrative citation has been served on the responsible person within that same twelve-month period. 
The administrative citation shall be in writing and shall set forth the facts constituting the violation, the specific provisions of the law which have been violated, the proposed sanctions for the violation as specified in Section 1.14.025 of this chapter, and the rights that the responsible person has to appeal the administrative citation. The administrative citation shall be served as provided in Section 1.14.029. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.024 - Administrative penalties. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein or as established by law, administrative citations, excluding accruing interest, shall not be assessed at more than one hundred thousand dollars cumulatively per calendar year for an individual parcel or separate structure thereon for any related series of violations. The citation amount for a single violation shall not exceed one hundred dollars for the first citation, two hundred fifty dollars for the second citation, and five hundred dollars for all subsequent citations for any related series of violations occurring within a twelve-month period. Each day a violation continues beyond the correction deadline specified in the administrative citation constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
B.  The issuance of administrative citations shall cease when all violations are wholly and permanently corrected. 
C.  Administrative citations shall be issued in accordance with the following factors: 
1.  The duration and frequency of recurrence of the violation; 
2.  The detrimental effects of the violation on the occupants of the property and the surrounding neighborhood and the community at large; 
3.  The history of compliance efforts by the responsible person to correct the violation wholly and permanently; 
4.  The viability of the administrative citation to effect abatement of the violation wholly and permanently; 
5.  Other factors that serve justice. 
D.  Administrative penalties, as authorized under this section, shall be assessed in addition to any applicable charges, fees, abatement costs, and interest, as established in the master fee schedule of the city. 
E.  At the time of issuance of an administrative citation pursuant to Section 1.14.023, the enforcement authority shall evaluate in writing the criteria set forth in Section 1.14.026 to determine the appropriate sanction and shall provide written notice to the responsible person of the proposed sanction and the reasons therefor as required by Section 1.14.023. 
F.  Where multiple violations have occurred or are occurring, each violation of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws shall be subject to a separate sanction. 
G.  The enforcement authority shall have no power or discretion to void any administrative citation until after a meeting with the enforcement authority's supervisor. If a citation is voided, the enforcement authority shall provide written justification for such action to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.025 - Sanctions for administrative violations. 
Any one or more of the following sanctions shall be available to redress infringement of the Rocklin Municipal Code or applicable laws. 
A.  Revocation and/or suspension of licenses or permits, conditional use permits or other entitlements issued by the city of Rocklin; 
B.  The placement of requirements for corrective action on permits, licenses or entitlements issued by the city of Rocklin as a condition to avoid revocation of the permit, license or entitlement; 
C.  Monetary penalties as set forth in Section 1.14.024 of this chapter; 
D.  Costs as set forth in Section 1.08.035 of Chapter 1.08. 
E.  The issuance of a compliance order setting forth corrective action; 
G.  Requiring a responsible person to post a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other adequate security to ensure compliance with the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.026 - Standards for imposition of administrative sanctions. 
The following factors shall be considered in determining the appropriate sanctions for any administrative violation: 
A.  The knowledge or intent of the person/entity found to have violated the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws; 
B.  A final determination of prior violations of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws within twelve months of the date of the violation. Violations of a similar nature shall be given additional weight in evaluating the appropriate sanctions as provided for in Section 1.14.024(C); 
C.  Efforts by the person/entity found to have violated the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws to take remedial action upon notice of a violation; 
D.  Any financial gain realized by a responsible person as a result of an administrative violation; 
E.  The extent to which the violation undermines the purpose of the ordinance violated; 
F.  The number of other violations existing at the time of the issuance of the administrative citation; 
G.  The costs incurred for remedial action taken by the enforcement authority; 
H.  The degree and permanence of harm to health, safety and/or the environment caused by the violation, including, but not limited to, any loss of life to person or animal; 
I.  The amount it would have cost the responsible person to comply with the law; 
J.  Where the violation consists of failure to obtain a permit or license, the financial cost to obtain a permit or license prior to engaging in the conduct that is the subject of the administrative violation. The amount of any sanction imposed for failure to obtain a license or permit shall be no less than one and one-half times the cost of obtaining such license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.027 - Right of entry for inspection. 
A.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists a violation of the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times (as that phrase is defined in Section 1.08.020(L) of this title) to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. 
B.  Except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant of the building or premises to be inspected has been obtained, the city official shall give the owner and/or occupant, if he/she can be located after reasonable effort, twenty-four-hours' written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect through a notice of intention to inspect. The notice of intention to inspect shall state that the property owner and/or occupant has the right to refuse entry and, that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of an administrative warrant or search warrant as allowed by law by a duly authorized judge. 
C.  The written notice of intention to inspect shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. Where the authorized official intends to inspect within the next twenty-four-hour period, the written notice shall be hand delivered. The notice of intention to inspect may be left with any person above the age of eighteen who identifies himself/herself as an occupant, tenant or owner of the premises. If no one is at the premises at the time of delivery, the notice of intention to inspect shall be posted in two conspicuous places on the premises. 
D.  Prior to entering the premises, the authorized official conducting the inspection shall ascertain from the owner and/or occupant whether the notice of intention to inspect has been received and shall obtain permission for entry. Unless an emergency situation exists, if the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such a request has been made, or if no actual contact is made with the owner and/or occupant prior to the attempt to enter, the official must seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.028 - Informal attempts to encourage compliance. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to preclude an enforcement authority from informally encouraging citizens to comply with the Rocklin Municipal Code or other applicable laws. Informal oral or written requests to encourage compliance are encouraged as are attempts to informally negotiate or mediate issues relating to compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.029 - Service of notices. 
Any notices required under this chapter except a notice of intention to inspect pursuant to Section 1.14.027 shall be served by personal delivery to the responsible person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the responsible person. If the responsible person is not present for personal delivery, if certified mail is refused, or if the location of a responsible person cannot be determined after diligent efforts, notices may be posted in a conspicuous place on the affected property for a period of ten calendar days and by mailing first class to the last known address. If such mailing is not returned to the city within seven days, such notice will be deemed received. When there is no affected property, such alternative service shall be accomplished by publication of any notices in a newspaper of general circulation that is most likely to give actual notice to the responsible person two times in a ten-day period and by mailing first class to the last known address. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.030 - Responsibility of parent(s) and/or legal guardian. 
Whenever the responsible person is a person under the age of eighteen, the enforcement authority shall provide copies of all notices and orders specified in this title to the parent(s) and/or legal guardian. Any administrative sanctions levied under this chapter may be levied against the juvenile and the parent(s) and/or legal guardian of the juvenile. The parent(s) and/or legal guardian shall have the right to a hearing and judicial review as set forth in this chapter. In addition to any other defenses that may be raised to the administrative violation, the parent(s) or legal guardian may raise a defense that the parent(s) or legal guardian have exercised good faith efforts to control the behavior of the minor but have been unsuccessful in achieving such control. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
Article III. - Hearings 
 
1.14.040 - Right to a hearing. 
Any person issued a notice of violation or stop order, and who wishes to contest the violation or stop order may request a hearing by filing a request for hearing within ten calendar days of the date of the service of the notice of violation or stop order. 
Any person issued an administrative citation, and who wishes to contest the violation or the proposed sanction may request a hearing by filing a request for hearing within thirty calendar days of the date of the service of the administrative citation. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.041 - Preservation of status quo pending hearing. 
Any stop order issued pursuant to Section 1.14.022 shall remain in effect until the time of the hearing and any subsequent judicial review. Any additional compliance obligations that may be imposed as the result of a notice to correct, stop order or administrative citation shall also be stayed if a timely request for hearing is filed and until a final decision after the hearing is completed unless an emergency situation affecting the safety or preservation of life or property exists. The enforcement authority shall provide written justification for invoking an emergency situation exception under this section to the responsible person within twenty-four hours of taking action to correct the emergency situation. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.042 - Request for hearing and fee—Notice of denial of hearing based on untimely appeal. 
The request for hearing shall be filed with the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk and shall include reference to the notice which is being appealed, shall state all of the grounds for the appeal, and shall be accompanied by payment of: (1) an advance deposit of the fine set forth in the citation; or (2) if no sanctions are issued, a hearing fee which may be established by resolution of the city council. The city clerk shall not accept any request for hearing unless it is accompanied by the required advance deposit for the fine, unless a hardship waiver has been granted by the city manager or his or her designee. If the city clerk determines that the request for a hearing is untimely, the city clerk shall advise the responsible person of that determination in writing and shall mail a notice of denial of hearing based on untimely appeal to the responsible person by first class mail. The responsible person shall then have the right to judicial review of that determination as provided for in Sections 1.14.060 through 1.14.062 of this chapter. Upon a showing of good cause for the delay in filing a request for hearing, the city clerk may refer the issue of the right to an appeal to an administrative hearing officer pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. The hearing officer shall determine whether there was good cause for the delay in filing the request for hearing before proceeding to the merits of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.043 - Meeting with enforcement authority. 
Persons issued a notice of violation or administrative citation under this chapter are encouraged to meet with the enforcement authority and/or the appropriate department head or his/her designee prior to requesting a hearing to seek resolution of the matter. Such a meeting may be requested before or after the request of hearing is filed, but a request for the meeting shall not extend the time for filing the request for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.044 - Timely hearing. 
The hearing shall be held within forty-five calendar days of the filing of a request for hearing unless both parties agree to a postponement of the hearing or the hearing officer rules that there is good cause to postpone the hearing. After the hearing has started, it may be continued with the consent of all parties or upon a showing of good cause for such continuance. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.045 - Notice of time and place of hearing. 
The city clerk shall mail by first class mail to all parties written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall also include a description of the rights of the parties in the hearing. Hearings shall be conducted in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.046 - Hearing officer. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall appoint an impartial hearing officer for each hearing, who may not be an employee of the city. The person appointed to conduct the hearing shall not have had any personal involvement in the case to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.047 - Ex parte communications. 
The hearing officer shall have no communications with any party, any city employee or official, or any potential witness concerning the substance of the case. Having such communications outside the presence of a party may be grounds for disqualification of the hearing officer from conducting the hearing. All communications concerning the case between the hearing officer and any person shall be revealed to the parties in the matter. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.048 - Rights of the parties. 
The parties to a hearing shall have the following rights: 
A.  Timely and adequate notice of the time and place of the hearing, their rights during the hearing, and the issues that are to be the subject of the hearing; 
B.  The right to present evidence and witnesses; 
C.  The right to present argument; 
D.  The right to be represented. The representative need not be an attorney; 
E.  The right to open disclosure of all evidence presented to the hearing officer in the case, subject to redaction of information regarding complainants; 
F.  The right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses; 
G.  The right to subpoena witnesses or documents; 
H.  The right to a decision based upon the evidence in the record of the hearing; 
I.  The right to an impartial hearing officer; 
J.  The right to a written decision setting forth the reasons for the decision and the evidence relied upon. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.049 - Hearing procedure. 
The hearing shall be informal and the hearing officer will have an affirmative obligation to seek the truth concerning the issues at the hearing. The hearing officer may ask questions of any witness and may establish the procedure for the presentation of evidence. The hearing officer may, on his or her own motion, call or subpoena a witness. The hearing officer may order the exclusion of a witness during the testimony of other witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.050 - Oath. 
All testimony shall be given under oath. Hearing officers have the authority to administer such oaths. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.051 - Quantum and burden of proof. 
All facts must be established by a preponderance of the evidence. The enforcement authority will have the burden to prove that a violation occurred and that the proposed sanction is appropriate. The enforcement authority shall be required to present its case first. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.052 - Rules of evidence. 
The rules of evidence adopted by state or federal law shall not apply. All relevant evidence shall be admissible and hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing and explaining other evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.053 - Subpoenas. 
The hearing officer shall have the authority to issue subpoenas (order to appear and give testimony) and subpoenas duces tecum (order to produce document(s) or paper(s)). The hearing officer may only issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum upon a showing of reasonable necessity by the requesting party. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.054 - Written decision. 
The hearing officer shall prepare and forward to the parties a written decision within thirty calendar days of the close of the hearing. The decision shall be mailed by first class mail. If the hearing officer grants the appeal, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to order the refund of the fee charged to the responsible person for the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
Article IV. - Judicial Review 
 
1.14.060 - Final administrative decision. 
The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute the final administrative decision and shall not be appealable to the city council or any committee or commission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.061 - Judicial review. 
Appeal shall be through judicial review of the final administrative decision by filing a petition for a writ of mandate with the Superior Court in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. Such writs must be filed within ninety calendar days from the date of the final administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.062 - Review standard. 
The court may not change the findings of fact of the hearing officer unless there is no substantial evidence to support those findings. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
Article V. - Enforcement of Monetary Sanctions 
 
1.14.070 - When monetary sanctions are due. 
Monetary sanctions levied against a responsible person are due at the following times: 
A.  If a request for hearing is not filed in relation to the administrative citation, the monetary sanction set out in the notice shall be due and payable ten calendar days after service of the administrative citation. 
B.  If a request for hearing is filed within the time limits proscribed by Section 1.14.040 and there is no appeal of the hearing decision to the court pursuant to Section 1.14.061, the monetary sanction shall be due and payable ninety calendar days after the date of a hearing decision, an order by the hearing officer dismissing the request for hearing, or the date the hearing request is withdrawn by the responsible party. The amount of sanction payable shall be the amount set by the hearing officer in a decision after hearing, or the amount set forth in the administrative citation if there is no hearing decision. 
C.  If there is judicial review of the hearing decision pursuant to Section 1.14.061, the monetary sanction shall be due and payable thirty calendar days after the date of the final court order in relation to that review. The amount due shall be the amount ordered by the hearing officer unless a court modifies the amount of monetary sanction. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.071 - Place for payment of monetary sanctions. 
All monetary sanctions shall be paid to the city as specified in the administrative citation, the decision of the hearing officer, or the court decision. All payments shall be accompanied by a copy of the administrative citation, or the decision of the hearing officer or the court decision establishing the amount of the monetary sanction. The finance department shall prepare a receipt documenting the payment of the monetary sanction and shall forward one copy of the receipt to the enforcement authority and one copy of the receipt to the city clerk. The city clerk shall thereafter verify that the sanction has been paid in full. If the sanction has been paid in full, the city clerk shall so note in the records pertaining to the administrative violation. If the sanction has not been paid in full, the city clerk shall notify the enforcement authority and responsible person in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.14.072 - Failure to pay a monetary sanction. 
If the responsible party does not pay the monetary sanction within the times provided under Section 1.14.070, or if the responsible party fails to pay the required monetary sanction in full within the times provided under Section 1.14.070, any unpaid portion shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date such payment was due until paid in full and the city may take any of the following actions to collect the monetary sanction. 
A.  Liens. The amount of unpaid costs, excluding penalties, plus interest plus a reasonable administrative fee established by the city council from time to time to cover the cost of collection constitutes and may be declared a lien on any real property owned by the responsible party within the city. 
1.  Notice shall be given to the responsible party prior to the recordation of the lien, and shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to Article 3, (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
2.  The lien shall attach when the city manager or his/her designee records a lien listing delinquent unpaid sanctions with the Placer County recorder's office. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the date of the code violation(s), the date of the final administrative decision, the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
3.  In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be recorded by the city clerk. 
B.  Special Assessments. The amount of the unpaid costs, excluding penalties, plus interest plus a reasonable administrative fee established by the city council from time to time to cover the cost of collection may be declared a special assessment against any real property owned by the responsible person within the city to the extent the responsible person owns more than one parcel within the city. The city council may impose the special assessment on more than one parcel. However, the amount of the assessment shall not exceed the penalty imposed for the administrative violation. The city manager or his/her designee may present a resolution to the city council to declare a special assessment, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the Placer County recorder's office. The assessment may then be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subjected to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
C.  Withholding Entitlements. The city may withhold issuance of licenses, permits, and other entitlements to a responsible person until payment is received. 
D.  Civil Action Authorized. The city may commence civil action to recover unpaid costs, or penalties. 
E.  Other Enforcement Procedures. The city may take such other actions as are allowed for enforcement of a civil judgment as provided for pursuant to the Enforcement of Judgments Law, California Code of Civil Procedure section 680.010 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
Chapter 1.16 - ADDITIONAL REMEDIES 
 
1.16.010 - Abatement by city. 
Pursuant to California Government Code section 38773, the city may abate any nuisance at the expense of the persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance and any and all expenses of abatement, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred, shall constitute a lien against the property on which the nuisance is maintained and such debt becomes a personal obligation against the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 7, 3-13-2018)  
1.16.020 - Procedure for creation of nuisance abatement lien. 
A.  Notice Requirement. Whenever a responsible person refuses to abate a nuisance and the owner or person occupying the property refuses to consent to abatement by the city, the enforcement authority shall serve a written notice to abate such nuisance upon the owner of the property (as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is most current), and on any persons known to be possessing such property. 
B.  Contents of Notice. The notice shall include the following information: 
1.  The street address, legal description or other description sufficient to identify the affected property; 
2.  A statement that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property has a reasonable period of time from the date of the notice to voluntarily abate the nuisance. The time period for correction shall be determined by the enforcement authority; 
3.  A statement that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property, may, during the period of voluntary abatement, (1) file a written request for a hearing with the city clerk as provided for in Section 1.14.040 of this chapter if there is an objection to the demand to abate the nuisance, or (2) present written evidence to the enforcement authority to show that the property owner or person in possession of the property had no responsibility for creating or maintaining the nuisance on the property and that to be required to remove or abate such nuisance will cause financial or physical hardship; and 
4.  A statement that if the nuisance is not voluntarily abated within the stated period, and the property owner and/or person in possession of the property fails to present the information set forth in subsection (B)(3) of this section or to file a timely written request for a hearing, all persons served with such notice shall be deemed to have consented to the abatement of the nuisance and that, at the election of the city, the city will abate the nuisance and the costs for such abatement may be charged against the premises and may be recorded as a lien against the premises. 
C.  Service of Notice. The notice to abate the nuisance shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days. The failure to make or attempt such service on any person as required herein shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter as to any other person duly served. 
D.  Failure to Pay Costs—Authority to Record Lien or to Declare Lien a Special Assessment Against Parcel. 
1.  If all or any portion of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the nuisance and accounted for by the enforcement authority remain unpaid after thirty days, pursuant to authority created by law, including Government Code section 38773 et seq., such portion thereof as remains unpaid shall constitute and shall be declared to constitute a lien on the real property which was the subject of notice to abate. 
2.  Prior to recordation of the lien, notice shall be given to the land owner. If the land owner, after a diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon the property subject to the lien, in a conspicuous place, for a period of ten days. The notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
3.  The lien shall attach when the city manager or his/her designee records a lien listing delinquent unpaid nuisance abatement costs with the Placer County recorder's office. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
4.  In addition to the recordation of a lien, the amount of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the nuisance plus a reasonable administrative fee established by the city council from time to time to cover the cost of collection may be declared a special assessment against any real property owned by the responsible person within the city to the extent the responsible person owns more than one parcel within the city. The city council may impose the special assessment on more than one parcel. However, the amount of the assessment shall not exceed the penalty imposed for the administrative violation. The city manager or his/her designee may present a resolution to the city council to declare a special assessment, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the Placer County recorder's office. The assessment may then be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subjected to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
5.  In the event that the lien or special assessment is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (D)(1) of this section shall be recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
1.16.030 - Treble damages for subsequent abatement judgments. 
Pursuant to California Government Code section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period that finds an owner of property responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with California Government Code section 38773.5, a court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. These costs shall not include conditions abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code section 17980. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 5, 3-13-2018)  
Chapter 1.18 - CRIMINAL PENALTIES 
 
1.18.010 - Violations—General penalty. 
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation shall be punished as follows: 
A.  For those acts or omissions designated as misdemeanors, the same shall be punished according to the punishment prescribed for a misdemeanor in the general laws of this state; 
B.  For any act of omission which is charged as an infraction, the same shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars; 
C.  For any act or omission for which no penalty is specified, the same shall be punished as a misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 8, 3-13-2018)  
1.18.020 - Violation—Separate offense. 
Each day a violation continues, it constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 8, 3-13-2018)  
1.18.030 - Authorization for issuance of citations by public officers and employees. 
Pursuant to Penal Code section 836.5, the city council authorizes public officers and employees of the city, who have the duty to enforce a statute or ordinance of the Rocklin Municipal Code, to arrest a person without a warrant whenever any such official or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of such statute or ordinance in the presence of the public official or employee. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 8, 3-13-2018)  
1.18.040 - Issuance of notice to appear. 
In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this chapter and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate or judge, the public official or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and shall thereafter release such person on his or her written promise to appear in court, pursuant to Penal Code section 853.6. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 8, 3-13-2018)  
1.18.050 - Designation of employees authorized to act pursuant to this chapter. 
The city manager shall designate in writing the classification or job title of the city officials and employees designated to exercise such arrest and citation authority. No officer or employee shall be allowed by his or her supervisor to exercise the arrest and citation authority herein conferred, unless such officer or employee is within such designation. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 8, 3-13-2018)  
1.18.060 - Training. 
Every public official or employee designated to act under this chapter shall be provided with such training as is established in Penal Code section 832, and such other training as may be required by the city manager. The training program shall include instruction regarding the provisions of the statutes and ordinances to be enforced, the evidentiary prerequisites to proper prosecution for violations thereof, the appropriate procedures for making arrests or otherwise prudently exercising such arrest and citation authority, and the legal and practical ramifications and limitations attendant thereto. Any such officer or employee shall be appropriately instructed to deposit executed citations or notices within three days for filing with the court after review for legal sufficiency. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 8, 3-13-2018)  
Chapter 1.20 - CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST CITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1088, § 3, adopted Feb. 13, 2018, repealed Ch. 1.20 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1.20, §§ 1.20.010, 1.20.020, pertained to claims and derived from Ord. 845, § 1, adopted 2001. 
 
1.20.010 - State provisions and applicability of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim procedures applicable to the city and all local public agencies are governed by the provisions of the California Government Code, Part 3, Chapters 1 and 2 of Division 3.6, commencing with Section 900 and following. The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Government Code Section 935 and shall apply to all claims against the city for money or damages, including all claims which are excepted by Government Code Section 905; provided, that such claims are not governed by any other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.020 - Presentation of claims—Prerequisite for bringing suit. 
No suit subject to this chapter may be brought against the city until a claim has been presented to and acted upon by the city, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 945.4. Any action brought against the city on a claim after it has been presented to and acted upon by the city shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. Any action brought against any employee of the city of Rocklin shall conform to the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the Government Code. Only the person who filed the claim may bring such action, and if another person should do so, judgment shall not be rendered for the plaintiff. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.030 - Authority of city manager. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 935.4, the city council delegates authority to the city manager and his/her designees to review all claims for sufficiency and to reject any and all claims. The city council delegates to the city manager, or his or her designee, authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims, including workers' compensation claims, for an amount up to and including fifty thousand dollars. The city council shall have sole authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims for an amount in excess of fifty thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.040 - Contents of claim—Review for sufficiency. 
A claim shall be in writing, verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator, and shall be presented to the city clerk by the claimant or by a person acting on the claimant's behalf. The claim shall show all information as required by Government Code Section 910. The foregoing reference to Government Code Section 910 shall not be construed to authorize a class action, and no claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall review all claims for sufficiency of information. The city manager, or his or her designee, may, within twenty days of receipt of a claim, either personally deliver or mail to claimant a notice stating deficiencies in the claim presented. If such notice is delivered or sent to claimant, the city shall not act upon the claim until at least fifteen days after such notice is sent. 
Pursuant to Section 930.2 of the California Government Code, the city may enter into written agreements containing provisions governing the presentation of claims including, but not limited to, time limitations. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all claims arising out of written agreements except to the extent the provisions of a written agreement conflict with the terms of this chapter, in which case the provisions of the written agreement shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.050 - Time limitation for presentation of claims. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 911.20, any claim specified in Section 1.20.010 shall be presented within the following time limitations: 
A.  Claims relating to a cause of action for death, injury to person or to personal property shall be presented within six months after the accrual of the cause of action. 
B.  Claims relating to any other cause of action shall be presented within one year after the accrual of the cause of action. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.060 - Time for action by city. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 912.4, the city council or city manager or his or her designee, as applicable, shall act on a claim within forty-five days after the claim has been presented. By mutual agreement of the claimant and the city council or city manager or his or her designee, as applicable, such forty-five-day period may be extended by written agreement. If the claim is not acted on within forty-five days, it shall be deemed to have been rejected on the forty-fifth day unless such time period has been extended, in which case it shall be denied on the last day of the period specified in the extension agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.070 - Application to file a late claim. 
Any applicant who fails to file a claim within the time period required by Section 1.20.050 may submit a written application to the city for leave to present a late claim, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 911.4. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall grant or deny the application to present a late claim within forty-five days after it is presented to the city, in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Sections 911.6 through 912.2, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.080 - Time barred claim. 
Nothing in this chapter revives or reinstates any cause of action that, on the effective date of this chapter, is barred by failure to comply with any previously applicable statute, ordinance, or regulation requiring the presentation of a claim prior to a suit subject to this chapter, or by failure to commence any action thereon within the period prescribed by an applicable statute of limitations. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.090 - Effective date of chapter. 
Subject to Section 1.20.080, the provisions of this chapter shall apply retroactively to any causes of action occurring prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that a claimant who has a cause of action occurring more than ten months before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall file a claim within sixty days after this chapter's effective date in accordance with its provisions or such claim shall be barred. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.100 - Claims for class actions. 
No claim presented to the city on behalf of a class of persons shall be sufficient unless such claim is verified by every member of that class or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. Notwithstanding the foregoing, class actions shall not be allowed in any case challenging a city tax, fee, assessment or any other charge imposed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
1.20.110 - Exhaustion of remedies. 
Prior to seeking judicial relief with respect to a dispute regarding a tax, fee, assessment or other charge imposed by the city, an aggrieved taxpayer, fee payer or any other party must first: exhaust any administrative remedies specified by any other provision of this code or applicable law; pay the full amount owed, including penalties and interest; and present a claim for refund as required by this chapter, the Government Claims Act, Government Code Section 910 et seq. and any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 2-13-2018)  
Chapter 1.22 - CITY SEAL AND AUTHORIZED LOGO AND INSIGNIA[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—5 of Ord. No. 1046, adopted Oct. 13, 2015, amended Ch. 1.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1.16 pertained to the city seal and derived from Ord. 1, § 1, adopted in 1893.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 1090, § 6, adopted March 13, 2018, renumbered former Ch. 1.16, §§ 1.16.010—1.16.040 as Ch. 1.22, §§ 1.22.010—1.22.040. 
 
1.22.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to specify the permissible uses for the use of the official seal and other official insignia of the city of Rocklin. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 2, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 1090, § 6, 3-13-2018)  
1.22.020 - Definitions. 
A.  City Seal: The city seal shall be as adopted by city of Rocklin Ordinance No. 1 on March 13, 1893 which is as described in Section 1.16.010. 
B.  City Logo: The city logo of the city of Rocklin shall be as adopted by the city council of the city of Rocklin on February 10, 2015 as Resolution No. 2015-49, which is a five-pillar rock formation with the words underneath Rocklin California. 
  
C.  City Emblem: The city emblem used for official correspondence or business or the like shall be the railroad steam engine and spike with the words city of Rocklin and 1893 inscribed in a bordering circle as shown here: 
  
D.  City of Rocklin Website Banner: The city of Rocklin website banner shall be the picture of the city logo that appears across the top of the city's official website, http://www.rocklin.ca.us. 
E.  Other Official City Insignia: In addition to that listed above, other official city insignia shall be any other intellectual property right owned by the city, including the names of city facilities, the logos and official insignia of the city of Rocklin Police Department and city of Rocklin Fire Department, and logos designed by or for use on behalf of the city, all of which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 3, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 1090, § 6, 3-13-2018)  
1.22.030 - Custody and use of the official seal and other city insignia. 
A.  The city clerk of the city of Rocklin shall have custody of the city seal, city logo, city insignia and all other official city insignia. The use of city seal, city logo, city insignia and all other official city insignia shall be for purposes directly connected with the official business of the city of Rocklin, its city council, officers or departments, and for those matters expressly approved by the city manager. 
B.  With the exception of uses of city seal, city logo, city insignia and all other official city insignia for purposes directly connected with official business of the city of Rocklin, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or allow to be used any reproduction or facsimile of the city seal, city logo, city insignia or other official city insignia, including any design so closely resembling the city seal, city logo, city insignia or other official city insignia as to be apt to deceive, without first having obtained the permission of the city manager. 
C.  The names of city facilities shall be used in accordance with their official purposes and it shall be unlawful for any person to use or allow the name to be used for private purposes without first receiving written approval from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 4, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 1090, § 6, 3-13-2018)  
1.22.040 - Violations. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter or a failure to comply with any mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to prosecution in accordance with Title 1 of the Rocklin Municipal Code and may be enforced through criminal, civil, administrative, injunctive or other relief available by law. Criminal penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter may result in up to a misdemeanor citation for each day in violation, punishable by a maximum of one year in jail and a one thousand dollar fine. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 5, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 1090, § 6, 3-13-2018)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
NOTE: Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title. 
 
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1054, § 1, adopted July 26, 2016, repealed former § 2.04.010 which pertained to special election after appointment, and derived from Ord. No. 372, § 1, adopted in 1978; Ord. No. 723, § 1, adopted in 1995; and Ord. No. 1053, § 2, July 12, 2016.  
2.04.020 - Compensation. 
The compensation for a council member shall be the sum of six hundred and eighty-five dollars per month. However, the council may reduce their monthly compensation by adopting a resolution, which shall require a four fifths affirmative vote, setting forth the amount of the reduction in compensation, and the time period for which the reduced compensation shall be in effect. 
(Ord. 851 §§ 1, 2, 2001: Ord. 558 § 1, 1986: Ord. 208 § 2, 1966). 
(Ord. No. 952, § 1, 7-28-2009)  
2.04.030 - General municipal elections—Consolidation. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 36503.5, all general municipal elections in the city shall be held on the day of the state-wide general election in even-numbered years. The first such consolidated election shall be held no sooner than the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1996, and each succeeding election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even numbered year. 
B.  This section shall apply to the election of all elected officials of the city. Any elected official whose term of office would have expired on the Tuesday succeeding the general municipal election in November, 1995, upon qualification of his or her successor, shall continue in office until no later than the Tuesday succeeding the general municipal election in November, 1996, and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. Any elected official whose term of office would have expired on the Tuesday succeeding the general municipal election in November, 1997, upon qualification of his or her successor, shall continue in office until no later than the Tuesday succeeding the general municipal election in November, 1998, and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ord. 697 § 1, 1994: Ord. 537 § 1, 1985; Ord. 500 § 1, 1983).  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Rules of procedure. 
The council shall adopt by resolution rules of procedure for the conduct of meetings of the council. The rules shall establish the time for holding regular meetings and may address any other matters the council deems appropriate. The rules shall be supplemental to the provisions of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code (beginning with Section 36801) and Chapter 9 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code (beginning with Section 54960) and any other applicable provisions of state law. If there exists or arises a conflict between the rules of procedure and state law, the latter shall prevail. 
(Ord. 554 § 1 (part), 1986).  
2.08.020 - Meeting place. 
The city council shall meet in the Council Chambers of the City Administrative Office Building located at 3970 Rocklin Road, Rocklin, or at such other place in the city to which the meeting may be adjourned. In case of an emergency or other condition rendering the chambers unsafe or unsuitable for the meeting, the meeting may be held for the duration of such condition at such other place as may be designated by the presiding officer. 
(Ord. 648 § 1, 1991: Ord. 554 § 1 (part), 1986).  
2.08.030 - Disclosure of closed session. 
No members of the council, employee of the city or any other person present during a closed session shall disclose to any person the content or substance of any discussion which took place during the closed session unless disclosure is authorized by a majority vote of the council. 
(Ord. 554 § 1 (part), 1986).  
2.08.040 - Validity of action—Failure to follow rules. 
No action taken by the council which is otherwise valid shall be void or nullified by reason of a failure to follow the provisions of this chapter, or procedural rules adopted under authority of this chapter. 
(Ord. 554 § 1 (part), 1986).  
2.08.050 - Conduct while addressing council. 
A.  The presiding officer at a meeting may in his or her discretion bar from further audience before the council, or have removed from the council chambers, any person who commits disorderly or disruptive behavior which substantially delays, interrupts, impedes, disrupts or disturbs the proceedings of the council, including but not limited to, the actions set forth in subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person while addressing the council at a council meeting to violate any of the following rules: 
1.  No person shall by disorderly or disturbing action, speech, or otherwise, substantially delay, interrupt, impede, disrupt or disturb the proceedings of the council. 
2.  No person shall yell at the council in a loud, disturbing voice which threatens the safety and welfare of the council members, city staff or members of the public in attendance thereby delaying, interrupting, and/or disrupting the proceedings of the council. 
3.  No person shall speak without being recognized by the presiding officer. 
4.  No person shall continue to speak after being told by the presiding officer that his or her allotted time for addressing the council has expired. 
5.  Every person shall comply with and obey the lawful orders or directives of the presiding officer. 
C.  The sergeant-at-arms shall have the authority to remove from the council chambers any person exhibiting such unlawful conduct and place him or her under arrest, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 7-22-2014)  
2.08.060 - Disorderliness by members of the audience. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person in the audience at a council meeting to do any of the following conduct: 
Engage in disorderly, disruptive, disturbing, or delaying conduct, such as, but not limited to, handclapping, stomping of feet, whistling, making noise, use of profane language or obscene gestures, yelling or similar demonstrations, which conduct substantially interrupts, delays, or disturbs the peace and good order of the proceedings of the council. 
Refuse to comply with the lawful order or directive of the presiding officer of the council. 
B.  The sergeant-at-arms shall have the authority to remove from the council chambers any person exhibiting such unlawful conduct and place him or her under arrest, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 2, 7-22-2014)  
2.08.070 - Enforcement. 
The chief of police, or such members of the police department as the chief may designate, shall be the ex officio sergeant-at-arms of the city council. The sergeant-at-arms shall carry out all lawful orders given by the presiding officer for the purposes of maintaining order at the council meetings. The sergeant-at-arms shall have the authority and power to enforce the orders of the presiding officer relating to the order and conduct at council meetings and to arrest any person violating the provisions of this chapter. Any council member may move to require the presiding officer to enforce the rules of conduct and a majority vote of the council shall require him or her to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 3, 7-22-2014)  
Chapter 2.16 - CLERK 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Duties. 
The city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
A.  All statutory obligations, save and except those set forth in Sections 40802 through 40805 and Sections 37202 through 37209 of the Government Code, which have previously been transferred to the director of finance; 
B.  Keep and maintain in good and proper order those minutes of the council, the city ordinances and resolutions, and all other city records which the laws of the state require the city clerk to maintain; 
C.  Publish and/or post ordinances of the city upon their passage; 
D.  Such other duties as may be prescribed by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. 493 § 1, 1983: Ord. 387 § 1, 1978).  
2.16.020 - Compensation. 
The compensation of the city clerk shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 861 § 1, 2002: Ord. 757 § 1, 1997: Ord. 559 § 1, 1987).  
Chapter 2.20 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Established. 
There is established within the city the position of city manager. 
(Ord. 396 § 1 (part), 1979).  
2.20.020 - References to administrator. 
Whenever the words "administrator" or "city administrator" appear in existing ordinances, they shall be deemed to mean and refer to the city manager, and all ordinances not expressly repealed by the ordinance codified in this chapter and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, referring to or respecting the rights, duties, powers and obligations of the administrator, are continued in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 396 § 1 (part), 1979).  
2.20.030 - Appointment—Term—Council members restricted. 
The council shall appoint the city manager, who shall serve at its pleasure. The council may contract, under such terms and conditions as it may deem reasonable, with any person to fill the position of city manager, except that no person who has served on the council may be appointed city manager within one year of the last day of such service. 
(Ord. 396 § 2, 1979).  
2.20.040 - Duties. 
The city manager shall perform all of the following duties: 
A.  Provide day-to-day administration of the affairs of the city, including control over all city departments, programs and personnel and administration of all franchises permits, and privileges granted by the city; 
B.  Oversee the proper enforcement of all ordinances, rules and regulations; 
C.  Carry out the programs and policies of the city council; 
D.  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
E.  Comprise or settle damage claims against the city after careful investigation up to amounts established by resolution of the council; 
F.  Investigate all complaints against the city, its departments, officers and employees, and take necessary corrective action, if warranted; 
G.  Manage and control all real and personal property owned, leased, rented or borrowed by the city; 
H.  Accept or dispose of, on behalf of the city, real and personal property of a value up to amounts established by resolution of the city council; recommend, on actions beyond city manager, authority to the city council; 
I.  To execute in the name of the city council and city, any contract, agreement, conveyance, or obligation authorized or approved by the city council, unless the city council shall expressly provide for other manner of execution of such contract, agreement, or obligation, or unless the signature of the council is otherwise required by law; and 
J.  Perform all other duties and responsibilities as may, from time to time, be prescribed by ordinance, resolution, order or direction of the city council. 
(Ord. 844 § 1, 2001: Ord. 698 § 1, 1994: Ord. 465 § 5, 1982: Ord. 396 § 3, 1979). 
(Ord. No. 962, §§ 1, 2, 6-22-2010)  
2.20.050 - Concurrent offices. 
The city manager or his designee shall occupy the following offices: 
A.  Finance director as specified in Chapter 2.28 of this code; 
B.  Personnel director, in which capacity he shall be responsible for all matters pertaining to the testing, hiring, promotion and termination of city employees, except for any elected official and the city attorney; 
C.  Planning director, in which capacity he shall be responsible for all matters pertaining to the execution of all statutes and ordinances pertaining to the development of real property within the city; 
D.  City engineer (if he is licensed to practice engineering in the state of California), in which capacity he shall be responsible for all engineering and public works functions to be exercised by the city, including the supervision of all public works contracts; 
E.  Purchasing officer, in which capacity he shall purchase materials and supplies for the city, and direct the execution of all contracts pertaining thereto; 
F.  Building inspector, in which capacity he shall be responsible for all matters pertaining to the inspection of buildings and structures as prescribed in applicable codes adopted by the city; 
G.  Director of emergency services, as specified in Chapter 2.32; 
H.  Administrator of special districts within and outside of the city, when authorized by joint powers agreements between the city and other public entities; 
I.  Animal control officer, as specified in Title 6 of this code; 
J.  Any and all other offices which may be assigned by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. 465 § 6, 1982: Ord. 396 § 4, 1979).  
2.20.060 - Implied power. 
In addition to all the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter, the city manager shall have all power reasonably and necessarily implied in executing those duties and responsibilities. 
(Ord. 396 § 5, 1979).  
2.20.070 - Manager-council relationship. 
The council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for purpose of inquiry, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the council, and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. No individual councilman shall in any manner attempt to influence the city manager in the making of any appointment or in the purchase of equipment or supplies. 
(Ord. 396 § 6, 1979).  
2.20.080 - Bond. 
The city manager shall, at the expense of the city, execute a surety bond, in an amount established by the council, which bond shall also specifically include the duties of director of finance. 
(Ord. 396 § 7, 1979).  
Chapter 2.24 - CITY TREASURER 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Duties. 
The city treasurer shall perform the following duties: 
A.  All statutory obligations; 
B.  Such duties pertaining to the collection of city taxes and license fees as are assigned by the city manager; 
C.  Such other duties as may be prescribed by the council from time to time. 
(Ord. 388 § 1, 1978).  
2.24.020 - Compensation. 
The compensation of the city treasurer shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 827 § 1, 2000; Ord. 757 § 2, 1997: Ord. 570 § 1, 1987).  
Chapter 2.28 - FINANCE DIRECTOR 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - Office established. 
The office of finance director for the city is established. The city manager or his designee is appointed finance director and shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in this chapter and such powers and duties as are otherwise prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 465 § 1, 1982).  
2.28.020 - Duties. 
To carry out the duties and responsibilities of finance director for the city, the director shall: 
A.  Perform the duties formerly required of the city clerk pursuant to Sections 40802 through 40805 and Sections 37206 through 37209 of the Government Code, which duties are transferred to the finance director; 
B.  Prepare and submit a budget to the city council on or before the 15th day of May each year; 
C.  Exercise the duties of collector under the business tax ordinance; 
D.  Act as accounting officer for the city and, in such capacity, supervise the maintenance of all records reflecting the financial conditions of the city; 
E.  Prepare monthly financial and budget reports as required by the city council; 
F.  Supervise the data processing of financial and other reports as required. 
(Ord. 465 § 2, 1982).  
2.28.030 - Additional duties. 
A.  The finance director shall contract for an annual audit of all city financial transactions with an independent auditor and implement such recommendations as required to improve the financial control and reporting of the city. Such audit shall be submitted to the city council within one hundred twenty days after the close of the fiscal year for which the report is compiled. 
B.  The finance director shall remit to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Local Agency Investment Fund such moneys in the city's treasury not required for immediate needs, pursuant to Section 16429.1 of the Government Code. The finance director shall direct other investments of the city when so directed by the city council and in a manner consistent with law. 
(Ord. 465 § 3, 1982).  
2.28.040 - Bond. 
The director of finance shall execute a bond to the city in accordance with Government Code Sections 36518 and 37209. Such bond shall be in an amount recommended by the city attorney, approved by resolution of the city council, and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 465 § 4, 1982).  
Chapter 2.32 - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION 
Sections: 
 
2.32.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 247 § 1, 1971).  
2.32.020 - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 247 § 2, 1971).  
2.32.030 - Disaster council—Established—Membership. 
The Rocklin disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice chairman; 
C.  The assistant director to emergency services; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 247 § 3, 1971).  
2.32.040 - Disaster council—Powers and duties—Meetings. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. 
B.  The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. 
(Ord. 247 § 4, 1971).  
2.32.050 - Director of emergency services—Created—City manager designated. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. 
B.  The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
(Ord. 247 § 5(A), 1971).  
2.32.060 - Director of emergency services—Powers and duties. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the council is in session. 
Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation has no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in Section 2.32.020; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided in this section the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager of all the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this chapter adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority; 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 247 § 6(A, B), 1971). [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
  Editor's Note: There are two Ord. 247 subsections designated 6(B). 
 
2.32.070 - Assistant director of emergency services—Created—Appointment. 
There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 247 § 6(B), 1971). *  
2.32.080 - Assistant director of emergency services—Powers and duties. 
The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 247 § 6(C), 1971).  
2.32.090 - Emergency organization—Personnel designated. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.32.060 (A)(6)(c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 247 § 7, 1971).  
2.32.100 - Emergency plan. 
The disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city of Rocklin emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 247 § 8, 1971).  
2.32.110 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 247 § 9, 1971).  
2.32.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to; 
1.  Give assistance to the enemy, or 
2.  Imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or 
3.  Prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification of the state. 
(Ord. 247 § 10, 1971).  
Chapter 2.36 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Appointment—Tenure—Roster. 
A.  The members of all city commissions and boards shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. 
B.  Appointments shall be made for fixed terms or, where a vacancy occurs, for the remainder of the term of the person vacating the office. 
C.  No appointment shall create tenure in the person appointed, and any appointee may be removed by the mayor with the consent of the council, with or without cause. 
D.  The clerk shall maintain a roster of all appointees showing their names, the office to which they have been appointed, the term of appointment and the date of the beginning and of the end of the term of appointment. 
(Ord. 431 § 7, 1980).  
2.36.020 - Resignation upon termination of residency. 
Whenever under this code residency within the city is required for membership on any board or commission, termination of residency within the city by a member of the board or commission shall be conclusively deemed an automatic and immediate resignation by that member from, and the creation of a vacancy on, the board or commission without action by the mayor or council. 
(Ord. 598 § 1, 1989).  
Chapter 2.40 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Established. 
The planning commission of the city is established. 
(Ord. 432 § 1, 1980).  
2.40.020 - Composition and residency. 
The planning commission shall consist of five members. Only residents of the city are eligible for membership on the commission. 
(Ord. 598 § 2, 1989).  
2.40.030 - Advisory members. 
From time to time the council may designate city officials or employees as advisory members of the planning commission. Advisory members shall have no vote unless the resolution appointing the advisory member grants the advisory member a vote; and provided further, that there are not more than two such advisory members. 
(Ord. 432 § 3, 1980).  
2.40.040 - Term of office. 
A.  Members of the planning commission shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are appointed. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, those members of the planning commission whose term would have expired on December 31, 1995, shall continue in office until December 31, 1996, and until their successors are appointed. Those members of the planning commission whose term would have expired on December 31, 1997, shall continue in office until December 31, 1998, and until their successors are appointed. 
(Ord. 708 § 1, 1994: Ord. 432 § 4, 1980).  
2.40.045 - Compensation. 
The compensation for a member of the planning commission shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 827 § 2, 2000: Ord. 626 § 1, 1990: Ord. 558 § 2, 1986).  
2.40.050 - Absenteeism. 
Any member of the planning commission who misses three consecutive regular meetings without the consent of the planning commission shall be deemed to have resigned, and his position shall be deemed vacant. 
(Ord. 432 § 5, 1980).  
Chapter 2.44 - PARKS, RECREATION AND ARTS COMMISSION[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1011, adopted April 8, 2014, changed the title of Ch. 2.44 from "Parks and Recreation Commission" to "Parks, Recreation and Arts Commission." 
 
2.44.010 - Established—Governing rules and regulations. 
A parks, recreation and arts commission is established as set out in this chapter and shall be governed by the rules and regulations set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 234 (part), 1970). 
(Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 1011, § 2, 4-8-2014)  
2.44.020 - Composition. 
The commission shall consist of five members. 
(Ord. 435 § 3, 1980: Ord. 234 § 1, 1970).  
2.44.030 - Residency required. 
Only residents of the city are eligible for membership on the commission. 
(Ord. 234 § 2, 1970).  
2.44.040 - Members ex officio. 
The city manager, or his or her designee, shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the commission. 
(Ord. 534 § 1, 1985: Ord. 234 § 3, 1970).  
2.44.050 - Term. 
Members of the parks, recreation and arts commission shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are appointed, unless the term is modified by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 708 § 2, 1994: Ord. 234 § 4, 1970). 
(Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 1011, §§ 2, 3, 4-8-2014)  
2.44.055 - Compensation. 
The compensation for a member of the parks, recreation and arts commission shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 827 § 3, 2000: Ord. 626 § 2, 1990: Ord. 558 § 3, 1986). 
(Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 1011, § 2, 4-8-2014)  
2.44.060 - Failure to attend meeting. 
If any member of the commission fails to attend three consecutive meetings, without due cause, such failure shall be deemed to constitute the retirement of such member. The chairman or the vice chairman of the commission shall forthwith notify the council of the fact, and the position held by the member shall be declared vacant. 
(Ord. 234 § 6, 1970).  
2.44.070 - Meeting date. 
The second Wednesday of each month is designated as the regular meeting date of the commission unless that date falls on a legal holiday, in which case the following day shall be the meeting date. 
(Ord. 749 § 1, 1996: Ord. 234 § 7, 1970).  
2.44.080 - Organizational meeting—Officers. 
The first regular meeting in January of every year shall be an organizational meeting, at which time the commission shall elect its own chairman, vice chairman and secretary, who shall serve in such positions for a period of one year or until their successors are chosen. 
(Ord. 534 § 2, 1985: Ord. 234 § 8, 1970).  
2.44.090 - Special meeting. 
Special meetings of the parks, recreation and arts commission may be called by the chairman, upon the written request of at least three members or upon the request of the council acting through either the mayor or the city manager. Notice of a special meeting shall be given at least twenty-four hours in advance of such special meeting, either in writing or by telephone. 
(Ord. 234 § 9, 1970). 
(Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 1011, § 2, 4-8-2014)  
2.44.100 - Brown Act compliance. 
All meetings of the parks, recreation and arts commission shall be held in compliance with the Brown Act of the state of California. 
(Ord. 234 § 10, 1970). 
(Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 1011, § 2, 4-8-2014)  
2.44.110 - Duties. 
The parks, recreation and arts commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the council in matters pertaining to parks, recreation and arts. The city council shall set forth the specific duties of the parks, recreation and arts commission in a council resolution, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 234 § 11, 1970). 
(Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-27-2010; Ord. No. 1011, § 2, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 3-8-2016)  
2.44.120 - Youth commissioner. 
There shall be appointed to the parks, recreation and arts commission a youth commissioner. The youth commissioner shall be at least age sixteen, a resident of Rocklin, and enrolled as a junior or senior in high school. The youth commissioner will serve a one-year term from July 1 to June 30 of the following year. The youth commissioner is a non-voting member of the parks, recreation and arts commission, and is not included for the purpose of determining a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 1117, § 3, 8-13-2019)  
Chapter 2.45 - COMMUNITY RECOGNITION COMMISSION 
 
2.45.010 - Established. 
The community recognition commission is established as set forth in this chapter and shall be governed by the rules and regulations set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018)  
2.45.020 - Composition. 
The commission shall consist of five members. The city council, when selecting persons to serve on the commission, shall seek outstanding individuals whose commitment and talents will contribute to the purposes and functions of the commission and who represent a broad array of backgrounds and areas of expertise (such as youth sports organizations, service clubs, local businesses, education sector, arts and culture groups, public safety, civic service clubs, citizens at-large, and philanthropic organizations). 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018)  
2.45.030 - Residency required. 
In order to be eligible to hold office on the commission, a person must be a resident and registered voter of the city. If, during his or her term of office, a member of the commission moves his or her residence outside the city limits, or ceases to be a registered voter of the city, such member's office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018)  
2.45.040 - Term of office. 
Members of the community recognition commission shall serve four-year terms and until their successor is appointed, unless the term is modified by the mayor with the consent of the city council. Two of the founding members of the commission shall be appointed to a two-year term, so as to stagger the terms of the members. 
The members of the commission serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office by the vote of a majority of the members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018)  
2.45.050 - Compensation. 
Compensation for a member of the community recognition commission shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018)  
2.45.060 - Failure to attend meetings. 
In the event a member has three consecutive unexcused absences from regular meetings of the commission, the city council may declare the office of such member vacant. The secretary to the commission shall advise the mayor through the city clerk of any member with three consecutive unexcused absences. The chair of the commission has the discretion to determine whether absences are excused or unexcused. Absences should be excused if due to situations such as illness, religious observances, family emergencies, work conflicts, and vacations. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018)  
2.45.070 - Meetings. 
The commission shall meet in February, May, August and November on the third Wednesday of the month at 4:00 p.m., or such other time as approved by the city council, unless that date falls on a legal holiday, in which case the following Wednesday shall be the meeting date. 
A quorum shall be a majority of the commission. No action of the commission shall be valid without the affirmative vote of at least three members. 
All meetings of the commission shall be conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order as published by Webster's New World, unless the particular rule or matter is otherwise provided for by city ordinance or the commission's rules and regulations. 
A permanent change in the date and time of the regularly scheduled meetings of the commission shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such change may be approved by motion, without the need to amend this chapter. 
The commission shall keep a record, which shall be available for public inspection, of all of its resolutions, proceedings, and other actions. 
The commission may adopt and amend, by the affirmative vote of a majority of its members, rules and regulations for the conduct of the commission's business consistent with this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the city council and shall not become effective until approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 1109, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
2.45.080 - Organizational meeting—Officers. 
The first regular meeting in February of every year shall be an organizational meeting, at which time the commission shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman, who shall serve in such positions for a period of one year or until their successors are chosen. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 1109, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
2.45.090 - Special meeting. 
Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairman or upon the request of the city council acting through either the mayor or the city manager. Notice of special meeting shall be given at least twenty-four hours in advance of such special meeting.  
2.45.100 - Brown Act compliance. 
All meetings of the commission shall be held in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act and shall be open to the public except as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018)  
2.45.110 - Purpose and duties. 
The community recognition commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council in matters pertaining to community recognition. The commission is charged with performing the following specific functions: 
1.  Coordinate the Ruhkala Awards event in April to coincide with National Volunteer Month of each year. Tasks include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Promote, publicize and encourage community awareness and participation in the Ruhkala Awards process and event; 
b.  Plan the Ruhkala Awards event; 
c.  Develop tools and selection criteria for determining worthy recipient(s); 
d.  Solicit nominations for recipient(s) and inform city council of the opening date of the call for nominations; 
e.  Evaluate nominations and select recipient(s); 
f.  Recommend recipient(s) to the city council via council agenda. During this time council may provide comments and additional direction to the commission; 
g.  Organize and honor recipient(s) at city council meeting. 
2.  Coordinate the Wall of Recognition event in the fall of each year. Tasks include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Promote, publicize and encourage community awareness and participation in the Wall of Recognition process and event; 
b.  Plan the Wall of Recognition event; 
c.  Develop tools and selection criteria for determining worthy recipient(s); 
d.  Solicit nominations for recipient(s) and inform city council of the opening date of the call for nominations; 
e.  Evaluate nominations and select recipient(s); 
f.  Recommend recipient(s) to the city council via council agenda. During this time council may provide comments and additional direction to the commission; and 
g.  Organize and honor recipient(s) at city council meeting. 
3.  Other duties as may be assigned by the city council, from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1091, § 2, 3-27-2018)  
Chapter 2.46 - MOBILE HOME RENT ORDINANCE 
Sections:  
Article I. - Purpose and Findings 
 
2.46.010 - Findings and declarations. 
The city council of the city finds and declares as follows: 
A.  A significant majority of the residents of mobile home parks in the city are older individuals or couples living on fixed incomes. 
B.  These residents qualify as "low" and "lower" income households and typically expend more than thirty percent of their income on housing-related expenses. 
C.  Nearly two-thirds of the residents own their mobile homes outright, having made a substantial monetary investment to live in a mobile home park. 
D.  Nearly all mobile home park residents own and occupy their mobile home. 
E.  Residents of a mobile home park have very limited mobility due to the difficulty and expense of relocating a mobile home. 
F.  Due to their limited incomes, the large investment in their mobile homes, and the immobility of mobile homes, mobile home park residents generally have very limited economic bargaining power concerning rents charged for mobile home lots. 
G.  There is a limited amount of alternative housing affordable to and suitable for the typical mobile home park resident. 
H.  During the two years prior to enactment of mobile home rent control in the city, mobile home lot rents increased substantially. During the time mobile home rent control has been in effect, petitions for additional substantial rent increases have been submitted, indicating continued upward pressure on rents. 
I.  The city is committed to providing for the development of the city's fair share of decent, safe and sanitary housing affordable to all economic segments of the community. 
J.  Mobile home parks are a valuable resource of affordable housing for low and moderate income individuals and families. 
K.  Based on the city's 1988 rental survey, the overall city apartment vacancy rate is 2.24 percent. The vacancy rate in subsidized and lower-end nonsubsidized complexes is zero percent with a waiting list of up to 2.5 years. These results indicate a shortage of affordable housing for low and moderate income individuals and families. 
L.  To remedy the continued upward pressure on rents and shortage of affordable housing, the council desires to encourage the development of a variety of types of housing units affordable to all economic segments of the community, especially mobile home lots affordable to low and moderate income individuals and families. 
M.  While rent control protects mobile home park residents from excessive and exploitive rent increases, it also discourages the development of new mobile home parks and the expansion of existing parks, thereby exacerbating the shortage of affordable housing. In addition, rent control may encourage mobile home park owners to convert existing parks to other uses and discourage adequate maintenance and services in existing parks. 
N.  Permanent mobile home rent control has proven to be a costly administrative burden and an inefficient city response to the affordable housing shortage. 
O.  Continued protection for the current residents of mobile home parks from excessive and exploitive rent increase is necessary for and consistent with the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to protect current residents of mobile home parks from excessive, unreasonable or exploitive rent increases by continuing rent control protection until a voluntary vacancy occurs; to give adequate notice to future residents of the economic risks of locating in a mobile home park and the absence of rent control; to promote the development of new mobile home parks and the expansion of existing mobile home parks as a source of housing affordable to low and moderate income individuals and families; to permit mobile home park owners to receive a fair and reasonable return; to establish an efficient and speedy process to review rent increases; and to provide for an alternative dispute resolution process. 
B.  To achieve the above purpose and to further the interests of justice, the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed. 
C.  No provision of this chapter shall be construed or applied to prohibit the grant of a rent increase that is demonstrated to be necessary to provide a landlord with a fair and reasonable return as provided by law. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
2.46.030 - Affected rental unit. 
"Affected rental unit" means a rental unit which is benefited by a particular capital improvement or rehabilitation. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.040 - Base rent. 
"Base rent" means the rent charged by a landlord on January 1, 1988, plus any rent increase authorized by or allowed under this chapter, including rent increases exempt from review under this chapter, but excluding assessments for capital improvements and/or rehabilitation. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.050 - Capital improvements. 
"Capital improvements" means the addition or replacement of any improvement to a unit or property within the geographic boundaries of a mobile home park, or outside such boundaries but which are directly and primarily for the benefit of the park, and which meets the following conditions: 
A.  The addition or replacement has a useful life of at least five years; and 
B.  Either: 
1.  The addition or replacement is necessary in order to maintain compliance with applicable local code requirements affecting health and safety, or 
2.  The addition or replacement is provided by the mobile home park owner primarily to benefit the residents of the affected rental units; 
C.  "Capital improvement costs" means all costs reasonably and necessarily related to the planning, engineering and construction of capital improvements, and shall include debt service costs, if any, incurred as a direct result of the capital improvements. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.060 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the mobile home rent review commission established by Article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.070 - Commissioners. 
"Commissioners" means commissioners of the mobile home rent review commission. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.080 - Debt service cost. 
"Debt service costs" means the periodic payment or payments due under any security or financing device which is applicable to the mobile home park including any fees, commission or other charges incurred in obtaining such financing. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.090 - Designated representative. 
"Designated representative" means the person appointed in writing by an owner, a homeowner, a tenant, or a group of homeowners and/or tenants under Section 2.46.300 and authorized to represent the interests of, negotiate on behalf of and bind the appointing party. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.100 - Fair and reasonable return. 
"Fair and reasonable return" means a rate of return high enough to encourage good management, reward efficiency, discourage the flight of capital, and enable operators to maintain their credit, and which is commensurate with returns in comparable enterprises, but which is not so high as to defeat the purpose of rent control to prevent excessive rents. There is a range of rents which could be allowed in any one mobile home park subject to this chapter, all of which could be characterized as allowing a "fair and reasonable return." There is no one precise formulation; rather, there are a variety of formulations which produce a zone of reasonableness which is higher than what would be a confiscatory rate. For purposes of this chapter, a fair and reasonable return is presumed to be the return realized by a landlord charging the base rent, plus capital improvements and/or rehabilitation assessments, if any. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.110 - Fair market rent. 
"Fair market rent" means the rent for a mobile home or mobile home lot that would be paid to a willing landlord by a willing homeowner or mobile home tenant as the result of an arm's length negotiation in a market free of the constraints of limited supply, impaired mobility or excessive demand. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.120 - Filing. 
"Filing" means actual receipt of the item being filed by the person designated in this chapter to receive the item, or by his or her designee. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.130 - Fiscal year. 
"Fiscal year" means the fiscal year used for tax purposes by a landlord submitting a petition for a rent increase. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.140 - Homeowner. 
"Homeowner" means a person who has a tenancy in a mobile home park under a rental agreement. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.150 - Landlord. 
"Landlord" means a mobile home park owner, or a mobile home owner, lessor or sublessor who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental unit or portion thereof, and the agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.160 - Operation and maintenance costs. 
A.  "Operation and maintenance costs" means all expenses incurred in the operation and maintenance of a rental unit and the buildings or complex of buildings of which it is a part together with common areas, but excluding costs of debt service, costs of capital improvements and costs of rehabilitation. 
B.  "Operation and maintenance costs" includes, but is not limited to, real property taxes; business taxes and fees; licenses and registration fees; insurance; sewer service charges; utility costs for rental units to the extent such costs are included in the rent; janitorial services; professional property management fees; including accounting fees, subject to paragraph D of this section; pool maintenance; building and grounds maintenance; supplies; equipment; refuse removal; and security services or systems. 
C.  "Operation and maintenance costs" also includes landlord-performed labor compensated at reasonable hourly rates; provided, that: 
1.  No landlord-performed labor shall be included as an operating expense unless the landlord submits documentation showing the date, time and nature of the work performed; 
2.  There shall be a maximum allowed under this provision of five percent of gross income unless the landlord shows greater services were performed for the benefit of the residents. 
D.  "Operation and maintenance costs" shall also include attorneys' fees and costs incurred in connection with successful good faith unlawful detainer actions not in derogation of applicable law, and legal expenses necessarily incurred in dealings with respect to the normal operation of the park to the extent such expenses are not recovered from adverse or other parties. Attorneys', accounting, consulting or any other fees incurred in relation to administrative or judicial proceedings in connection with this chapter are not allowed as operating expenses. 
E.  "Operation and maintenance costs" shall not include the following: 
1.  Mortgage principal or interest payments or other debt service costs; 
2.  Any penalties, fees or interest assessed or awarded for violation of any provision of law; 
3.  Legal fees except as expressly specified in subsection D of this section; 
4.  Political contributions; 
5.  Depreciation of the rental unit or rental units; 
6.  Any expenses for which the landlord has been reimbursed by any utility rebate or discount, security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for damages, settlement or any other method or device. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.170 - Mobile home. 
"Mobile home" means a structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than one dwelling unit, to be used with or without a foundation system. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.180 - Mobile home lot. 
"Mobile home lot" means a portion of a mobile home park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobile home. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.190 - Mobile home park owner or owner. 
"Mobile home park owner" or "owner" means the owner, lessor, operator or manager of a mobile home park. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.200 - Mobile home tenant or tenant. 
"Mobile home tenant" or "tenant" means any person legally occupying a mobile home dwelling unit pursuant to ownership thereof or a rental or lease arrangement with the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.205 - Qualified appraiser. 
"Qualified appraiser" means an MAI appraiser with experience or special training in, or otherwise showing the skills necessary for, appraising mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.210 - Rehabilitation costs. 
"Rehabilitation costs" means the costs of any rehabilitation or repair work done on or in a mobile home park (excluding such work done on or in an owner-occupied mobile home) or directly servicing a mobile home park, and which work was done in order to comply with an order issued by any governmental agency, regulatory board or public utility, or to repair or prevent damage resulting or which may result from fire, earthquake or other natural disaster. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.220 - Party. 
"Party" means a landlord, homeowner or tenant whose rent increase is the subject of the administrative hearing process of this chapter. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.230 - Rent. 
A.  "Rent" means the consideration, including any bonus, benefit or gratuity, demanded or received by a landlord for or in connection with the use or occupancy, including services, of a rental unit or in connection with the assignment of a lease or in connection with subleasing of the rental unit. 
B.  Rent shall not include utility charges for utility services (including gas, electricity, water, refuse disposal, and/or sewer service), provided to an individual mobile home resident, as opposed to utility services provided to the mobile home park in general, where such charges are billed to the mobile home resident separately from the rent for the mobile home or mobile home lot. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.240 - Rent increase. 
"Rent increase" means any rent demanded of or paid by a homeowner or tenant in excess of rent paid for the rental unit immediately prior to such demand or payment. Rent increase includes any reduction in services provided to a mobile home resident without a corresponding reduction in the moneys demanded for or paid as rent. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.250 - Rental agreement. 
"Rental agreement" means a written agreement between a landlord and a homeowner or tenant for the use and occupancy of a rental unit to the exclusion of others. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.260 - Rental unit. 
"Rental unit" means a mobile home or mobile home lot, located in a mobile home park in the city, which is offered or available for rent. Rental unit includes the land, with or without a mobile home, and appurtenant buildings thereto and all housing services, privileges and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy of the mobile home or mobile home lot. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.270 - Services. 
"Services" means those facilities which enhance the use of the rental lot or space, including, but not limited to, repairs, replacement, maintenance, painting, heat, hot and cold water, utilities, security devices, laundry facilities and privileges, janitorial service, refuse removal, telephone service, and recreational and other facilities in common areas of the mobile home park in which the rental units are located. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.280 - Service reduction. 
"Service reduction" means a decrease or diminution in the basic service level required to be provided by the landlord pursuant to any of the following: 
A.  California Civil Code Sections 1941.1 and 1941.2; 
B.  The Mobile Home Residency Law, California Civil Code Sections 798 et seq.; 
C.  The Mobile Home Parks Act., California Health and Safety Code Sections 18200 et seq.; 
D.  The landlord's implied warranty of habitability; 
E.  An express or implied agreement between the landlord and the resident; 
F.  The level of service as implied by the condition of improvements, fixtures and equipment, and their availability for use by the resident, at the time of the last rent increase; 
G.  Applicable rules or regulations of the mobile home park. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.290 - Tenancy. 
"Tenancy" means the right of a homeowner or tenant to the use of a rental unit within a mobile home park on which to locate, maintain or occupy a mobile home, site improvements, and accessory structures for human habitation, including the use of the services and facilities of the park. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article III. - Designated Representative 
 
2.46.300 - Appointment of designated representative. 
A.  An owner, a homeowner, a tenant or a group of homeowners and/or tenants may appoint one or more persons as a designated representative to represent the interests of, negotiate on behalf of, and bind the appointing party. 
B.  The appointment shall be in writing, shall be dated, shall list the name of the appointing party and the name and address of the designated representative, and shall describe the matters within the scope of this chapter for which the designated representative is authorized to act. 
C.  The appointment may include the term during which the appointment is valid. If no term is specified, the appointment shall be deemed effective until revoked. 
D.  Owner's appointment shall be effective upon notifying the city manager of the appointment by mailing or personally delivering a copy of the designation to him or her and posting a copy in a centralized location in the mobile home park for no less than ten days. A homeowner's or tenant's appointment shall be effective upon notifying the city manager and the owner of the mobile home park by mailing or personally delivering a copy of the designation to each. 
E.  An appointment may be revoked at any time by the appointing party. A revocation shall be in writing and shall be effective upon notifying the city manager and, in the case of an owner's appointment, the homeowners and tenants in the park, or, in the case of a homeowner's or tenant's appointment, the mobile home park owner, in the same manner as notifying of an appointment. 
F.  A designated representative shall be deemed to be, and to act on behalf of, the appointing party for all purposes under this chapter, subject to any restrictions contained in the appointment. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article IV. - Mediation 
 
2.46.310 - Mediation. 
A.  Whenever a landlord proposes to increase rent in an amount subject to review under this chapter, or more frequently than permitted under this chapter, the landlord and the homeowners and tenants involved may use informal mediation as a way of reaching agreement on the proposed rent increase without resorting to the formalities, expense and adversary atmosphere of the hearing process provided in this chapter. The city encourages use of mediation as an alternative to the hearing process. 
B.  At any time prior to filing a petition for a hearing under this chapter, the landlord and the homeowners and tenants affected by the proposed rent increase may file a written request for mediation with the city manager. The written request must be signed by all involved. 
C.  Upon receipt of a written request for mediation, the city manager shall work with the landlord, homeowners and tenants to select a mediator, if requested. The city manager shall have no other involvement in the mediation other than to help in selecting the mediator and answering questions or providing information to the mediator at the request of the mediator. 
D.  A written request for mediation under this section shall be deemed agreement by all requesting mediation: 
1.  To meet in mediation at least one time within thirty days of the date the mediator is retained; 
2.  That all discussion in or connected with the mediation be confidential; and 
3.  That the mediation continue only with the agreement of all those requesting mediation and the mediator. 
E.  The landlord, homeowners and tenants shall notify the city manager in writing of the conclusion of the mediation and of the rent increase, if any, agreed upon by the participants in the mediation. 
F.  The cost of mediation shall be the full and sole responsibility of those requesting mediation and shall not be an obligation of the city. 
G.  Any rent increase agreed upon by the participants in a mediation shall be exempt from review under this chapter. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article V. - Exemptions 
 
2.46.320 - Exemptions—Small mobile home parks. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any mobile home park or lot in a mobile home park which contains fewer than ten spaces. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.330 - Exemptions—Permanent vacancy decontrol—Notice. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any tenancy in a mobile home lot or dwelling unit following the voluntary termination of a tenancy on the part of a homeowner or tenant, or following a termination of a tenancy because of eviction for a material breach of a written agreement. 
B.  This exemption shall apply only where the landlord of the mobile home lot or dwelling unit gives written notice to the subsequent homeowner or tenant prior to entering into a rental or lease arrangement with the homeowner or tenant that the rental unit is not subject to this chapter. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE: THIS RENTAL UNIT IS NOT SUBJECT TO RENT CONTROL 
READ THIS NOTICE IN FULL. IT CONTAINS IMPORTANT INFORMATION ON YOUR RIGHTS AS A HOMEOWNER OR TENANT. 
 Rocklin Municipal Code Chapter 2.46 controls rents on some but not all mobile home lots and units. Rents are not controlled in mobile home parks or on mobile home lots and units for which a plumbing, electrical or sewer permit was first issued, or which became vacant, on or after August 31, 1988 (Rocklin Municipal Code Section 2.46.330). 
 The mobile home lot or unit specified below is not subject to rent control under Rocklin Municipal Code Chapter 2.46. Because the mobile home lot or unit specified above is not subject to rent control, the landlord may raise the rent without any limitation or review by the city or other government or administrative agency. You are solely responsible for informing yourself of your rights and obligations in this matter and for protecting yourself against future rent increases. 
 I hereby acknowledge that I have read and have received a fully completed copy of this notice prior to entering into a rental or lease agreement involving the above described mobile home lot or unit. 
Date: _____ 
Signature: _____ 
Name (please print): _____ 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.340 - Exemptions—Individual rental agreements. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any mobile home lot which is the subject of a rental agreement voluntarily entered into between a landlord and a homeowner where the rental agreement meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  The rental agreement was entered into on or after January 1, 1986; 
2.  The term of the rental agreement is in excess of twelve months' duration; 
3.  The mobile home lot which is the subject of the rental agreement is used for the personal and actual residence of the homeowner; 
4.  The first paragraph of the rental agreement contains a provision notifying the homeowner that the mobile home lot will be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  This exemption shall apply only for the duration of the term of the rental agreement and any uninterrupted, continuous extensions thereof. If the term of the rental agreement is not extended and no new rental agreement meeting the above-stated criteria is entered into, and if no other exemption applies, this chapter shall immediately become applicable to the mobile home lot, and the last rental rate charged for the lot under the immediately preceding rental agreement shall be the base rent for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.355 - Exemptions—New mobile home parks and lots—Notice. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any mobile home park or lot for which a plumbing, electrical or sewer permit was first issued on or after August 31, 1988. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any mobile home situated on a mobile home lot which is exempt from the provisions of this chapter under subsection A of this section. 
C.  This exemption shall apply only where the landlord of the mobile home or mobile home lot gives written notice to the prospective homeowner or tenant prior to entering into each rental or lease arrangement on the subject lot that the lot is not subject to this chapter. The notice shall be in substantially the form set out in Section 2.46.330B. 
D.  This exemption shall apply in mobile home parks only where a notice in substantially the form set out in Section 2.46.330B and in a size no less than fourteen inches by sixteen inches is posted conspicuously in the mobile home park office. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article VI. - Base Rent 
 
2.46.360 - Base rent—Presumption. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, "base rent" means the rent charged by a landlord on January 1, 1988, plus any rent increase authorized by or allowed under this chapter, including rent increases exempt from review under this chapter, but excluding assessments for capital improvements and/or rehabilitation. 
B.  For rental units which were exempt from the provisions of this chapter by reason of a rental agreement as of January 1, 1988 and which become subject to the provisions of this chapter because of the expiration or other termination of the rental agreement, "base rent" shall mean the average rent received by the landlord for the rental unit during the last thirty days of the rental agreement. 
C.  For purposes of determining rent increases under this chapter, the base rent, plus any approved assessments for capital improvements or rehabilitation, shall be presumed sufficient to cover operation and maintenance costs, rehabilitation costs and capital improvement costs while also providing the landlord a fair and reasonable return. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.370 - Base rent—Presumption—Rebuttal. 
Any landlord who disputes the presumption that the base rent, plus approved assessments for capital improvements or rehabilitation, is sufficient to cover operation and maintenance costs, rehabilitation costs, and capital improvement costs, and still provide the landlord a fair and reasonable return, may challenge the presumption by filing a petition for rent increase for a fair market rent adjustment under Section 2.46.490.  
Article VII. - Petitions for Rent Increase—Decisions 
 
2.46.380 - Frequency of rent increases. 
A.  The rent on any rental unit shall not be increased more than one time in any twelve-month period, except as otherwise expressly allowed under this section or elsewhere in this chapter, or by agreement. 
B.  A rent increase may be allowed within twelve months of the effective date of the preceding rent increase where the owner can clearly demonstrate that the rent increase is necessary to cover costs of operation and maintenance, capital improvements or rehabilitation that could not have been reasonably foreseen at the time notice of the preceding rent increase was given. The facts supporting the necessity shall be included in the petition, and the question of necessity shall be considered and decided by the administrative hearing officer. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.390 - Notice of rent increase. 
A.  Whenever a landlord serves notice to a homeowner or tenant of a proposed rent increase which exceeds the amounts specified in Section 2.46.400, said notice shall include all of the following information: 
1.  The name of the homeowner or tenant occupying the rental unit which is the subject of the rent increase; 
2.  The mobile home lot or space number where the rental unit is located; 
3.  Notice that under the provisions of this chapter the landlord is required to file a petition requesting a rent increase in excess of the amounts specified in Section 2.46.400; 
4.  Notice of the date the petition requesting a rent increase in excess of the amounts specified in Section 2.46.400 was filed with the city manager; 
5.  Notice that the portion of the rent increase in excess of the amounts specified in Section 2.46.400 will not take effect until approved by an administrative hearing officer and a statement of the rent that will be in effect until such approval; 
6.  Notice that documentation supporting the proposed rent increase is on file with the city manager, in the Rocklin Public Library, and in the mobile home park office; 
7.  The name and current address of the landlord to whom notices are to be sent; and 
8.  A statement of the proposed rent increase expressed both as an actual dollar amount and as a percentage of the then current base rent. 
B.  A copy of the notice shall be filed with the city manager within five working days of service of the notice on the homeowners or tenants together with an affidavit of proof of service on such homeowners or tenants. 
C.  No rent increase in excess of the amounts specified in Section 2.46.400 shall be effective unless notice is given in accordance with the provisions of this section and such excess is approved by an administrative hearing officer. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.400 - Rent increase allowed without review. 
A.  Any rent increase, taken together with any increase which took effect in the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date the increase is noticed, which is equal to or less than the amount determined by multiplying the base rent by the cost of living factor, and rounded off to the nearest dollar, shall not be subject to review by the administrative hearing process under this chapter. The cost of living factor shall be as follows: 
1.00 (CPI/C) 	where CPI/C is equal to or less than five percent; 
.75 (CPI/C) 	or five percent, whichever is greater, where CPI/C is greater than five percent and equal to or less than ten percent; 
.66 (CPI/C) 	or seven and one-half percent, whichever is greater, where CPI/C is greater than ten percent. 
 
"CPI/C" means the percent change in the consumer price index for California, All Urban Consumers, as published by California State Department of Industrial Relations, Division of Labor Statistics and Research, over the twelve months preceding the date notice of the rent increase is given. The most recently published CPI figure available at the time the rent increase notice is given shall be used for the calculations. 
B.  Any rent increase charged by a landlord for a mobile home he or she owns or leases in an amount equal to or less than the amount of a rent increase for the lot on which the mobile home is located and approved under Section 2.46.450, 2.46.460, 2.46.480 or 2.46.490, shall not be subject to review by the administrative hearing process under this chapter; provided, that a rent increase taken under this subsection B shall be in lieu of, and not in addition to, an increase taken under subsection A of this section. 
C.  The rent increases permitted by this section without review are presumed to be sufficient to account for any increased costs of operation and maintenance, debt service, capital improvements and/or rehabilitation incurred by a landlord and to provide the landlord a fair and reasonable return adjusted for inflation. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.410 - Rent increase subject to review. 
A.  Any rent increase not exempt from review under this chapter and in excess of the amount specified in Section 2.46.400 shall be subject to the administrative hearing process set forth in this chapter. 
B.  That portion of the rent increase in excess of the amount specified in Section 2.46.400 shall not be collectible by the landlord until such time as the excess is approved by an administrative hearing officer under this chapter. That portion of the rent increase that equals the amount specified in Section 2.46.400 shall be collectible as noticed. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.420 - Petition for rent increase. 
A.  Any landlord whose rental unit is subject to this chapter and who seeks a rent increase in an amount in excess of the amount specified in Section 2.46.400 shall file a petition for rent increase with the city manager under Sections 2.46.450 and/or 2.46.460, or Section 2.46.490. 
B.  Within five days of filing the petition with the city manager, the landlord shall notify the homeowners and tenants of the filing by mail or personal delivery, and shall place a copy of the petition at a centralized location in the mobile home park and at the Rocklin public library for inspection and copying. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.430 - Petition for rent increase—Form and contents. 
A.  The petition shall be filed in the form prescribed by the city manager and shall include the following: 
1.  The amount of the proposed rent increase; 
2.  The names and addresses of all homeowners and tenants who would be subject to the rent increase; 
3.  The date the rent increase is proposed to be effective; 
4.  A summary statement of the base rent, itemizing the base rent as of January 1, 1988 and all increases; 
5.  A summary statement of operation and maintenance cost increases during the fiscal year immediately preceding the filing of the petition if the requested rent increase is for operation and maintenance cost increases; 
6.  A summary statement of rehabilitation costs incurred during the fiscal year immediately preceding the filing of the petition, if the requested rent increase is for rehabilitation costs; 
7.  A summary statement of capital improvement costs incurred during the fiscal year immediately preceding the filing of the petition, if the requested rent increase is for capital improvement costs; 
8.  A summary statement of the reasons for a rent increase to recover a fair and reasonable return, if the requested rent increase is for a fair and reasonable return; 
9.  Copies of all documentation upon which the landlord relied in determining the proposed rent increase. 
B.  If the landlord fails to file any of the documentation required by this section, the administrative hearing officer may order production of the documentation. Failure of the landlord to submit the documentation ordered by the administrative hearing officer shall be grounds for the administrative hearing officer to find that a rent increase in the amount specified in Section 2.46.400 will provide the landlord with a fair and reasonable return. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.440 - Petition for rent increase—Time for filing. 
A landlord's petition for a rent increase in excess of the amounts specified in Section 2.46.400 shall be filed at least sixty days, but not more than one hundred twenty days, prior to the effective date of the proposed rent increase. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.450 - Petition for rent increase—Operation and maintenance—Decision. 
A.  Where a landlord finds that the rent increase allowed under Section 2.46.400 is inadequate to account for increased costs of operation and maintenance, a petition for a rent increase may be filed under this section in lieu of imposing the increase allowed under Section 2.46.400. 
B.  The administrative hearing officer shall set the rent increase in the amount necessary to account for actual increased costs of operation and maintenance as found by the administrative hearing officer. 
C.  Subject to any offsets under Section 2.46.470, the amount of the increase allowed under subsection B of this section shall become part of the base rent, and that new base rent, plus any other increases allowed by the administrative hearing officer in connection with the landlord's petition, shall be conclusively presumed to provide the landlord with a fair and reasonable return. 
D.  A petition for a rent increase under this section may be filed in conjunction with a petition under Section 2.46.460. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.460 - Petition for rent increase—Rehabilitation and capital improvements—Decision. 
A.  Where a landlord finds that the rent increase allowed under Section 2.46.400 is inadequate to account for costs of rehabilitation and/or capital improvements incurred in the immediately preceding twelve months, a petition for a rent increase may be filed under this section in lieu of the increase allowed under Section 2.46.400. 
B.  The administrative hearing officer shall set the increase in the amount necessary to account for the actual increase in costs of rehabilitation and capital improvements in the preceding twelve months, as found by the administrative hearing officer during the hearing, subject to the following: 
1.  With respect to capital improvements: 
a.  The capital improvement is made at a direct cost of not less than one hundred dollars per affected rental unit or at a total direct cost of not less than five thousand dollars, whichever is lower. 
b.  The costs, less any insurance proceeds or other applicable recovery, are averaged and spread on a per unit basis for each rental unit actually benefited by the improvement. 
c.  The costs are amortized over a period of not less than sixty months. 
d.  The costs do not include any additional costs incurred for property damage or deterioration resulting from any unreasonable delay in the undertaking or completion of any repair or improvement. 
2.  With respect to rehabilitation costs: 
a.  The costs, less any insurance proceeds or other applicable recovery, are averaged and spread on a per unit basis for each rental unit actually benefited by the rehabilitation. 
b.  The costs are amortized over a period of not less than thirty-six months. 
c.  The costs do not include any additional costs incurred for property damage or deterioration resulting from any unreasonable delay in the undertaking or completion of any repair or improvement. 
C.  The amount of the increase allowed under subsection B of this section shall not become a permanent part of the base rent, but rather shall be a separately itemized assessment which shall be collectible with rents during the amortization period. 
D.  Subject to any offsets under Section 2.46.470, the amount of the increase allowed under subsection B of this section, plus any other increase allowed by the administrative hearing officer in connection with the landlord's petition, when added to the base rent, shall be conclusively presumed to provide the landlord with a fair and reasonable return. 
E.  A petition for a rent increase under this section may be filed in conjunction with a petition filed under Section 2.46.450. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.470 - Petition for rent increase—Offsets. 
A.  If the administrative hearing officer finds that service reductions have occurred, the administrative hearing officer shall determine the value of the service reductions and shall offset the rent increase allowed under Sections 2.46.450 and/or 2.46.460 by the value of the service reductions. Service reductions which affect all rental units subject to the proposed rent increase shall be prorated over all such rental units, regardless of the number of residents claiming such service reductions. 
B.  In determining the value of any service reductions, the administrative hearing officer shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The area affected by the service reduction; 
2.  The length of time the resident has been subjected to the service reduction; 
3.  The degree of discomfort the service reduction imposes on the resident; 
4.  The extent to which the service reduction causes the rental unit or rental units to be uninhabitable; 
5.  The extent to which the service reduction causes a material reduction in the usability of the rental unit; 
6.  Other similar factors deemed relevant by the administrative hearing officer. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.480 - Petition for rent increase—Additional adjustment. 
Where the administrative hearing officer allows a rent increase under Sections 2.46.450 and/or 2.46.460, an additional three percent of the base rent before the allowed increase shall also be allowed. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.490 - Petition for rent increase—Fair market rent—Decision. 
A.  Where a landlord finds that the rent increase allowed under Section 2.46.400, and any increase that would be allowable under Section 2.46.450 for operation and maintenance and Section 2.46.460 for rehabilitation and capital improvement costs, plus the adjustment allowed under Section 2.46.480, would be inadequate to provide the landlord with a fair and reasonable return, or where the landlord disputes the base rent presumption in Section 2.46.360, the landlord may file a petition for a rent increase under this section in lieu of the increase allowed under Section 2.46.400 and in lieu of a petition under Sections 2.46.450 and/or 2.46.460. 
B.  The notice of hearing given under Section 2.46.520 on a petition filed under this section shall direct the landlord and the affected homeowners and tenants to submit to the administrative hearing officer at the hearing one or more names of qualified appraisers they wish to nominate to determine fair market rents for the mobile home park. 
C.  1.  Upon submission of the names at the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall divide the names into two lists, one list being those nominated by the landlord and the other list being those nominated by the homeowners and tenants. 
2.  The administrative hearing officer shall then review the lists and shall select as the appraiser anyone who appears on both lists. 
3.  If no name appears on both lists, the administrative hearing officer shall select a name from each list. 
4.  If one list contains no names, the administrative hearing officer shall select a name at random from the names submitted. 
5.  If no names are submitted, the petition shall be dismissed. 
6.  At the hearing and prior to selection of the appraiser or appraisers by the administrative hearing officer, any party may move to disqualify a nominee on the grounds he or she is not a qualified appraiser. The administrative hearing officer shall hear the motion at that time or continue the hearing on the motion and the petition for no more than ten days. At the conclusion of the hearing on the motion, the administrative hearing officer shall rule on the motion, and the ruling shall be final. The hearing on the petition shall then resume. 
D.  Once the appraiser or appraisers are selected, the administrative hearing officer shall direct the landlord to retain the appraiser or appraisers. If one appraiser has been selected, one appraisal and appraisal report shall be prepared. If two appraisers are selected under subsection C3 of this section, each shall independently make an appraisal and prepare an appraisal report. Notwithstanding Section 2.46.550, the hearing shall be continued until the appraisal(s) is completed. The appraiser(s) shall be directed to determine fair market rents for the mobile home park in issue, taking into consideration the following: 
1.  Whether or not and the extent to which rents in the mobile home park are depressed due to the past effects of rent control, historically low rents, and any other factors which have artificially depressed rents in the mobile home park or the mobile home rental market in the region; 
2.  Whether or not and the extent to which rents in the mobile home park are elevated due to the scarcity of mobile home lots in the region in relation to demand, the difficulty in relocating mobile home units, and any other factors which have artificially elevated rents in the mobile home park or the mobile home rental market in the region; 
3.  The existence or nonexistence of unreimbursed capital improvements or rehabilitation work; the extent and quality of park amenities and services; location and setting; aesthetic value; operation and maintenance costs; and quality of management and maintenance. 
E.  The appraisal report(s) shall include, as an appendix, all background and backup data considered by the appraiser(s) in reaching the conclusion. 
F.  When the appraisal report(s) is completed, the landlord shall file two copies of the appraisal report(s) with the administrative hearing officer. The administrative hearing officer shall then notify the homeowners and tenants that the appraisal report(s) is available for inspection and copying and shall schedule the hearing to resume no sooner than ten working days from the date of the notice. 
G.  At the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall receive the appraisal report(s) into evidence and otherwise conduct the hearing in accordance with Article VIII of this chapter; provided, that the subject matter of the hearing shall be limited to the appraisal(s) and the determination of fair market rents. 
H.  The administrative hearing officer shall set rents at the level(s) he finds to be fair market rents and that will provide the landlord a fair and reasonable return. 
I.  The rent allowed under subsection H of this section shall become the base rent and shall be conclusively presumed to provide the landlord with a fair and reasonable return. 
J.  Once a petition for rent increase is filed under this section and a decision is made, another petition under this section for the same lots in the same park may not be filed for four years, provided a petition under this section may be filed more frequently upon a showing of hardship. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article VIII. - Administrative Hearing Process 
 
2.46.500 - Administrative hearing—Purpose. 
The purpose of the administrative hearing is to make a determination of the allowable rent increase pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.510 - Administrative hearing—Appointment and retention of hearing officer. 
A.  Within fifteen working days of receipt of a petition for rent increase, an administrative hearing officer shall be appointed to conduct the hearing. Final retention of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to the payment of costs under subsection C of this section. 
B.  The administrative hearing officer shall be appointed in the following manner: 
1.  Any interested person may submit to the city manager a list of nominees. The nominee shall be an experienced hearing officer with particular expertise in rental disputes or with experience or training showing the capabilities to deal with the issues found in a rental dispute. The lists of nominees shall include the resumes of each, detailing their qualifications. 
2.  To be eligible for nomination, the hearing officer shall not own a real estate interest in a mobile home park, shall not be a tenant of a mobile home park, and shall not be an employee, officer, member or otherwise affiliated with any group or organization which has or is viewed by a significant number of owners or tenants as having taken advocacy positions in rent control matters. 
3.  The city manager shall review the lists, conduct such investigation and/or interviews as (s)he deems necessary, and refer the lists to the commission. 
4.  The commission shall review the lists, shall conduct such investigations and/or interviews as it deems necessary, and shall select a hearing officer. The hearing officer selected by the commission may, but need not, appear on either list submitted, but shall meet the criteria set forth in subdivision 2 of this subsection. The decision of the commission under this section shall be final. 
C.  Upon appointment of the administrative hearing officer, the city manager shall notify the petitioner by mail of the estimated cost of the hearing officer and request payment. If payment is not received from the petitioner within ten days of the notice, the petition shall be deemed withdrawn. 
D.  If the payment made under subsection C of this section, is insufficient to pay the full cost of the administrative hearing officer, the petitioner shall pay the difference to the city manager within ten working days of receiving notice of the amount due. If the payment made exceeds the full cost of the administrative hearing officer, the excess shall be refunded by the city manager to the petitioner after the administrative hearing officer is paid in full. 
E.  Upon receipt of payment under subsection C of this section, the hearing officer shall be deemed retained. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.520 - Administrative hearing—Notice. 
A.  Written notice of the time, date and place of the administrative hearing and of the name of the administrative hearing officer assigned to hear the petition shall be given by the administrative hearing officer to the landlord and to all affected homeowners and tenants within ten days of retention of the administrative hearing officer. 
B.  Such notice shall be personally served on the parties or shall be sent by first class mail, with a proof of service affidavit. 
C.  The notice of hearing shall specify the date by which any documentation the homeowners or tenants wish to introduce at the administrative hearing must be filed under Section 2.46.530. The date shall not be more than thirty calendar days from the date such notice is given by the city manager. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.530 - Administrative hearing—Submission of documents. 
A.  The homeowners or tenants shall submit to the landlord a copy of all written documentation, including any allegations of service reductions, which the homeowners or tenants wish to present at the hearing within the time specified in the notice described in Section 2.46.520. 
B.  Either party may request that additional specific supporting documentation be provided to substantiate the claims made by the other party. The request shall be presented in writing to the administrative hearing officer. 
C.  The administrative hearing officer may order production of such requested documentation as the administrative hearing officer determines is relevant to the proceedings. The requested documentation shall be submitted to the city manager and shall be available to the requesting party for inspection and copying during the normal business hours of City Hall. Copying shall be subject to the city's normal copying charge. 
D.  A copy of all documentation required by this section shall also be maintained at the mobile home park office and shall be available for inspection during the normal business hours of such office. 
E.  The failure of a party to produce documentation ordered by the administrative hearing officer shall be grounds for the administrative hearing officer to find that such party has not met its burden of proof with respect to the matters to which such documentation pertains. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.540 - Administrative hearing—Time and place of hearing. 
A.  The administrative hearing officer shall open the administrative hearing on the petition within sixty days of the date the administrative hearing officer is retained. 
B.  The administrative hearing shall be held at the time and place designated by the administrative hearing officer in the notice; provided, that the time and/or place so designated may be changed by the administrative hearing officer upon notice to the parties. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.550 - Administrative hearing—Conduct. 
A.  The hearing shall be conducted by the administrative hearing officer in accordance with this section and as he or she otherwise deems necessary or convenient to achieve justice and effectuate the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  The administrative hearing officer shall have the power and authority to require and administer oaths or affirmations where appropriate, and to take and hear evidence concerning any matter pending before the administrative hearing officer. 
C.  The rules of evidence generally applicable in the courts shall not be binding on the administrative hearing officer. Hearsay evidence and any and all other evidence which the administrative hearing officer deems relevant and proper may be admitted and considered. 
D.  Any party may appear at the hearing to offer such documents, oral testimony, written declarations or other evidence as may be relevant to the proceedings. 
E.  The administrative hearing officer may grant or order not more than two continuances of the hearing for not more than ten working days each. Additional continuances may be granted only if all parties stipulate in writing. Such continuances may be granted or ordered at the administrative hearing without further written notice to the parties. 
F.  Neither the administrative hearing officer nor the city shall be responsible for recording or reporting the hearing. Any party or parties, individually or jointly, may make arrangements for recording or reporting the hearing. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.560 - Administrative hearing—Representative of parties. 
The parties in any administrative hearing are entitled and encouraged to be represented at the hearing by a designated representative appointed under Section 2.46.300. The designated representative need not be an attorney. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.570 - Administrative hearing—Findings and decision. 
A.  The administrative hearing officer, within fifteen working days of the date the matter is taken under submission, shall file with the city manager a written statement of decision, together with written findings of fact upon which such decision is based. 
B.  The decision shall include a determination in accordance with the provisions of this chapter of the amount of the rent increase, if any, which is required to provide the landlord with a fair and reasonable return. 
C.  The administrative hearing officer's allowance or disallowance of any proposed rent increase or portion thereof may be reasonably conditioned in any manner necessary to further the interests of justice or to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. Authority to condition a rent increase shall include the authority to spread payment of an increase over a specified period of time, or to defer payment of an increase, with interest and adequate security, until the time that tenancy is terminated. 
D.  The decision shall include a determination of the award of costs under Section 2.46.580. 
E.  The city manager shall mail copies of the decision to the landlord and all affected homeowners and tenants within five days of the date the decision is filed. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.580 - Administrative hearing—Findings and decision—Award of costs. 
A.  The administrative hearing officer shall include in the decision the award of costs consistent with this section. 
B.  For purposes of this section, "costs" means all costs actually incurred and paid by the petitioner to the city to retain the administrative hearing officer and, where applicable, to retain the appraiser or appraisers. 
C.  If the administrative hearing officer finds that greater than eighty percent of the rent increase requested by the petitioner is allowed by the final decision, the administrative hearing officer shall award costs to the petitioner. 
D.  To collect the costs so awarded, the petitioner shall be allowed to pass the costs through to the homeowners and/or tenants in addition to the rent increase allowed, spread over a one-year period or otherwise as may be directed by the administrative hearing officer. 
E.  The pass-through of costs to homeowners and/or tenants under this section shall be subject to Section 2.46.600D. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.590 - Administrative hearing—Burden of proof. 
A.  The burden of proving the reasonableness of the rent increase shall be on the landlord. 
B.  The burden of proving service reductions shall be on the homeowner or tenant alleging that service reductions have occurred. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.600 - Administrative hearing—Decision—Applicability. 
A.  The administrative hearing officer's decision shall apply to all homeowners and tenants subject to the proposed rent increase regardless of whether such owner or tenant was present or represented at the administrative hearing. 
B.  The administrative hearing officer's decision regarding service reductions shall apply to all homeowners and tenants affected by the service reduction. 
C.  Any rent increase approved by the administrative hearing officer shall be made effective as of the date for which it was originally noticed, unless the administrative hearing officer imposes a different effective date as a condition of approval under Section 2.46.570. 
D.  A retroactive increase shall not be imposed on any homeowner or tenant who was not a homeowner or tenant of the park at the time the notice of rent increase was given, unless the landlord gave the homeowner or tenant notice of the pending petition in writing prior to or at the time that person became a homeowner or tenant. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.610 - Administrative hearing—Decision—Finality. 
Unless a notice of error is filed under Section 2.46.620, the decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final and binding on the landlord and all homeowners and tenants who are parties to the hearing either personally or through their designated representatives, fifteen days from the postmarked date the decision is mailed by the city manager under Section 2.46.570. If a notice of error is filed, the decision shall be final and binding as of the postmarked date the decision is mailed by the city manager under Section 2.46.620. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.620 - Administrative hearing—Decision—Mathematical and clerical errors. 
Any party alleging that the administrative hearing officer's statement of decision contains mathematic or clerical inaccuracies may file a notice of error with the city manager within fifteen days of the mailing of the decision by the city manager. The city manager shall refer such allegations to the administrative hearing officer who shall review the decision, make any corrections warranted, and refile the statement of decision within five working days of referral by the city manager. The city manager shall mail copies of the refiled decision to the landlord and all affected homeowners and tenants. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article IX. - General Provisions 
 
2.46.630 - Notices. 
A.  Unless the method of giving notice is otherwise specified, any notice required to be given by any provision of this chapter may be given by personal service, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by first-class mail, postage prepaid. 
B.  If personally served or if sent by registered or certified mail, such notice shall be deemed given on the date actually received. 
C.  If sent by first-class mail, such notice shall be deemed given on the postmarked date. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.640 - Judicial review. 
Any landlord, homeowner or tenant aggrieved by any decision of an administrative hearing officer in a proceeding under Article VIII of this chapter in which such landlord, homeowner or tenant is a party may seek judicial review of the decision in a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.650 - Days. 
All references in this chapter to "days" shall be deemed calendar days unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article X. - Variances 
 
2.46.660 - Variances—Fair and reasonable return. 
A.  Whenever a landlord finds that application of the fair market rent method of determining a fair and reasonable return is inappropriate and will not, in fact, result in rents that will provide a fair and reasonable return in its situation, the landlord may apply for a variance. 
B.  The application for a variance shall be submitted to the city manager and shall contain the following information: 
1.  A clear and detailed statement of why the fair market rent method of determining a fair and reasonable return is inappropriate to the landlord's situation and why this method will not, in fact, result in rents that will provide a fair and reasonable return; 
2.  One or more alternative methods of determining a fair and reasonable return; 
3.  All supporting documentation on which the landlord intends to rely to support the application for a variance. 
C.  Submittal and hearing of an application for a variance under this section shall be handled in the same manner as petitions for rent increases under Sections 2.46.420, 2.46.430B, 2.46.500 through 2.46.560, 2.46.570A and E, 2.46.610 and 2.46.620. The burden of proving an entitlement to a variance under the standards contained in this section shall be on the landlord. 
D.  The administrative hearing officer shall grant the variance if: 
1.  The administrative hearing officer finds that application of the fair market rent method will not result in setting rents that will provide a fair and reasonable return due to specific and clearly identified factors particular to the mobile home or mobile home park in question which were not caused in substantial part by the landlord; and 
2.  The administrative hearing officer approves an alternative method of determining rents that will provide a fair and reasonable return. 
E.  Upon approval of a variance under this section, a petition for rent increase may be filed under and shall be governed by Section 2.46.490 except that the approved alternative method of determining rents that will provide a fair and reasonable return shall be applied, and the administrative hearing officer shall have the authority to modify the procedures and other hearing requirements as he or she deems necessary or convenient to effectuate the objectives of this chapter and apply the alternative method. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article XI. - Enforcement and Penalties 
 
2.46.670 - Enforcement—Homeowner and tenant rights and remedies. 
If a landlord demands, accepts, receives or retains any payment of rent in excess of the maximum allowable rent permitted by this chapter, a tenant or homeowner may take any or all of the following actions until compliance is achieved: 
A.  A tenant or homeowner may withhold up to the full amount of his or her periodic rent which is charged or demanded by the landlord under this chapter. In any action to recover possession based on nonpayment of rent, possession shall not be granted where the tenant or homeowner has withheld rent in good faith under this section. 
B.  A tenant or homeowner may seek injunctive relief on behalf of himself or herself to restrain the landlord from demanding or receiving any rent on the unit until the landlord has complied with this chapter. 
C.  A tenant or homeowner may file a damage suit against the landlord for actual damages when the landlord receives or retains any rent in excess of the maximum rent allowed under this chapter. Upon proof of bad faith on the part of the landlord in connection with such receipt or retention of rent, the tenant or homeowner shall receive a judgment of up to five hundred dollars in addition to any actual damages. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.680 - Enforcement—Injunction. 
The city attorney may bring an action for injunctive relief on behalf of the city seeking compliance by landlords with this chapter. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.690 - Violations—Unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any landlord to demand, accept, receive or retain any payment of rent in excess of the maximum allowable rent permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.700 - Retaliation prohibited. 
A.  No landlord shall in any way retaliate against any homeowner or tenant for the homeowner's or tenant's assertion or exercise of any right under this chapter. Such retaliation shall be subject to suit for actual and punitive damages, injunctive relief and attorney's fees. Such retaliation shall also be an available defense in an unlawful detainer action. 
B.  No homeowner or tenant shall in any way retaliate against any landlord for the landlord's assertion or exercise of any right under this chapter. Such retaliation shall be subject to suit for actual and punitive damages, injunctive relief and attorney's fees. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Article XIII. - Rent Review Commission 
 
2.46.750 - Rent review commission. 
A.  There is created within the city a mobile home rent review commission, consisting of five members, the membership of which shall be appointed by the city council from a list of applicants to serve at the council's pleasure. 
B.  Each member shall be a full-time resident within the city. 
C.  1.  Commissioners shall serve for terms of four years and until their successors are appointed. Those commission members whose term would have expired on December 31, 1994, shall continue in office until December 31, 1996. Those members whose term would have expired on December 31, 1995, shall continue in office until December 31, 1998, and until their successors are appointed. 
2.  A member chosen to fill a vacancy created other than by expiration of a term shall be appointed for the unexpired term of the member whom he or she is to succeed. A member of the commission shall be eligible for reappointment. A vacancy in the commission shall not impair the rights of the remaining members to exercise the powers of the commission. Three members shall constitute a quorum. Three affirmative votes are required for a ruling or decision. 
D.  The city council shall appoint, for a four-year term, an alternate commissioner in the same manner provided by this section. The alternate commissioner shall serve as a commissioner in the event that a regular member is unable to attend or participate because of absence or conflict of interest. In the event a regular member submits to the city manager a written notice stating that the member will be unable to attend a specific meeting or participate in specific issues because of an absence or conflict of interest, the city manager shall immediately request the alternate to serve in that member's place. The alternate, when sitting as a commission member, shall have the same powers as a regular commission member. 
E.  Commission members who are tenants, owners or employees of a mobile home park, or who are related in the first degree by blood or marriage to a tenant, owner or employee of a mobile home park, shall not act upon or participate in any decision which will affect the rents in such mobile home park. 
(Ord. 708 §§ 3, 4, 1994; Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
2.46.760 - Duties and powers of the commission. 
Within the limitations provided by law, the commission shall have the following duties and powers: 
A.  To meet one time a year or more often if requested by the chair or the city manager. The commission may utilize the city staff and offices and/or facilities as needed; 
B.  To select a chair and vice-chair for a term of one year; 
C.  To appoint administrative hearing officers under Section 2.46.510. 
(Ord. 594 § 2 (part), 1988).  
Chapter 2.48 - POLICE SALARIES 
Sections: 
 
2.48.010 - Comparable class of position defined. 
As used in this chapter, the term "comparable class of position" means a group of positions substantially similar with respect to qualifications or duties or responsibilities, using the following positions as guidelines: 
A.  Sergeant; 
B.  Police officer; 
C.  Dispatch supervisor-administrative secretary; 
D.  Dispatcher clerk. 
(Ord. 440 (part), 1980).  
2.48.020 - Council determination. 
The council shall, on January 1st annually, determine the existing average salaries for the Auburn Police Department, Lincoln Police Department, Roseville Police Department and Placer County sheriff's office, operating within the county of Placer for each class of position employed by those agencies. Effective February 1, 1981, and effective February 1st of each year thereafter, the council shall adjust and determine that the average salary for each class of position in the Rocklin police department as set forth in this chapter is at least equal to the average of the salaries for the comparable positions in the Auburn Police Department, Lincoln Police Department, Roseville Police Department and Placer County sheriff's office. 
(Ord. 440 (part), 1980).  
2.48.030 - Provisions to prevail. 
The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over any otherwise conflicting provisions which may relate to salaries of city officers or employees who are not elected by popular vote. 
(Ord. 440 (part), 1980).  
Chapter 2.52 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.52.010 - Findings. 
It is found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city in accordance with the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Ord. 468 § 1, 1982).  
2.52.020 - Established—Authority. 
The redevelopment agency is established pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be known as the redevelopment agency of the city of Rocklin. The redevelopment agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Ord. 468 § 2, 1982).  
2.52.030 - Council declared redevelopment agency. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, the city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city. 
(Ord. 468 § 3, 1982).  
2.52.040 - Service of public interest. 
The city council finds and determines that the designation of the city council as the redevelopment agency will serve the public interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposes of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Ord. 468 § 4, 1982).  
Chapter 2.56 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 
 
2.56.010 - Purposes. 
The California Industrial Development Financing Act, Title 10 (commencing with Section 91500), Government Code (the "Act"), has established an industrial development authority of this city council for the achievement of specific public purposes. The public purposes are to increase opportunities for useful employment or otherwise contribute to economic development. The need for the establishment of an industrial development authority in the achievement of such purposes is based upon findings that industry requires the new and alternative method of capital finance that such authorities can provide in order for it to undertake the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities, the use of which will serve those public purposes. 
(Ord. 471 § 1, 1982).  
2.56.020 - Findings. 
There is a need in the city of Rocklin for the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities for the use of industry which will increase employment opportunities or otherwise contribute to economic development, and further, the new and alternative method of capital finance that industrial development authorities can provide will aid in satisfying that need. 
(Ord. 471 § 2, 1982).  
2.56.030 - Declarations. 
A.  Need. There is a need in the city for an industrial development authority to provide industry with an alternative and additional method of finance in accordance with state policy as set forth in the Act. 
B.  Organization. The industrial development authority of the city council established by the Act is declared organized and shall function under the name "industrial development authority of the city of Rocklin," and be authorized to transact business and exercise all of the powers and other authority conferred upon industrial development authorities by such Act. 
(Ord. 471 § 3, 1982).  
Chapter 2.60 - DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
2.60.010 - Property to be turned over to police department—Affidavit. 
Any person who saves or finds any personal property, the ownership of which is unknown to such person and the value of which is ten dollars or more, shall within a reasonable time turn the property over to the police department of the city. At the time of surrendering the property to the police department such person shall make an affidavit containing the following information: 
A.  A statement as to when and where the property was saved or found; 
B.  A description of the property; 
C.  A statement as to whether the owner of the property is known to the affiant; and 
D.  A statement as to whether the affiant has secreted, withheld or disposed of any part of the property. 
(Ord. 486 § 1, 1982).  
2.60.020 - Notification of owner when ascertainable. 
The police department shall notify the owner, if his identity is reasonably ascertainable, that it possesses the property and the time and place where it may be claimed. The police department may require payment by the owner of a reasonable charge for costs of storage and care of the property. 
(Ord. 486 § 2, 1982).  
2.60.030 - Return of property to owner—Conditions. 
If the owner of the property appears within one hundred twenty days after receipt of the property by the police department, proves ownership of the property, and pays all reasonable charges for storage and care thereof, the police department shall restore the property to him. 
(Ord. 486 § 3, 1982).  
2.60.040 - Unclaimed property to be turned over to finder—Conditions—Exception. 
If the owner of the property fails to appear and claim such property within one hundred twenty days, whether or not such person has been notified under Section 2.60.020, title to such property shall vest in the person who found or saved the property if such person claims the property and pays all reasonable charges for storage and care thereof; provided, that if the property was saved or found by an employee of the city in the course of employment, the property shall be disposed of as provided in Section 2.60.050 
(Ord. 486 § 4, 1982).  
2.60.050 - Sale at auction when—Notice. 
If, after expiration of the time period specified in Section 2.60.030 the owner fails to redeem the property or the finder fails to pay the reasonable costs of storage and care or otherwise fails to claim the property, the chief of police shall cause such property to be sold at public auction to the highest bidder and shall cause notice of the sale to be published once at least five days before the time fixed for the auction in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county; provided, that if the city determines any property subject to sale at public auction under this section is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the city and need not be sold. 
(Ord. 486 § 5, 1982).  
2.60.060 - Unsold property—Disposition. 
Any property remaining unsold after being offered at such public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. 486 § 6, 1982).  
2.60.070 - Immediate disposition—When. 
The chief of police may, immediately upon receipt of property under Section 2.60.010, cause the notice described in Section 2.60.050 to be given and the item sold at public auction if: 
A.  The item is a thing which is commonly subject to sale; 
B.  The owner cannot with reasonable diligence be found or, being found, refuses to pay the reasonable costs of care and storage; and 
C.  The item is in danger of perishing or losing the greater part of its value, or the lawful charges for care and storage would amount to two-thirds of its value. 
(Ord. 486 § 7, 1982). 
TITLE 2 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For provisions on conflict of interest affecting council members' voting, see Ch. 2.08 of this code.  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— For transient occupancy tax provisions, see Chapter 5.24 of this code. 
 
Chapter 3.04 - PROCUREMENT[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1113, § 3, adopted April 23, 2019, repealed Ch. 3.04 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.04, §§ 3.04.010—3.04.200, pertained to purchasing, and derived from Ord. No. 912, § 1, adopted in 2006; and Ord. No. 1057, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2016. 
 
3.04.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 54202 and 54203 to establish policies and procedures governing purchases of goods and procurement of services. 
It is the city's policy to establish efficient policies for the purchase of goods, procurement of services, and construction of public works at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needed; to exercise effective and efficient financial control over such transactions; to clearly define authority for the purchasing and contracting function; and to assure the quality of purchases, services, and public works. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.020 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter, as well as any applicable state or federal laws, shall apply to (1) the purchase of equipment, supplies, products or materials ("goods"), (2) the procurement of services, (3) the procurement of professional services; and (4) public works projects, funded by the city of Rocklin. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the acquisition of real property. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.030 - Definitions. 
The following terms, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as follows: 
A.  "Best value" means the best value to the city based on all factors, including: cost; contractor's ability, capacity or skill; ability to perform within the time required; character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency; quality of contractor's performance on previous purchases or contracts, if applicable; and the ability of the contractor to provide future maintenance, repair, parts and services, if necessary. 
B.  "Bid" means a written offer, more formal than a quote, to furnish supplies, equipment, material, services or the construction of public works, in conformity with the specifications, delivery terms, and conditions required, at a guaranteed maximum cost. 
C.  "Bid security" means financial security provided to guarantee that a bidder will enter into a contract with the city if a bid is awarded. It may be in the form of cash, cashier's check, certified check, or surety bond, in an amount not less than ten percent of the aggregate amount of the bid. 
D.  "Goods" means supplies, equipment, and materials, including any and all articles, things or personal property furnished to or used by the city department or agency. 
E.  "Professional services" means work performed by architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, construction project management, and specialized professional services such as financial, economic, accounting, legal, (or administrative matters) lobbying firms, and by other specially trained persons. The selection of persons or firms to provide such professional services shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. Price may be considered after making a determination based upon professional qualifications. 
F.  "Public works project" means any of the following: (1) construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility; or (2) painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility. A "public works project" does not include maintenance work. For purposes of this policy, "maintenance work" includes all of the following: (1) routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes; (2) minor repainting; (3) resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch; (4) landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems; or (5) work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher. (Public Contract Code Section 22002). 
G.  "Purchase order (PO)" means a document memorializing a purchase or service transaction with a vendor and/or authorizing the payment of funds for a purchase or service. 
H.  "Quote" means a verbal or written promise from a vendor/contractor guaranteeing to provide certain goods, supplies, or services for a fixed price. 
I.  "Request for proposal (RFP)" means a solicitation for a competitive proposal that states the technical requirements for the services desired. 
J.  "Request for qualifications (RFQ)" means a request seeking a written presentation of the professional qualifications and experience of a proposed contractor. 
K.  "Services" means the furnishing of labor, time or effort (sometimes parts are included) to perform or complete a designated task. Some examples of services include janitorial, landscaping, pest control, and refuse disposal. The emphasis is on physical, rather than professional/intellectual capabilities. Services do not include public works projects, utility services, insurance services, professional services, services rendered by city officers or employees, or another governmental agency, or contractual services which are in their nature unique or not subject to competition. 
L.  "Vendor" means a supplier of goods, services or professional services. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.040 - Purchasing officer. 
The city manager is the city's purchasing officer, and generally supervises the purchasing and contracting functions described in this chapter. The city manager is responsible for the overall administration of the policies codified in this chapter, and has delegated responsibility within each department to the individual department heads as set forth in the authorization limits and bid requirements matrix at Section 3.04.060. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.050 - Authorization limits and competitive bid requirements. 
The following authorization limits shall apply to: (1) the purchase of goods, (2) the procurement of services, (3) the procurement of professional services, and (3) public works projects. Authorized limits shall include freight and delivery, and taxes. 
A.  Goods or Services—Five Thousand Dollars or Less. 
1.  Authority. A department head is authorized to purchase goods or procure services for an amount up to twenty-five thousand dollars if adequate funds have been appropriated by the city council in the budget. City council appropriation of funds is required prior to such purchase or procurement. 
2.  No Competitive Bid Process. For the purchase of goods or procurement of services in an amount of five thousand dollars or less, no competitive bid process is required, but the department shall endeavor to purchase goods or procure services at the lowest cost commensurate with the quality needed. 
B.  Goods or Services—More Than Five Thousand Dollars to Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars. 
1.  Authority. A department head is authorized to purchase goods or procure services for an amount up to twenty-five thousand dollars if adequate funds have been appropriated by the city council in the budget. City council appropriation of funds is required prior to such purchase or procurement. 
2.  Informal Solicitation Process—Oral or Written Quotes. For the purchase of goods or procurement of services more than five thousand dollars up to twenty-five thousand dollars, the department must seek oral or written quotes, and document the receipt of the quotes prior to executing the contract and/or purchase order. A minimum of three oral or written quotes is preferred. The vendor offering the best value, after considering any local preference, shall be selected. For the purchase of goods, if the lowest price quote is not selected, the department shall document in the file the basis for the selection of the vendor. 
C.  Goods or Services—More than Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars to Fifty Thousand Dollars. 
1.  Authority. The city manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to purchase goods or procure services for an amount up to fifty thousand dollars, if adequate funds have been appropriated by the city council in the budget. City council appropriation of funds is required prior to such purchase or procurement. 
2.  Informal Solicitation Process—Written Quotes. For the purchase of goods or procurement of services more than twenty-five thousand dollars to fifty thousand dollars, the department must seek written quotes, and document the receipt of the quotes, prior to execution of the contract and/or purchase order by the city manager. A minimum of three written quotes is preferred. The vendor offering the best value, after considering any local preference, shall be selected. For the purchase of goods, if the lowest price quote is not selected, the department shall document in the file the basis for the selection of the vendor. 
D.  Goods or Services—More than Fifty Thousand Dollars. 
1.  Authority. The purchase of goods or procurement of services for an amount more than fifty thousand dollars must be approved by the city council. City council appropriation of funds is required prior to or concurrently with the approval of such purchase or procurement. 
2.  Formal Bids—Competitive Sealed Bids. For the purchase of goods or procurement of services more than fifty thousand dollars, the department must seek competitive sealed bids, in the manner set forth under Section 3.04.070, formal bids—competitive sealed bid process. A minimum of three bids is preferred. Local vendor preference does not apply to purchases in excess of one hundred fifty thousand dollars. 
E.  Professional Services. The following provisions apply to contracts for professionals services: 
1.  Authority. If adequate funds have been appropriated by the city council in the budget, department heads are authorized to procure professional services for an amount up to twenty-five thousand dollars, and the city manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to procure professional services for an amount up to fifty thousand dollars. Amendments to a contract which result in the total contract amount to exceed the authority of the city manager shall require city council approval. 
The procurement of professional services for an amount more than fifty thousand dollars must be approved by the city council. City council appropriation of funds is required prior to or concurrently with the approval of such procurement. Due to the unique nature of legal services, the city manager is authorized to execute contracts for professional legal services up to one hundred thousand dollars. Professional legal service contracts in excess of one hundred thousand dollars require council approval. 
Notwithstanding the above limits, the city manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to execute a contract for professional services without city council approval if a developer has deposited funds sufficient to cover the full amount of the contract with the city (as verified by the chief financial officer or his/her designee), and such funds are held in a deposit account that restricts the use of the funds to pay for city-managed professional services contracts, such as the preparation of an environmental impact report. Any contract entered into pursuant to this paragraph shall be entered into in accordance with state law, city ordinances and adopted city policies, as applicable, including the same competitive process as would be required for a city-funded contract for professional services. The selection of a contractor to provide professional services shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. Selection based upon price alone is prohibited; however price is a factor that may be considered. 
(2)  Request for Proposals. The department must prepare a request for proposals for the procurement of professional services, excluding legal services, for an amount more than fifty thousand dollars, in the manner set forth in Section 3.04.070, request for proposals—competitive sealed proposal process, of this chapter. For the procurement of professional services for an amount up to fifty thousand dollars, the city manager shall determine the appropriate method of procurement, which may include direct negotiation with a provider of professional services. The selection of a contractor to provide professional services shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. Selection based upon price alone is prohibited; however price is a factor that may be considered. 
F.  Public Works Projects. The city of Rocklin is considered a general law city and is subject to the procedures set forth in Article 4 of the Local Agency Public Construction Act (California Public Contract Code commencing with Section 20160). In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter, and the Public Contract Code, the Public Contract Code shall take precedence. 
1.  Projects Under the Section 20162 Limit—No Bids Required. Projects under the limit specified in California Public Contract Code section 20162, and as amended from time to time (five thousand dollars or less at the time of adoption of these policies) may be performed by the employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. The department head, or his/her designee, is authorized to execute project contracts under the Section 20162 limit, if adequate funds have been appropriated by the city council in the budget. 
2.  Projects Above the Section 20162 Limit—Formal Bids Required. Public works projects above the limit set forth in the California Public Contract Code section 20162 (five thousand dollars at the time of adoption of these policies) shall be contracted by formal bidding procedures as set forth in the Public Contract Code. Contracts must be approved by the city council, and subsequent to such approval, may be executed by the city manager. City council appropriation of funds is required prior to or concurrently with the approval of the contract. 
3.  Contingency Amount for Public Works Projects. 
a.  Except as otherwise provided herein, a contingency amount of fifteen percent is hereby automatically authorized for all public works project contracts awarded by either the city council or the city manager or his/her designee, without further action, as long as adequate funds have been appropriated. The contingency amount shall be administered by the department head responsible for the public works project. The city council or city manager, as applicable, may set a different contingency amount on a project-specific basis. The contingency amount shall be used to fund only contract change orders for the applicable public works project. 
b.  When determining the authorization limit for a public works project contract, the contingency amount shall be included. For example, a public works project with an initial contract amount of thirty thousand dollars and a contingency of fifteen percent would result in a total contract amount of thirty-four thousand five hundred dollars. 
4.  Change Orders. All change orders for public works projects shall comply with the city of Rocklin standard construction specifications and shall be approved in writing by the department head responsible for the public works project prior to the work being performed. If a contract change order would cause the total amount of contract change orders to exceed the contingency amount authorized by the city council or city manager, the department head shall obtain the consent of the city council or city manager prior to approving the work. 
5.  Utility Relocation. The city council hereby authorizes and delegates authority to the department head responsible for the public works project to negotiate and execute contracts for the relocation of utilities necessitated by a public works project with utility companies. Such authority shall only be exercised (a) in accordance with state law, city ordinances and adopted city policies, as applicable (b) only if adequate funds for the contract have been included in the approved city budget for the applicable year, or otherwise appropriated by the city council, and (c) subject to city attorney approval as to form and legality. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019) 
_____ 
3.04.060 - Authorization limits and bid requirements matrix. 
	Type of Contract 	Amount 	Competitive Bidding Process 	Minimum Approving Authority 
1 	Goods or services 	$5,000 or less 	None 	Department head or above* 
2 	Goods or services 	$5,000.01 to $25,000 	Informal solicitation—Oral or written quotes 	Department head or above* 
3 	Goods or services 	$25,000.01 to $50,000 	Informal solicitation—Written quotes; 	City manager 
4 	Goods or services 	More than $50,000 	Formal sealed bids 	City council 
5 	Professional services 	$5,000 or less 	None 	Department head or above* 
6 	Professional services 	$5,000.01 to $25,000 	As appropriate 	Department head or above* 
7 	Professional services 	$50,000 or less** 	As appropriate 	City manager 
8 	Professional services 	More than $50,000 	Formal sealed requests for proposals 	City council 
9 	Public works 	$5,000 or less 	Negotiated contract required 	Department head or above* 
10 	Public works 	More than $5,000 	Formal sealed bids 	City council 
 
* This authority may not be delegated. 
** City manager has authority to approve professional legal services contracts in an amount not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.070 - Formal bids—Competitive sealed bid process. 
The competitive sealed bid (formal bid) process, as described below, shall be used for the purchase of goods or procurement of services in an amount more than fifty thousand dollars. Public works projects above the limit set forth in Public Contracts Code Section 20162, as amended from time to time (five thousand dollars at the time of adoption of these policies) shall be competitively bid in accordance with the provisions of the Public Contract Code, Division 2, Part 3, Chapter 1, Article 4 (commencing with Section 20160). 
A.  Invitation and Notice. A bid invitation and the public notice inviting bids shall be issued and shall state the project to be done, include a general description of the work to be bid, the place the bids are to be received and the time by which they shall be received, where bidding forms and project documents, including final plans and specifications may be obtained, whether there will be a mandatory pre-bid conference, site visit, etc., and the time and place for opening bids. Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for the opening of bids. The notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
B.  Bid Opening. Bids shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the place and not earlier than the time designated in the invitation for bids. The tabulation of all bids received shall be open to public inspection after the bid opening. 
C.  Bid Evaluation and Acceptance. Bids received at or prior to the time set for bid opening shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this policy. Bids shall be evaluated to determine the lowest responsible bidder. The process includes a determination of: (1) which bidder is the lowest monetary bidder; (2) whether the lowest monetary bidder submitted a responsive bid; and (3) whether or not the lowest monetary bidder is responsible. To be responsive, the bid must conform to the material terms of the bid package. The requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluations that are not set forth in the invitation for bids. City may waive any informality, irregularity, immaterial defects or technicalities in any response. 
D.  Correction or Withdrawal of Bids. Subject to any provisions of federal or state granting authorities to the contrary, correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, shall be in accordance with this section. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid opening. After bid opening, no corrections to bid or provisions shall be permitted but, in lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: (a) the mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document, or (b) the bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids shall be supported by a written determination made by the city. 
E.  Determination of Nonresponsibility. In addition to price, the lowest bidder must be a responsible bidder, meaning that the bidder must demonstrate the attributes of trustworthiness, quality, fitness, capacity and experience to satisfactorily perform the contract. Factors to be considered may include performance history, reliable financial information, bonding and insurance capacity, public works experience, personnel, litigation history, the ability, capacity, and skill to perform the contract experience to perform the contract; the bidder must have the facilities and financial resources necessary to perform the contract within the time specified, without delay or interference; and, the bidder must have a record of satisfactory performance of prior contracts and a record of compliance with laws and ordinances applicable to the contract. If a bidder who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found non-responsible, a written determination of nonresponsibility, setting forth the basis of the finding, shall be prepared by the city manager or his/her designee. The unreasonable failure of a bidder to supply promptly information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a determination of non-responsibility with respect to such bidder. A copy of the determination shall be sent promptly to the non-responsible bidder. The final determination shall be made part of the contract file. 
F.  Award. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. The process of selecting the lowest responsible bidder includes a determination of which bidder is the lowest monetary bidder, whether or not the lowest monetary bidder submitted a responsive bid, and whether or not the lowest monetary bidder is responsible. 
G.  Cancellation of Invitations. An invitation for bids may be cancelled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation. Each solicitation issued by the city shall state that the solicitation may be cancelled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part at the city's discretion with or without a showing of good cause. 
H.  Bonds. 
1.  For public works projects, bids must include bid security in the form required by state law. The city may require a bid bond with any bid, or a performance bond before entering into a contract, in such amount as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. The form and amount of any bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
2.  The city shall require a labor and materials bond for one hundred percent of the amount of the contract on public works projects in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars, unless the city attorney authorizes an alternative amount. 
I.  Re-Bid Required Every Three Years. The maximum term for a contract awarded through the competitive sealed bid process is three years, unless otherwise approved by the city council for good cause. Prior to renewing any such contract, a re-bid must occur following the procedures set forth above. The city manager may authorize an exception to this re-bid requirement for good cause, which shall be documented and maintained by the department as set forth in Sections 3.04.090.B. and 3.04.100.K. below. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.080 - Request for proposal—Competitive sealed proposal process. 
The request for proposal competitive sealed proposal process ("RFP" process) shall be used for the procurement of professional services in an amount more than fifty thousand dollars, excepting legal services. 
A.  Request for Proposals and Notice. A notice requesting proposals ("RFP") shall be issued and shall include a general description of the services to be procured, shall state where proposal forms and specifications may be obtained and the time and place for the delivery of proposals. Public notice of the RFP shall be given at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for the delivery of proposals. The notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
B.  Evaluation Factors. The RFP shall identify all evaluation factors that will be used by the city, and the relative importance of the evaluation factors, including price. 
C.  Interviews with Responsible Vendors and Revisions to Proposals. The city may conduct interviews and negotiations with vendors whose proposals are responsive to the RFP, for the purpose of gaining full understanding of the proposal contents. Vendors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals. Such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing vendors or any information derived from proposals submitted by competing vendors. 
D.  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible vendor whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration the evaluation factors, including price, set forth in the RFP. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
E.  Determination of Nonresponsibility; Cancellation of Invitations; Bonds. The provisions set forth under Section 3.04.070.E., formal bids—competitive sealed bid process, relating to determination of nonresponsibility, cancellation of invitations, and bonds (except labor and materials bonds), shall apply to the RFP process. 
F.  Requests for Qualifications. A request for qualifications ("RFQ") is a document often distributed before initiation of the RFP process. It is used to gather vendor information from multiple companies to generate a pool of prospects. This eases the RFP review process by preemptively short-listing candidates which meet the desired qualifications. An RFQ shall be issued and shall include a general description of the qualifications desired and the services to be procured, shall state where forms and further information may be obtained, and the time and place for the delivery of responses. Public notice of the RFQ shall be given at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for the delivery of responses. The notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
G.  RFP Required Every Three Years. The maximum term for a contract awarded through the RFP process is three years, unless otherwise approved by the city council. Prior to renewing any such contract, a new request for proposals must be completed following the procedures set forth above. The city manager may authorize an exception to this re-bid requirement for good cause, which shall be documented and maintained by the department as set forth in Sections 3.04.090.B. and 3.04.100.K. below. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.090 - Exceptions to formal and informal competitive process. 
The solicitation and competitive processes identified in Sections 3.04.050, 3.04.070 and 3.04.080 above shall not apply in the following circumstances. 
A.  Emergency. 
1.  In the case of an emergency, the city, by resolution with a four-fifths vote of the city council, may declare that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property repair or replace a public facility, take any directly related and immediate action required by that emergency, and procedure the necessary equipment, services and supplies for those purposes without giving notice for bids or pursuing a RFP process. A written determination of the basis for the emergency purchase or procurement, and for the selection of the particular vendor or contractor shall be included in the contract file. In the case of contracts of fifty thousand dollars or less, this determination shall be made by the city manager. In the case of contracts in the amount of more than fifty thousand dollars, the city manager shall provide a report to the city council after the emergency condition has passed or subsided of the basis for the emergency purchase or procurement, and for the selection of the particular vendor or contractor, and if the city council determines that the emergency purchase or procurement was warranted, the city council will be requested to ratify the contract. 
2.  The city will adhere to federal standards in an emergency or exigent circumstance (as defined by federal law): 
a.  Contracts will include the required contract clauses (2 C.F.R. 200.326 and Appendix II). 
b.  Contracts will include the federal bonding requirements if the contract is for construction of facility improvement (2 C.F.R. 200.325). 
c.  Contracts will be awarded to a responsible contractor (2 C.F.R. 200.318(h). 
d.  Cost or price analysis will be performed to determine that the cost or price of the contract is fair and reasonable (2 CFR 200.323): 
(i)  Before receiving bids or proposals, city staff will perform a cost or price analysis to make independent estimates. The method and degree of analysis will be dependent on the facts surrounding the particular procurement situation. 
(ii)  The city will negotiate profit as a separate element of the price for each contract in which there is no price competition, and in all cases where cost analysis is performed. To establish a fair and reasonable profit, consideration must be given to the complexity of the work to be performed, the risk borne by the contractor, the contractor's investment, the amount of subcontracting, the quality of its record of past performance, and industry profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for similar work. 
(iii)  Costs or prices based on estimated costs for contracts are allowable only to the extent that costs incurred or cost estimates included in negotiated prices would be otherwise allowable. 
e.  The use of cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage of construction cost methods of contracting must not be used (2 CFR 200.323(c)(d)). 
f.  Time and materials contracts (2 CFR 200.318(j)). 
(i)  Time and materials contracts are allowed only after a determination that no other contract is suitable and if the contract includes a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. City will assert a high degree of oversight in order to obtain reasonable assurance that the contractor is using efficient methods and effective cost controls. The contract will include language specifying the ceiling price and limiting duration of the contract. 
g.  Piggybacking is allowed for the period of the emergency circumstance. 
h.  For all work that is not of a short duration, the existing competitive procurement procedures apply. 
B.  Sole or Limited Source (No Competitive Advantage by Soliciting Bids). A contract may be awarded without competition when the city determines in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required goods, service, or construction item. In the case of contracts of fifty thousand dollars or less, this determination shall be made by the city manager and, in the case of contracts in the amount of more than fifty thousand dollars, this determination shall be made by the city council. The city manager or his/her designee shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. A statement of the basis for the sole source determination shall be provided to the city clerk along with the fully-executed contract. 
C.  Cooperative Purchasing/Procurement. The city is authorized to enter into cooperative purchasing/procurement arrangements with other governmental entities (i.e., joint power authorities) without separate competitive bidding by the city if a governmental agency has solicited bids and awarded a contract for the goods or services which the city desires to obtain, and participation in such an arrangement is agreeable to the bidder awarded the contract. 
1.  For the purchase of goods in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars or less, the department head is authorized to make this determination. For the purchase of goods in an amount up to fifty thousand dollars, the city manager is authorized to make this determination. For purchases in an amount more than fifty thousand dollars, this determination shall be made by the city council. Utilizing cooperative purchasing arrangements does not eliminate the requirement to enter into a contract directly between the city and the vendor providing the goods. 
2.  For the procurement of services in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars or less, the department head is authorized to make this determination. For the procurement of services in an amount up to fifty thousand dollars, the city manager is authorized to make this determination. For the procurement of services in an amount more than fifty thousand dollars, this determination shall be made by the city council. 
3.  A contract directly between the city and the vendor is required for the purchase of goods or the procurement of services rendered through a cooperative purchasing arrangement, unless otherwise approved by the city attorney. 
D.  Piggyback Purchasing. Piggyback contracting occurs when one entity assigns the contractual rights it has in a contract to another. The city is authorized, without prior competitive bidding, to contract for the purchase of goods or procurement of services with vendors who have been awarded contracts by government agencies (i.e., California Multiple Award Schedule (CMAS) contracts), for the purchase of goods or services under the competitive processes applicable to the government agency, within the past twelve months. In the case of contracts of fifty thousand dollars or less, this determination shall be made by the city manager and, in the case of contracts in the amount of more than fifty thousand dollars, this determination shall be made by the city council. A contract directly between the city and the vendor is required for the purchase of goods or the procurement of services rendered through a piggyback purchasing arrangement, unless otherwise approved by the city attorney. 
E.  Public Interest. In limited and unique circumstances, competitive bidding and/or the RFP process is not required when it would be impossible, or not in the public interest. This exception may apply when the purchase is for: (1) a specialized technology product or service, (2) an addition to, or repair or maintenance of, existing equipment which can be more efficiently added to, repaired or maintained by a particular company or manufacturer, or (3) equipment which must be compatible with existing equipment, by reason of the training of the personnel or an inventory of existing replacement parts kept by the city. For contracts of fifty thousand dollars or less, this determination shall be made by the city manager and, for contracts in the amount of more than fifty thousand dollars, this determination shall be made by the city council. A statement of the basis for the determination shall be provided to the city clerk along with the fully-executed contract. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.100 - General requirements. 
The following general policies shall apply, if applicable, to: (1) the purchase of goods (2) the procurement of services, (3) the procurement of professional services, or (4) public works projects. 
A.  Purchase Orders. Except for purchases made with a city CalCard or using an accounts payable expense form, a purchase order must be completed for the purchase of goods or procurement of services and professional services, and for public works projects, in order to encumber the expenditure against the budget. 
B.  Contracts. For the purchase of goods, or the procurement of services or professional services, in excess of five thousand dollars, a contract is required in a form approved by the city attorney, unless an exception is made by the city attorney. Copies of all contracts required by this policy must be provided to the city clerk for recordkeeping purposes. Change orders or amendments to a contract which result in the total contract amount exceeding the authority of the department head shall require city manager approval. Change orders or amendments to a contract which result in the total contract amount exceeding the authority of the city manager shall require city council approval. The maximum term for any contract shall be three years, unless a longer initial term or renewal term is approved by the city council. Contracts may be renewed thereafter following completion of a competitive bid or request for proposal process as set forth in Sections 3.04.070 and 3.04.080 above. 
C.  Insurance. A vendor of services or professional services is required to provide insurance certificates and endorsements. Generally, the types of insurance, amount of coverage, and policy endorsements shall be consistent with the recommendations of NCCSIF third party insurance administrators. For contracts in an amount up to twenty-five thousand dollars, the department head may waive or reduce the insurance requirements, after consulting with the city attorney, and shall document in the file the basis for any waiver or reduction. For contracts in an amount greater than twenty-five thousand dollars up to fifty thousand dollars, the city manager may waive or reduce the insurance requirements, after consulting with the city attorney, and shall document in the file the basis for any waiver or reduction. The city council may waive or reduce the insurance requirements for contracts in an amount over fifty thousand dollars. 
D.  Structuring and Splitting. The structuring or splitting of the purchase of goods, procurement of services or professional services, and for public works projects, without proper justification or to avoid the authorization limits, is prohibited. Additionally, if it is reasonably anticipated by the department head that the annual total cost of a particular good or service would require a competitive sealed bid process, then incremental purchases of that good or service shall be pursuant to a competitive sealed bid process. For example, if a department normally purchases one hundred sixty tires annually from a single vendor, which would require a sealed bid process, then incremental purchases of forty tires shall be pursuant to a sealed bid process. This example is applicable to the procurement of services that are expected to reach a total annual amount that requires a competitive bid process or a higher level of authorization. 
E.  Delegation of Contracting Authority. 
1.  The city council retains all contracting authority not specifically delegated in these policies. This procurement policy shall supersede all resolutions and policies adopted prior to adoption of these policies that delegated contracting authority to the city manager or other subordinate city officials or employees, and specifically supersedes Resolution No. 2015-280. 
2.  Any delegation of contracting authority contained in these policies shall only be exercised (a) in accordance with state law, city ordinances and adopted city policies, as applicable, and (b) only if adequate funds have been included in the approved city budget for the applicable year or otherwise appropriated by the city council. 
F.  City Attorney Contract Review. The city attorney shall approve all contracts in excess of five thousand dollars, including amendments to contracts, as to form and legality prior to the execution of the contract by the authorized city official. The city attorney's approval shall be evidenced by his or her signature on the contract. City attorney approval on change orders to public works projects is not required, but may be requested, at the discretion of the city manager or department head responsible for the public works project. 
G.  Local Preference. 
1.  Purchasing goods and services from local vendors is desired because it stimulates the local economy and recognizes that our local vendors are valued members of our community. If factors such as quality, previous performance, and availability are equal among vendors, a vendor whose business is located within the city of Rocklin limits shall be awarded a contract if their quote or bid is within three percent of the low bid for purchases of goods or services up to fifty thousand dollars, or within one percent of the low bid for purchases of goods or services greater than fifty thousand dollars up to one hundred fifty thousand dollars. 
2.  Local preference does not apply to public works projects, purchases procured under federal or state requirements, or cooperative or piggy-back purchases through other governmental agencies. 
3.  The vendor must have a valid city of Rocklin business license and employ at least one full time employee located at the Rocklin address. 
4.  Vendor selection for professional services usually is based primarily on qualifications and project schedule. Nonetheless, the local preference may be taken into account in reaching a final consultant selection decision. 
5.  Local vendors must bid or issue quotes with same or comparable specification as required of non-local vendors. 
6.  The following language shall be included in each invitation for bids or solicitation for quotes where the local preference shall apply: 
  
"Local Vendor Preference: By City Council action, a three percent (3.0%) preference shall be granted to local bidders for goods or services for contracts up to $50,000, and a one percent (1.0%) preference shall be granted to local bidders for goods and services for contracts greater than $50,000 up to $150,000. A local bidder is defined as a business entity with a fixed place of business located within the city limits of the City of ROCKLIN, and employs at least one full time employee located at the ROCKLIN address. To qualify for the preference, local bidders must submit proof of the address of this fixed place of business, proof of one full-time employee, and a copy of their current city business license. This information must be submitted with each bid for which a local preference is claimed. 
  
"Local Preference Claimed: ___YES ___NO" 
H.  Multi-Year Contracts. Unless otherwise approved by the city council, a contract for goods or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interest of the city, up to a maximum of three years, provided that the term of the contract and renewal provisions are included in the original solicitation process. Contracts may not contain auto-renewal provisions, unless approved by the city attorney. Funds must be appropriated prior to contract execution for the first fiscal year's obligation. The contract must allow the city to cancel the agreement without penalty if the city council does not appropriate funds after the first year of the contract. Prior to contract renewal beyond a three-year term, departments must conduct new bid, solicitation for quotes, or RFP process for the goods, services or professional services, excluding legal services. The city manager may authorize an exception to this re-bid requirement for good cause, which shall be documented and maintained by the department as set forth in Section 7 [of Ordinance No. 1113]. 
I.  Encumbrance of Funds. Except in cases of emergency, or by order of the city council, purchase orders shall not be issued and purchases shall not be made unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation within the department's budget (for capital purchases, on the account code level; for operational expenditures, on the departmental fund operational basis). 
J.  Unlawful Purchases or Contracts. If any officer or employee purchases or contracts for any goods or services contrary to the provisions of these policies, such purchase order or contract shall be void and of no effect. 
K.  Recordkeeping. Each department is responsible for maintaining its own purchasing and contracting records, including RFP and bidding documentation, pursuant to the city's current record retention policy. All original procurement contracts, along with a digital copy of RFP and bidding documentation, must be provided to the city clerk for safekeeping/recordkeeping purposes. Copies of contracts are acceptable when the original is not available or when contracts are digitally signed. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
3.04.110 - Disposition of surplus supplies, materials and equipment. 
A.  All city departments shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such form as the purchasing officer shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies, materials and equipment which are no longer needed or which have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing officer shall have authority to sell all supplies, materials and equipment which cannot be used or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies, materials and equipment. For items valued in excess of five thousand dollars, such sales shall be made by solicitation of informal bids/written offers for purchase. If there are no bids, the property may be sold at private sale, donated to charity, or disposed of in the manner most economically beneficial to the city. 
B.  The amount received for any property sold pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund or other fund so designated by the purchasing officer. 
C.  Except as provided by state code, the purchasing officer shall determine the disposition of unclaimed or abandoned property in the possession of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 4-23-2019)  
Chapter 3.08 - TAX DUTY TRANSFER 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Assessment and collection by county. 
The council elects that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes, heretofore performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city, shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector. 
(Ord. 130A § 1, 1955).  
3.08.020 - Authority. 
This election is made pursuant to Article 5, Part 2, Chapter 1 of the Government Code (Government Code § 51500, et seq.). 
(Ord. 435 § 2, 1980: Ord. 130A § 2, 1955).  
Chapter 3.12 - AUTOMATIC ANNUAL TAX ADJUSTMENT 
Section: 
 
3.12.010 - Cost-of-living adjustment required. 
Notwithstanding any provision of any ordinance, resolution or policy to the contrary, all fees and taxes, excluding ad valorem real property taxes and any sales or transaction tax applicable to real property, for whatever purpose, currently imposed and collected by and/or for the city shall, commencing on July 1, 1978 and each July 1st thereafter, be adjusted by the amount of the cost of living, as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, U.S. Government, for the San Francisco-Bay Area, for the year ending the preceding March 31st. 
(Ord. 374 § 1, 1978).  
3.12.020 - Computation. 
Any fee or tax adjusted under the provisions of Section 3.12.010 shall be computed as follows: For any flat fee or tax, the amount for the previous year shall be multiplied by the percentage adjustment in the cost of living and rounded to the nearest dollar. 
(Ord. 374 § 2, 1978).  
3.12.030 - Fee and tax list. 
The city manager shall keep a current list, available to any person upon demand, of the current fees and taxes, and the latest adjustment, if any, based on the cost of living. 
(Ord. 496 § 3, 1983: Ord. 374 § 3, 1978).  
Chapter 3.16 - CONSTRUCTION TAXES AND DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
Sections:  
Article I. - Capital Expenditures and Park and Recreation Tax 
 
3.16.010 - Purpose. 
The council finds and declares that the fees required to be paid by this article are assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the city solely for the purpose of producing revenue, and not for regulatory purposes. The purpose of such fees is to continue to provide adequate public facilities commensurate with the increasing demand thereupon for the city, occasioned by the substantial amount of new construction within the city, which demand cannot be met by other available funding sources. Industrial structures and multiple-family buildings with more than four dwelling units require additional and more sophisticated firefighting equipment than do other structures. 
(Ord. 329 § 6, 1977).  
3.16.020 - Effect on prior ordinances. 
The fees required to be paid under this article shall in no way affect any similar fees collected pursuant to Ordinance Nos. 253 or 304 and 324 as the same read prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this article. 
(Ord. 329 § 7, 1977).  
3.16.030 - Value-based tax imposed. 
A.  There is imposed a tax on the privilege of constructing: 
1.  Any new building; 
2.  The conversion of any existing building from a nonresidential to residential use; 
3.  An addition to any building. 
B.  The tax, payable concurrently with the issuance of a building permit, shall be based on the valuation determined for issuance of such permit, as follows: 
1.  For any building designed to be occupied for industrial purposes, and for any multiple-family building in excess of one story in height and/or having more than four dwelling units, one percent of the valuation; 
2.  For all other buildings and structures, three-fourths of one percent. 
(Ord. 373 § 1, 1978: Ord. 329 § 2, 1977).  
3.16.040 - Tax in lieu of park fee imposed. 
Where a building intended for multiple-family occupancy which contains three or more dwelling units is constructed on a parcel of land for which no park fees have been paid pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, a sum per dwelling unit, in amount established by resolution of the city council, shall be imposed as a tax on the privilege of constructing the building, in addition to the tax payable pursuant to Section 3.16.030. Revenue derived pursuant to this section shall be used for park and recreational purposes only. 
(Ord. 435 § 8 (part), 1981; Ord. 373 § 2, 1978: Ord. 329 § 3, 1977).  
3.16.050 - Exceptions. 
The tax imposed in Section 3.16.030 shall not apply to the privilege of constructing the following: 
A.  Garages, sheds, carports, gazebos, pools, spas, patios, decks, patio or deck covers, and similar structures or outdoor appurtenances accessory to any existing residential building; 
B.  Alterations, repairs, and remodeling of existing residential buildings, including increases in interior floor area of up to six hundred square feet or twenty percent of the existing living area of the building, whichever is greater. This exception shall not apply to the creation or addition of a separate living unit to an existing residential building; 
C.  Alterations, repairs, or remodeling of any existing nonresidential building or structure that does not increase the total interior floor area of the building or structure. This exception does not apply to initial interior improvements of partially constructed shell buildings; 
D.  Reconstruction or repair of any building or structure which was damaged by earthquake, fire, flood or other natural cause over which the owner had no control; provided, that the dwelling is rebuilt or repaired to approximately the same configuration and same square footage as before the damage occurred, and the building permit for the work is applied for within one year of the occurrence of the damages. Compliance with any applicable ordinance or law is not a cause over which the owner had no control; 
E.  Additions, repairs or replacements of plumbing, mechanical, electrical, air pollution control, fire extinguishing, processing or similar equipment to existing buildings; 
F.  Additions of minor accessory structures which do not significantly impact the need for the capital expenditures described in Section 3.16.060. 
(Ord. 551 § 1, 1986: Ord. 329 § 4, 1977).  
3.16.060 - Use of funds. 
Except as provided in Section 3.16.040, all sums collected pursuant to this article shall be for capital expenditures of the following types: 
A.  Purchase of land or interests therein; 
B.  Development of parks and related recreational uses; 
C.  Acquisition of open space; 
D.  Development of public buildings; 
E.  Development of bicycle trails, riding trails, or similar facilities; 
F.  Acquisition of fire equipment. 
(Ord. 329 § 5, 1977).  
Article II. - Traffic Circulation Surcharge 
 
3.16.070 - Purpose—Not tax on the district. 
A.  The council finds that the construction of structures contributes to the problems of traffic circulation and creates a need for new traffic improvements. The council finds that this article is necessary to make new developments consistent with the general plan and the traffic circulation element thereof. The council intends, by the ordinance codified in this article, to raise revenue to alleviate the health, safety and welfare problems resulting from traffic congestion by imposing a surcharge on construction in relation to such problems. 
B.  The council finds that this article is not a special tax imposed "on the district" as prescribed by Section 4 of Article XIII, A of the California Constitution. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1979).  
3.16.080 - Imposed—Payment. 
A.  A surcharge of one percent of the valuation of any structure for which a building permit is required is imposed upon the application for such permit, except as provided in this article. 
B.  The surcharge of one percent shall be multiplied by the valuation of the structure for which application is made. Such surcharge shall be due at the time of application for the permit and shall be payable at the time of, and as a condition of, the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1979).  
3.16.090 - Exceptions. 
The surcharge imposed in Section 3.16.080 shall not apply to building permits for the following: 
A.  Garages, sheds, carports, gazebos, pools, spas, patios, decks, patio or deck covers, and similar structures or outdoor appurtenances accessory to any existing residential building; 
B.  Alterations, repairs, and remodeling of existing residential buildings, including increases in interior floor area of up to six hundred square feet or twenty percent of the existing living area of the building, whichever is greater. This exception shall not apply to the creation or addition of a separate living unit to an existing residential building; 
C.  Alterations, repairs, or remodeling of any existing nonresidential building or structure that does not increase the total interior floor area of the building or structure. This exception does not apply to initial interior improvements of partially constructed shell buildings; 
D.  Reconstruction or repair of any building or structure which was damaged by earthquake, fire, flood or other natural cause over which the owner had no control; provided, that the dwelling is rebuilt or repaired to approximately the same configuration and same square footage as before the damage occurred, and the building permit for the work is applied for within one year of the occurrence of the damages. Compliance with any applicable ordinance or law is not a cause over which the owner had no control; 
E.  Additions, repairs or replacements of plumbing, mechanical, electrical, air pollution control, fire extinguishing, processing or similar equipment to existing buildings; 
F.  Addition of minor accessory structures which do not significantly impact the city's need for traffic circulation improvements as described in Section 3.16.100. 
(Ord. 551 § 2, 1986: Ord. 460 § 1, 1981; Ord. 398 § 1 (part), 1979).  
3.16.100 - Revenues. 
Revenues derived from the imposition of this surcharge shall be used pursuant to the traffic circulation element of the general plan of the city. 
(Ord. 398 § 2, 1979).  
Article III. - Fee for Traffic Signalization and Control 
 
3.16.110 - Findings. 
A.  There is occurring in the city a substantial amount of new residential, commercial and industrial development. 
B.  This development is creating additional vehicular traffic in the city. 
C.  Increased traffic flows on the city streets requires the installation of new traffic control devices, including electric traffic signals. 
D.  The cost of such traffic controls is high, and other revenue sources of the city are insufficient to pay such costs. 
E.  The cost of the necessary traffic control devices should be borne by those who are generating the increased demand for those devices. 
(Ord. 343 § 1, 1977).  
3.16.120 - Fund established. 
There is established a fund to be known as the "Traffic Control and Signalization Fund" ("the fund"). All moneys collected pursuant to this article shall be separately maintained in the fund and disbursements therefrom shall be only for the purposes set forth in this article. 
(Ord. 343 § 2, 1977).  
3.16.130 - Fee imposed—Collection—Restriction. 
A.  There is imposed a fee for the purpose of deposit into and disbursement from the fund. Such fee shall be calculated as a percentage of the value established for purposes of the issuance of each building permit for new construction in an amount equal to one-fourth of one percent of such value. 
B.  The fee shall be collected with all other fees required prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  The fee imposed under subsection A of this section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Garages, sheds, carports, gazebos, pools, spas, patios, decks, patio or deck covers, and similar structures or outdoor appurtenances accessory to any existing residential building; 
2.  Alterations, repairs, and remodeling of existing residential buildings, including increases in interior floor area of up to six hundred square feet or twenty percent of the existing living area of the building, whichever is greater. This exception shall not apply to the creation or addition of a separate living unit to an existing residential building; 
3.  Alterations, repairs, or remodeling of any existing nonresidential building or structure that does not increase the total interior floor area of the building or structure. This exception does not apply to initial interior improvements of partially constructed shell buildings; 
4.  Reconstruction or repair of any building or structure which was damaged by earthquake, fire, flood or other natural cause over which the owner had no control; provided, that the dwelling is rebuilt or repaired to approximately the same configuration and same square footage as before the damage occurred, and the building permit for the work is applied for within one year of the occurrence of the damages. Compliance with any applicable ordinance or law is not a cause over which the owner had no control; 
5.  Additions, repairs or replacements of plumbing, mechanical, electrical, air pollution control, fire extinguishing, processing or similar equipment to existing buildings; 
6.  Additions of minor accessory structures which do not significantly impact the city's need for traffic signalization and control devices. 
(Ord. 551 §§ 3, 4, 1986; Ord. 459 § 1, 1981; Ord. 343 § 3, 1977).  
3.16.140 - Disbursements from fund. 
Disbursements shall be made from the fund upon recommendation of the city engineer and approval of the council for the following purposes: 
A.  Electric traffic signal lights; 
B.  Traffic control signs; 
C.  Warning signals, signs and markings; 
D.  Other traffic control devices as are determined necessary to ensure the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Ord. 343 § 4, 1977).  
Article IV. - Traffic Impact Fee 
 
3.16.200 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the transportation element of the city of Rocklin General Plan, and to mitigate the traffic impacts caused by new development in the city, certain street improvements must be or had to be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for development's fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its General Plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the General Plan. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 1989).  
3.16.210 - Traffic impact fee. 
A traffic impact fee is hereby established on issuance of all building permits for development in the city to pay for street improvements. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the specific types of development and the benefit and impact area on which the impact fee is imposed, list the specific street improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these improvements, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of development, and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this impact fee shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of development and whether the described street improvements are still needed. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 1989).  
3.16.220 - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to: 
A.  Pay for the cost, including administrative costs, of future construction of street improvements described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 3.16.210 of this chapter, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed street improvements constructed in whole or in part by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or 
B.  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 3.16.230 of this chapter to install such street improvements which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 1989).  
3.16.230 - Developer construction of facilities. 
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a street improvement described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.16.210 of this chapter, which improvements are determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the street improvement network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and/or a credit against all or a portion of the fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project may be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvements needed to provide services to, or mitigate the need for street improvements created by the development, nor shall the developer be relieved from the obligation to pay that portion of the fee needed to mitigate impacts created by the development on the street system elsewhere in the city. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 1989).  
3.16.240 - Exemption from payment of traffic circulation surcharge and traffic signalization fee. 
No traffic circulation surcharge under Article II of this chapter and no traffic signalization fee under Article III of this chapter shall be due or collected upon the application for or issuance of any building permit for which a traffic impact fee is imposed and paid under this article. 
(Ord. 601 § 1 (part), 1989).  
Article V. - Impact Fee Adjustments 
 
3.16.300 - Traffic impact fee adjustments. 
A.  A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 3.16.210 or Section 3.16.410 may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the development impacts of that project and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk at the time of filing an application for a building permit or, if a discretionary planning or zoning entitlement is required, no later than ten days prior to the hearing on the entitlement. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application if such hearing is held by the city council or, if not, at a separate hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
B.  If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. 
(Ord. 799 § 2, 1999; Ord. 602 § 1, 1989).  
Article VI. - Park and Recreation Facilities Improvement Fee 
 
3.16.400 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the open space, conservation and recreation element of the city of Rocklin General Plan, and to mitigate the impacts caused by new development in the city, certain park and recreation facilities improvements must be or had to be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for development's fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its General Plan and has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the General Plan. 
(Ord. 799 § 3 (part), 1999).  
3.16.410 - Park and recreation facilities improvement fee. 
An improvement fee is established on issuance of all building permits for development in the city to pay for park and recreational facilities improvements. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the specific types of development and the benefit and impact area on which the impact fee is imposed, list the specific park and recreational facilities improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these improvements, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types or development, provide for a credit for any fees previously paid, and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this impact fee shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of development and whether the described park and recreational facilities improvements are still needed. 
(Ord. 799 § 3 (part), 1999).  
3.16.420 - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to: 
A.  Pay for the cost, including administrative costs, of future construction of park and recreational facilities improvements described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 3.16.410, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed park and recreational facilities improvements constructed in whole or in part by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or 
B.  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 3.16.430 to install such park and recreational facilities improvements which are oversized with supplemental size or capacity. 
(Ord. 799 § 3 (part), 1999).  
3.16.430 - Developer construction of facilities. 
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a park and recreational facilities improvement described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.16.410, which improvements are determined by the city to have supplemental size or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of park and recreational facilities, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and/or a credit against all or a portion of the fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this article on the development project may be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvements needed to provide services to, or mitigate the need for park and recreational facilities improvements created by the development, nor shall the developer be relieved from the obligation to pay that portion of the fee needed to mitigate impacts created by the development on parks and recreational facilities elsewhere in the city. 
(Ord. 799 § 3 (part), 1999).  
Article VII. - Public Facilities Impact Fee 
 
3.16.500 - Purpose. 
The city council finds and declares that the purpose of this article is as follows: 
A.  The city must be provided, in a time frame related to its development, with an adequate level of public facilities so as to maintain adequate levels of public services. 
B.  New development and the expansion of existing development within the city impose a burden on the existing public facilities and create a need for additional public facilities. Such burdens may vary by the type of land use. 
C.  Analysis of the current land use within the city makes it possible to estimate the burden or need for various public facilities generated by different types of land uses. Analysis of the land use expected at buildout of the city pursuant to the general plan makes it possible to estimate the type and amount of public facilities necessary to support that additional land use. It is therefore possible to construct a fee, imposed on new development, which equitably spreads the burden of public facilities to development which creates the need for them. It is the intent of this article to create such a fee, spreading costs of public facilities to development which creates the need for such public facilities, without generating any surplus to the general fund. It is the further purpose of this article to implement the general plan by assuring that adequate public facilities are financed and provided to serve the city. 
D.  The fee established by this article has been calculated in the manner set forth in the report, as hereinafter defined, so as to pay for those facilities listed in the report. 
E.  The fee established by this article is in addition to any other fees or charges required by law as a condition of development. 
F.  The fee established by this article is to be collected for public facilities for which an account has been established and funds appropriated, and for which a proposed construction schedule has been adopted. 
G.  The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this article relating to payment of the fee on building permits would jeopardize residents of the community, in that it would permit construction to proceed without adequate public facilities or means of financing said public facilities. 
H.  The city council has considered the effect of the fee imposed by this article with respect to the housing needs of the city as a whole and of the region, particularly as required by the housing element of the general plan, and the city council finds that this article does not unduly adversely affect the city's ability to provide for such needs. 
I.  The establishment of the fee is for the purpose of obtaining funds for capital projects, necessary to maintain service required by the general plan within existing service areas and existing portions of the city which are developed or for which land use has already been granted. 
(Ord. 893 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.16.510 - Definitions. 
The following words are defined for purposes of this article as follows: 
A.  "Building permit" means the permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any structure pursuant to and as defined by the building code. 
B.  "Fee" or "public facilities fee" means the fee established by this article. The fee shall be collected prior to the approval of any building permit. The fee shall be used solely to finance the facilities. 
C.  "Public facilities" mean buildings or improvements or infrastructure shown and included in the report, including ancillary uses and appurtenances, owned by the city of Rocklin or Placer County. 
D.  "Report" means the public facilities impact fee final report prepared by MuniFinancial and dated February, 2005. The report is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 893 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.16.520 - Public facilities impact fee. 
A development impact fee is hereby established on issuance of all building permits for development in the city of Rocklin to pay for public facilities. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the specific types of development and the benefit and impact area on which the impact fee is imposed, list the specific public facilities to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of development, provide for a credit for any fees or construction taxes previously paid, and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this impact fee shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of development and whether the described public facilities are still needed. 
(Ord. 893 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.16.530 - Inflation adjustment. 
The public facilities fee shall be adjusted for inflation annually by city council resolution. The construction cost index shall be based on the city's recent capital project experience or the San Francisco Engineering News Record index. Land costs will be adjusted based on the consumer price index or appraisal data. Fee increases shall be weighted by the share of total planned facility costs represented by land or construction costs as appropriate. 
(Ord. 893 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.16.540 - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to: 
A.  Pay for the cost, including administrative costs, of future construction of public facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 3.16.520 of this article, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed public facilities constructed in whole or in part by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or 
B.  Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted by Section 3.16.520 of this article to construct or install such public facilities improvements which are oversized with supplemental size or capacity. 
(Ord. 893 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.16.550 - Developer construction of facilities. 
Whenever a developer is required as a condition of approval of a development permit to construct a public facility described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.16.520 of this article, which improvement is determined by the city to have supplemental size or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of public facilities, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and/or a credit against all or a portion of the fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to the ordinance codified in this article on the development project may be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvements needed to provide services to, or mitigate the need for public facilities created by the development, nor shall the developer be relieved from the obligation to pay that portion of the fee needed to mitigate impacts created by the development on public facilities elsewhere in the city. 
(Ord. 893 § 1 (part), 2005).  
Chapter 3.20 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Title—Authority—References to code. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Documentary Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Rocklin." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California (hereinafter "the Code"). All references to the code shall be as the same now reads or as it may hereafter be amended to read from time to time. 
(Ord. 305 § 2, 1976).  
3.20.020 - Imposed. 
There is imposed a tax on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, upon the value and in the amounts specified by subsection b of Section 11911 of the code. 
(Ord. 305 § 3, 1976).  
3.20.030 - Who is to pay. 
The tax imposed by Section 3.20.020 shall be paid by those persons specified in Section 11912 of the code. 
(Ord. 305 § 4, 1976).  
3.20.040 - Exemptions. 
The tax imposed by Section 3.20.020 shall not apply to those entities or under those conditions specified in Sections 11921 through 11925 of the Code. 
(Ord. 305 § 5, 1976).  
3.20.050 - Former tax unimpaired. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be read to impair the validity of any tax imposed or collected pursuant to Ordinance No. 220. 
(Ord. 305 § 9, 1976).  
3.20.060 - Administration. 
The recorder of Placer County shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Section 11933 of the Code. 
(Ord. 305 § 6, 1976).  
3.20.070 - Refund claims. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Section 11934 of the Code. 
(Ord. 305 § 7, 1976).  
3.20.080 - Revenue allocation—Conformity to tax code. 
Money received by the county of Placer through the county recorder shall be allocated by the county auditor pursuant to Section 11931 of the Code. This chapter shall be deemed to be in conformity with Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Code. 
(Ord. 305 § 8, 1976).  
Chapter 3.24 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. 269 § 1, 1973).  
3.24.020 - Purpose—Conformance to state provisions. 
The council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 4, 1973).  
3.24.030 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 5, 1973).  
3.24.040 - State provisions—Adopted. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 9, 1973).  
3.24.050 - State provisions—City substituted for state. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, The State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections including, but not necessary limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under those provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 or the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 269 § 10, 1973).  
3.24.060 - State provisions—Amendments incorporated. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 15, 1973).  
3.24.070 - Sales tax imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.100 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 269 § 6, 1973).  
3.24.080 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 269 § 7, 1973).  
3.24.090 - Use tax imposed. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.100 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 269 § 8, 1973).  
3.24.100 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 269 § 2, 1973).  
3.24.110 - Retailer's permit not required when. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 269 § 11, 1973).  
3.24.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this subsection shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
1.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
2.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
3.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
4.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
B.  The provisions of this subsection shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
1.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
2.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
3.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the same is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
4.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
5.  There are exempted from the computation 
of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
6.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 510 §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 1983: Ord. 269 § 13, 1973).  
3.24.130 - Enjoining collection prohibited. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 269 § 16, 1973).  
3.24.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 269 § 17, 1973).  
Chapter 3.28 - BUDGET 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Proposal—Submission to council. 
A.  Not later than May 15 in any year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the fiscal year commencing July 1 of that year. Such budget shall contain itemized statements for recommended city expenditures and estimated revenues and be accompanied with a comprehensive budget memo presenting the various components of the budget and their anticipated impact on the city's fiscal condition. 
B.  The city manager may require a department head or employee to furnish whatever information is deemed necessary to prepare the proposed budget. 
C.  The proposed budget shall be accompanied by a proposed resolution establishing an organizational plan, positions and classifications of employment and fixing the compensation of employees and elected officers. 
D.  The city council shall conduct one or more hearings on the proposed budget and shall make such changes therein as may be deemed appropriate. Thereafter, the city manager shall submit to the city council a revised budget based on the changes adopted by the city council. 
E.  The city council shall adopt the final budget on or before June 30 th of each year by resolution. 
(Ord. 397 § 1, 1979: Ord. 355 § 1, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 982, §§ 1—5, 3-27-2012)  
3.28.020 - Proposal—City manager authority. 
The city manager may require a department head or employee to furnish whatever information is deemed necessary to prepare the proposed budget. 
(Ord. 355 § 2, 1978).  
3.28.030 - Proposal—Personnel resolution. 
The proposed budget shall be accompanied by a proposed resolution establishing positions and classifications of employment and fixing the compensation of employees and elected officers. 
(Ord. 355 § 3, 1978).  
3.28.040 - Hearings—Revised budget. 
The council shall conduct one or more hearings on the proposed budget and shall make such changes therein as may be deemed appropriate. Thereafter, the city manager shall submit to the council a revised budget based on the changes adopted by the council. 
(Ord. 355 § 4, 1978).  
3.28.050 - Final adoption. 
The council shall adopt a final budget on or before June 30th of each year, by resolution. 
(Ord. 355 § 5, 1978).  
3.28.060 - Council control. 
The council shall control the submission, approval and enforcement of the budget and the filing of claims thereunder by all city departments or employees. 
(Ord. 355 § 6, 1978).  
Chapter 3.32 - SERVICE FEE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  By enacting this chapter, the city council establishes a policy of recovering the costs of providing services of a voluntary and limited nature from those utilizing those services, so that general tax revenues are not diverted from general services of a broad nature to be used to subsidize such limited benefit services. 
B.  To implement this policy, this chapter establishes a service fee revenue/cost comparison system to ascertain and provide for the recovery of the cost of providing services through user service fees. 
C.  The service fee revenue/cost comparison system provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the city council do not exceed the costs reasonably borne of providing the services for which the fees are charged. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 1995).  
3.32.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies only to fees for those services listed in Section 3.32.050 below. To the extent that this chapter establishes a fee for services for which an identical fee is already required by another provision of this code, or by regulation, ordinance, statute or otherwise, the authority in this chapter shall be deemed supplementary. 
B.  This chapter does not apply to, and does not affect in any manner, the following taxes and fees: 
1.  Capital expenditures and park and recreation tax—Chapter 3.16, Article I. 
2.  Traffic circulation surcharge—Chapter 3.16, Article II. 
3.  Fee for traffic signalization and control—Chapter 3.16, Article III. 
4.  Traffic impact fee—Chapter 3.16, Article IV. 
5.  Real property transfer tax—Chapter 3.20. 6. Sales and use tax—Chapter 3.24. 7. Business license tax—Chapter 5.04. 8. Transient occupancy tax—Chapter 5.24. 9. Community facilities district taxes. 
10.  Lighting district No. 1, landscaping and lighting district No. 2, and park development and maintenance district assessments. 
11.  Park fees—Chapter 16.28, Article II; Chapter 17.71. 
12.  Dry Creek watershed drainage fees—Ordinance No. 703, as amended. 
13.  Oak tree mitigation fee—Chapter 17.77. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 1995).  
3.32.030 - Service fee revenue/cost comparison system. 
A.  There is hereby established a service fee revenue/cost comparison system by which the amount of each service fee shall first be calculated at the cost reasonably borne to provide the service, and then set at a designated percentage of that cost, as determined by the city council. "Costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in Section 3.32.040 below. The percentage of the cost to be recovered by the fee shall be in the sole discretion of the council. 
B.  The city manager shall implement this system by determining the costs reasonably borne for each city service fee, and providing to the city council the documentation necessary to enable the city council to set service fees at an amount sufficient to recover the designated percentage of costs reasonably borne. 
C.  The city manager shall review the amount of each service fee, and the cost reasonably borne of providing the service, at least annually, and report the results of the review, along with the supporting documentation, to the city council. 
D.  Prior to adopting or amending any fee amount, the city council shall conduct a noticed public hearing in compliance with Government Code Sections 66016 through 66018. At the conclusion of the hearing and after consideration of all oral and documentary evidence received, the council may adopt, by resolution, a service fee schedule setting fee amounts at a designated percentage of costs reasonably borne. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 1995).  
3.32.040 - Costs reasonably borne—Defined. 
"Costs reasonably borne," as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter are to consist of the following elements: 
A.  All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred; 
B.  All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system; 
C.  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset; 
D.  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city attorney, city manager, city clerk, city treasurer, finance department, and personnel office, and all other staff and support services provided to the entire city organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of said percentage so that each of taxes and fees shall proportionately defray such overhead costs; 
E.  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections A, B, C and F of this section; 
F.  Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. 
(Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 1995).  
3.32.050 - Service fees established. 
There are hereby established fees for the services listed below. The amount of each fee shall be established by resolution of the city council, based on a percentage of the costs reasonably borne in providing the service as determined by the council. 
A.  Administrative Services 
Building records research 
Police report reproduction 
Fire report reproduction 
Business license application 
Returned check processing 
Records research services 
Document reproduction 
Creation of financing district—Bonds 
Creation of financing district—Services 
Annexation into existing CFD 
Annexation into existing LLMD 
Cable TV franchise application 
Appeals fee—City manager 
Appeals fee—City council 
B.  Public Services 
Overwide/overweight transport permit 
Encroachment permit 
Residential street closure permit 
Street barricade service 
Street trees—Trimming and removal 
Vegetation removal from private property 
Spilled load cleanup 
Sidewalk repair 
Damaged/lost barricade 
C.  Public Safety: Police 
Parking enforcement 
Vehicle code enforcement 
Disturbance response callback 
Solicitor permit 
Fingerprinting 
Impounded vehicle release 
Repossessed vehicle receipt 
Police report reproduction 
Police audio/video/photo reproduction 
Vehicle citation signoff 
Records check clearance letter 
Booking 
Private special event control 
Animal license/control 
Potentially dangerous dog license 
Animal catch and return to owner 
DUI involved emergency response 
Accident investigation/report 
Special traffic control 
Explosive permit 
Security plan check 
ABC license review 
ABC license review—One day 
Bingo permit 
Review local criminal history 
Patrol ride along 
Massage establishment permit 
Massage establishment renewal 
Taxi/vehicle for hire owner permit 
Taxi/vehicle for hire owner renewal 
Taxi/vehicle for hire driver permit 
Taxi/vehicle for hire driver renewal 
Adult-related business operator permit 
Adult-related business operator renewal 
Adult-related business employee permit 
Adult-related business employee renewal 
Adult-related business permit review 
Adult-related business permit appeal 
D.  Public Safety: Fire 
Fire Construction Permits 
Fire alarm—New installation 
Fire alarm—Tenant improvement 
Large fire alarm project (plus fifty devices) 
Fire alarm high rise 
Comm. fire sprinkler system—New less than one hundred heads 
Comm. Fire sprinkler system—New one hundred to one hundred ninety-nine heads 
Comm. Fire sprinkler system—New two hundred plus heads 
Comm. Fire sprinkler system—Tenant improvement one to fifty heads 
Comm. Fire sprinkler system—Tenant improvement fifty-one plus heads 
Fire stand pipe system 
Fire pump system 
Special suppression system 
Hood and duct system 
Compressed gas systems inspection—Medical gas 
Compressed gas systems inspection—General 
Compressed gas systems inspection—Hazardous material 
Smoke management systems 
Radio amplification systems 
Spray booths 
Underground water systems 
Fire code board of appeals 
Special consultation services 
Project plan revision review per hour 
Off-hours inspections 
Re-inspection fee 
Open space and EVA 
Electric gate inspection 
Fire Code Operational Permits and Inspections 
Amusement building 
Carnivals and fairs 
Combustible dust operations 
Covered mall buildings 
Exhibits and trade shows 
Explosives or blasting agents 
Theatrical fire performance 
High pile storage 
Hot work operations 
Industrial ovens 
Lumber yards 
Miscellaneous combustible storage 
Places of assembly 
Commercial day care facility 
Institutional 
Apartments/hotels/motels 
Large family day care 
Residential care facilities 
Temporary membrane structures 
Aerosol products 
Candles/open flames 
Combustible storage 
Compressed gases 
Cryogens 
Dry cleaning 
Dust producing operations/storage 
Flammable/combustible liquids 
Garage repairs/motor vehicle fuel 
Hazardous materials 
Hazardous production facilities 
Hot food vendor—Annual 
Liquid petroleum gas 
Organic coating application 
Radioactive materials 
Refrigeration equipment 
Spraying or dipping 
Tire storage 
Wood products 
Other fire code permits 
Annual business general fire and life safety inspections 
Other required inspections not specifically listed 
Fire services and inspections 
False alarm response (up to three per twelve months) 
False alarm response (each after three per twelve months) 
Vegetation management/grazing/nuisance abatement activities 
- Grazing permit 
- Fire fuel/WUI reduction compliance activity 
Weed abatement 
Emergency responses (spilled load, hazmat, DUI, etc.) 
Fireworks sales permits (booths) 
Public display of fireworks (three hours) 
- Additional standby time (per hour) 
- Additional engine if needed 
Special pyrotechnic effects/entertainment (not fireworks) 
- Additional standby time (per hour) 
- Engine company standby if needed 
Ambulance assistance 
Will serve letters/special requests 
Fire flow hydrant test 
Fire board up contractor permit application 
Fire board up use/evaluation 
Knox box servicing 
E.  Economic and Community Development: Planning 
Zone change review 
Zoning ordinance amendment 
Zoning ordinance interpretation 
General development plan 
General development plan—Modification 
General development plan—Major modification 
Conditional use permit—City council review 
Conditional use review—New building 
Conditional use review—Existing building 
Conditional use review—Minor 
Conditional use review—Modification 
Home occupation permit—Basic 
Home occupation permit—With fire review 
Home occupation permit modification 
Variance review 
Variance review—Administrative review 
Specific plan use permit 
Notice of exemption 
Initial study and negative declaration 
Initial study and mitigated negative declaration 
Mitigation monitoring (minimum deposit) 
Initial study and environmental impact report (EIR) 
Subdivision ordinance amendment 
Mobile pushcart review 
General plan amendment 
Combination application 
Combination application—Fifty-acre increment 
Design review—Commercial 
Design review—Residential 
Design review—Signs 
Special event—City council review 
Special event—Administrative review 
Special event—Administrative modification 
Development agreement 
Development agreement amendment 
Tentative subdivision map 
Tentative subdivision map—Increment 
Tentative subdivision map—Modification 
Tentative parcel map 
Annexation/de-annexation processing 
Planning commission appeal 
City council appeal 
Time extension review 
Modification of approved project 
Project processing cost 
Development activity reports 
Written zone verification 
Lot line adjustment merger 
Street name change 
Historical review 
Tree permit review—Planning commission 
Tree permit review—City council 
Sign permit 
Substantial compliance review 
Planning inspection 
Planning re-inspection 
F.  Economic and Community Development: Building 
Temporary certificate of occupancy 
Street address change 
Building permit processing 
Building plan check 
- SFR master plans (production homes) 
- Non-residential—Plumbing plan check fee 
- Non-residential—Electrical plan check fee 
- Non-residential—Mechanical plan check fee 
- Energy plan check (excludes production homes) 
- Disabled access plan check 
- Special consultant services 
- Plan review post approval 
Electronic plan scanning fee 
Building inspection/permit 
- Plumbing permit—Issuance 
- Plumbing permit—Residential 
- Plumbing permit—Commercial 
- Mechanical permit—Issuance 
- Mechanical permit—Residential 
- Mechanical permit—Commercial 
- Electrical permit—Issuance 
- Electrical permit—Residential 
- Electrical permit—Commercial 
Preliminary project review 
Certificate of occupancy 
Building miscellaneous services 
- Records maintenance fee 
- Off-hours inspections 
- Re-inspection fee 
- Massage business inspections/MCBO processing 
- Minimum building permit fee 
- Minimum sign permit inspection/permit fee 
- Fire construction inspection fee (commercial) 
- Planning division inspection fee (commercial) 
Residential fire sprinkler fee 
Alternate methods and materials 
Appeals board construction advisory 
Board of appeals fee 
Building permit reissuance 
CASp inspection 
CASp review 
Demolition permit 
ESS permit 
ESS/PV combo permit 
Job card replacement 
Landscape plan review 
Large format copies 
Life safety inspection (per hour) 
Manufactured structure setup 
Plan duplication 
PV fee—Commercial 
PV fee—Residential 
Pool permit 
Spa permit 
Combo pool/spa permit 
Ground mounted PV system—Residential 
Use permit/occupancy permit change 
Unpermitted work penalty 
Portable spa 
Fireplace insert 
End processing fee 
Refund processing fee 
G.  Economic and Community Development: Engineering 
Certificate of compliance 
Minor grading plan check 
Minor grading inspection 
Improvement plan check 
Improvement inspection 
Final map check—Subdivision 
Final map check—Residential parcel 
Final map check—Commercial parcel 
Improvement plan revision 
Record of survey plan check 
Reversion to acreage 
Flood zone designation letter 
Flood zone development permit 
Flood zone development appeal 
Flood zone development variance 
Low-impact design review 
Easement or public right-of-way abandonment 
Easement or public right-of-way grant 
H.  Economic and Community Development: Code Enforcement 
Abandoned shopping cart abatement 
I.  Recreation Programs 
Recreation programs 
Public facilities rentals 
J.  Effective Date of Fees 
The effective date of any fee shall be established by resolution of the city council 
(Ord. 937 §§ 1—3, 2008; Ord. 928 § 2, 2008; Ord. 919 § 1, 2007; Ord. 911 §§ 1—3, 2006; Ord. 896 §§ 1—3, 2005; Ord. 875 § 2, 2003; Ord. 869 §§ 1—3, 2003; Ord. 842 §§ 1, 2, 2001; Ord. 786 § 1, 1998: Ord. 778 § 3, 1998; Ord. 761 § 2, 1997; Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 1995). 
(Ord. No. 955, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 972, §§ 1—3, 2-8-2011; Ord. No. 1104, § 3, 9-11-2018)  
3.32.060 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person subject to payment of a service fee authorized by this chapter who desires to protest the amount of the service fee on the basis it exceeds the council designated percentage of costs reasonably borne in providing the service shall tender to the city full payment of the fee when due accompanied by a written appeal of the amount of the fee, stating the payment is tendered under protest and the factual basis and reasons supporting the appellant's protest. If the amount by which the fee exceeds what the appellant claims is the correct amount is two hundred dollars or less, the appeal shall be filed with and considered by the city manager or his/her designee. If over two hundred dollars, the appeal shall be filed with and considered by the council. 
B.  If to be heard by the council, the appeal shall be placed on the next available council meeting agenda. 
C.  Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the imposition of a fee for which an appeal has been denied in whole or in part shall be filed no later than ninety days after a decision to the appeal is made. 
(Ord. 875 § 3, 2003: Ord. 841 § 1, 2001; Ord. 717 § 1 (part), 1995).  
Chapter 3.34 - PARK MAINTENANCE AND DEVELOPMENT FUND[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1093, § 4, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Ch. 3.34 in its entirety and enacted new provisins to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.34, §§ 3.34.010—3.34.070 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 781 § 1 (part), adopted in 1998; and Ord. No. 949, §§ 2, 3, adopted April 14, 2009. 
 
3.34.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Park Maintenance and Development Act of 2018. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.015 - Use of revenue for park maintenance and development purposes. 
A.  It is the intent of the city council in re-adopting this chapter to continue to provide a source of funds for the development, installation, servicing, maintenance, repair and operation of parks and related recreation and appurtenant facilities which may be either currently or subsequently operated, serviced and maintained by the city of Rocklin. Such funds shall be used for the development of parks and recreation facilities, including but not limited to architectural, engineering and environmental services, and the furnishing of services and materials for the ordinary and usual operation, maintenance and servicing of these facilities including, but not limited to: personnel for maintenance and operations such as mowing, litter control, irrigation and equipment maintenance; utilities such as water for park irrigation, electricity and sewer; fertilizers, pesticides, soil amendments, and other agricultural products; replacement trees, shrubs, plants, park and playground equipment, fencing, and sports facilities including lighting; building maintenance and custodial items such as light bulbs, paint, floor care products, sanitation equipment and paper goods; maintenance of swimming pool equipment, building heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems, and park maintenance equipment; contract maintenance services; and rents and leases of maintenance equipment. 
B.  The tax imposed under this chapter is solely for the purpose of raising revenue necessary for the development and maintenance of parks and related recreation and appurtenant facilities in the city of Rocklin as described in this section. 
C.  The revenue raised by this special tax shall be placed in a special fund to be used only for the purposes set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.020 - Authority to adopt measure. 
This chapter and the tax authorized herein is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 37100.5 and 53720 et seq. and California Constitution Article XIIIA, Section 4, Article XIIIC, Section 2, and Article XIIID, Section 3. This special tax is not an ad valorem tax on real property, nor a transaction tax, nor sales tax on real property. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.030 - Maximum tax rate. 
A.  A special tax for park development and maintenance is hereby imposed and shall be levied annually on each residential parcel within the city of Rocklin. 
B.  What qualifies as a residential parcel shall be determined by reference to the assessor's use code assigned to the parcel as it appears on the most current Placer County equalized assessor's tax roll, or by actual land use, as determined by land use or building permits issued to the property. 
C.  The maximum tax rate, by type of residential parcel, is hereby established as follows: 
Assessor's 
Use 
Code 	Type of Residential 
Parcel 	Tax Per 
Residential 
Unit 
01 	Single-Family Residential 	$30.00 
02 	Duplex (each unit) 	20.00 
03 	Triplex (each unit) 	20.00 
04 	Condominium 	30.00 
05 	Apartments (each unit) 	10.00 
10 	Vacant Residential Lot 	10.00 
16 	Residence on a Commercial Lot 	30.00 
28 	Mobile Home Park (each unit) 	10.00 
 
D.  Notwithstanding subsection C of this section, the following maximum tax rate is hereby established for homeowners sixty-two years of age and older for a single-family residence, duplex unit, triplex unit, condominium, or a residence located on a commercially zoned lot of which they are the principal occupant. 
Assessor's 
Use 
Code 	Type of Residential 
Parcel 	Tax Per 
Residential 
Unit 
98 	Single-Family Residence 	$10.00 
02 	Duplex (unit occupied by homeowner) 	10.00 
03 	Triplex (unit occupied by homeowner) 	10.00 
04 	Condominium 	10.00 
16 	Residence on a Commercial Lot 	10.00 
 
E.  The classification for each parcel shall be based on the most current Placer County equalized assessor's tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.040 - Collection of tax—Interest and penalties. 
A.  The county of Placer tax collector shall annually levy on each residential parcel of real property located within the city of Rocklin a special tax in the amount specified in Section 3.34.030. The tax shall be added by the tax collector to the parcel's real property tax bill, and the tax collector shall take any and all action necessary to collect the tax. 
B.  The special tax for each fiscal year and subsequent fiscal years shall be due on the same basis, in the same manner, and on the same applicable dates as established by law for the due dates for the other charges and taxes fixed and collected by the county of Placer on behalf of the city of Rocklin. 
C.  The special tax imposed hereby shall be collected in the same manner, on the same dates, and subject to the same penalties and interest in accordance with the established dates as, or with, other charges and taxes fixed and collected by the county of Placer on behalf of the city of Rocklin. Such special tax, together with all penalties and interest thereon, shall constitute a lien upon the parcel upon which it is levied until it has been paid, and such special tax, together with all penalties and interest thereon, shall, until paid, constitute a personal obligation to the city of Rocklin by the persons who own the parcel on the date the tax is due. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.042 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following parcels shall be exempt from the special tax imposed by this chapter: 
a.  Parcels owned by federal or state agencies; 
b.  Parcels owned by local governmental agencies, including but not limited to, special districts and school districts; 
c.  Parcels exempt from taxation by the city pursuant to the laws or constitutions of the United States and the state of California. 
B.  Any person claiming an exemption from the special tax imposed by this chapter shall file a verified statement of exemption on a form prescribed by the city manager prior to June 30 of the first fiscal year for which the exemption is sought. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.045 - Administrative determinations; appeal. 
A.  The records of the Placer County Assessor shall determine the use and improvement of each parcel for the calculation of the tax applicable to that parcel in the following fiscal year. As used in this chapter, a parcel shall mean a contiguous unit of improved or unimproved real property in possession of an owner, as identified on the Placer County assessor's parcel map. 
B.  The city manager shall administer this chapter. Actions or decisions of the city manager, or his/her designees, regarding the administration of this chapter may be appealed in writing to the city clerk in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01 of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.050 - Reduction in rate—Tax adjustment. 
A.  The tax rates imposed by this chapter are maximum rates and may not be increased by the city council above such maximum rates. 
B.  The tax imposed by this chapter may be levied at a reduced rate or eliminated by the city council for any fiscal year upon a determination by the city council that, after such reduction or elimination, there will be sufficient revenues available to fund park development and maintenance for the ensuing fiscal year. Such reduction or elimination shall be effective only for the fiscal year following such determination. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.060 - Annual accountability report. 
On or before January 1 of each successive year that this ordinance is in effect, the city's finance director shall file an annual report with the city council reporting the amount of funds collected and expended under this section, and explaining the status of any project required or authorized to be funded by the special tax authorized by this section. The annual report shall comply with all the requirements set forth in Government Code Section 50075.3. The annual report shall be presented to the city council at a regular meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.070 - Expiration date. 
This chapter shall expire by its own terms on June 30, 2029. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
3.34.080 - Amendment. 
The city council of the city of Rocklin is hereby authorized to amend this chapter by three (3) affirmative votes of its members for the purpose of carrying out the general purposes of this chapter, to conform the provisions of this chapter to applicable state law, to permit the county tax collector or another public official to collect the special tax levied by this chapter in conjunction with county taxes, or to re-assign the duties of public officials under this chapter. In no event, however, may the city council alter the provisions of Sections 3.34.030 or other provisions which increase the maximum tax rate, without the approval of two-thirds of the voters of the city voting on the question. 
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 4-10-2018)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.01 - APPEALS PROCEDURE 
 
5.01.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Appeals Procedure" for Title 5. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.01.020 - Right to appeal and fees. 
A.  Right to Appeal. Except where a procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this title, any person objecting to the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license, permit or entitlement of any nature, the determination or issuance of which is under any of the provisions of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any city official, if the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of such license, permit or entitlement or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised under any of the provisions of this code, may appeal such decision in writing as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Appeals Fees. The city council may establish a schedule for appeals fees by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.01.030 - Procedure for filing an appeal. 
A.  Appeal to City Manager. If a party is aggrieved of an administrative decision under this Title 5, they may appeal the decision to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days after the date upon which the written administrative decision was deposited in the U.S. mail. The notice of appeal shall contain a statement of the grounds to be relied upon for reversing the decision being appealed. In the event the last calendar day of the filing period falls on a non-business day, the appeal period shall be extended to include the next business day. In the absence of a timely appeal and the payment of any applicable appeal fee, the original administrative decision shall be final. 
The city manager shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal not later than forty-five calendar days after the notice of appeal is received. At least ten calendar days' notice shall be given to the appellant of the time and place of the hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail to the address provided by appellant in his/her notice of appeal. The city manager may hear the appeal in person and shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the hearing. The city manager's written decision shall include appellant's right to appeal the decision to the city council. 
B.  Informal Resolution. Persons denied a permit or otherwise aggrieved by a determination of a city official under this title may meet and/or confer with the city official who issued the decision or the appropriate department head in an effort to informally resolve the matter. Such efforts to informally resolve the matter do not extend the time for filing a formal appeal under subsection A above. In the event the matter is informally resolved prior to the hearing date set by the city manager, the city will refund any appeals fees paid provided the appellant has withdrawn their formal appeal. 
C.  Appeal to City Council. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council by filing a notice of appeal containing appellant's grounds for appeal with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days after the date upon which the city manager's decision is made. In the absence of a timely appeal and payment of any applicable appeal fee, the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
The city clerk shall fix a time and place for the city council hearing of such appeal not later than forty-five calendar days after the notice of appeal is received. At least ten calendar days' notice shall be given to the appellant of the time and place of the hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail to the address provided by appellant in his/her notice of appeal. 
At such hearing before the city council, the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action appealed from should be reversed. The city council may continue the hearing from time to time; provided, however, that the hearing shall occur and be concluded no later than thirty calendar days after the original date set for hearing. The city council shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing and its decision to affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given by this section, unless otherwise specifically provided: 
A.  "Business" means any business, commercial enterprise, trade, calling, vocation, profession, or any means of livelihood whether or not carried on for gain or profit. 
B.  "Business license certificate", or "certificate", means the receipt given by the collector which indicates that the tax imposed by this chapter has been paid. 
C.  "City" means the City of Rocklin, a municipal corporation, in the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
D.  "City manager" means the city manager or his or her designee. 
E.  "Collector" means the chief financial officer or his or her designee. 
F.  "Engaged in business", "carrying on business", or "transacting business", herein used interchangeably, means commencing, conducting, operating, managing, engaging in or carrying on of a business by any person, whether done as owner or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, servant, or lessee of any of them, whether operating from a fixed location in the city or coming into the city from an outside location to engage in the said activities. When any person shall sell or offer to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, service, or other thing of value in the city; or when he shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, newspaper, radio or television, advertise, hold out or represent that he is commencing, engaging in, conducting, operating, managing, carrying on, or soliciting any business in the city; or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating he is in business in the city and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement that he is conducting a business in the city, after having been requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he is conducting or engaging in business in the city. 
G.  "Gross receipts" means the gross receipts of the preceding calendar year or part thereof, and is defined as follows: The total amount actually received or receivable from all sales; the total amount or compensation actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise; and gains realized from trading in stocks or bonds, interest discounts, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, or other emoluments, however designated. Included in gross receipts shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever, except that the following shall be excluded therefrom: 
1.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
2.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold, at which time the sales price shall be included as gross receipts; 
3.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
4.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of a contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
5.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
6.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained by the agent or trustee; 
7.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the portion of his receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under Part 2 of Division 2 of Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California; 
8.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the customer or purchaser; 
9.  Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business; 
10.  That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represents payments to subcontractors; provided that such subcontractors are licensed under this chapter, and provided the general contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractor and the amounts paid each subcontractor; 
11.  As to real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker. 
H.  "Itinerant vendor" means and includes any person who engages in any of the occupations generally referred to as "peddling", "hawking", "selling as a transient merchant", or "vending"; and includes any person who, as an agent for another or on his own behalf, goes from place to place within the city, selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, service, or other thing of value, other than a "solicitor" as defined in this section. One who engages in the business of selling any goods, wares, merchandise, service, or other thing of value from any fixed location within the city for a period of less than ninety days shall be considered an itinerant vendor. 
I.  "Manufacture" or "process" shall embrace all the activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different, or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced. Manufacture includes the production or fabrication of specially made or custom made articles. 
J.  "Person" includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than strictly as a salaried employee. 
K.  "Sale" or "sell" means, includes, and refers to the making of any transfer of title, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, to tangible personal property or other property for a consideration; and to the serving, supplying or furnishing, for consideration, of any tangible personal property or other property fabricated or made at the special order of consumers who do or do not furnish directly or indirectly the specifications therefore. A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in, a sale within the contemplation of law. Sale includes both wholesale and retail sales and sales by vending machines dispensing tangible personal property. 
L.  "Solicitor" means any person who goes from residence to residence or place to place within the city selling or offering to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, service, or other thing of value for future delivery; or any person who by telephone or by mail or by any other means sells or offers to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other thing of value for future delivery. 
M.  "Sworn statement" means a written statement, declaration, or certification made under penalty of perjury. 
N.  "Utility" or "public utility" means any person furnishing the public with communication, water, light, heat or power, subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
O.  "Valid certificate" means a certificate which complies with all the requirements of this chapter, and any certificate which does not comply with these requirements shall not be deemed to be a valid certificate for the purposes of this chapter or any other purpose. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1, 6-12-2012)  
5.04.020 - Revenue measure only. 
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to any other tax or fee which may be imposed by any other provision of this code or other ordinance or resolution of the city. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.030 - Effect on other ordinances. 
The payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, and its acceptance by the city, and the issuance of a certificate to any person, shall not entitle that person to carry on the business so licensed unless that person complies with all other applicable laws of the city, or to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in the certificate if such building or premises is situated in a zone in which the conduct of such business is not allowed. The payment of such tax and its acceptance by the city and the issuance of a certificate shall in no way relieve the taxpayer from compliance with all applicable laws of the city, nor shall it be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.040 - Administration of chapter—Powers of collector. 
A.  This chapter shall be administered by the director of finance or his or her designee acting as the collector. 
B.  The collector may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to supplement or clarify such provisions or aid in their enforcement. 
When, by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of California, the business tax imposed by this chapter cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the city, or in the state, as the case may be, the collector may make such rules and regulations for the apportionment of the tax as are necessary or desirable to overcome the constitutional objections. 
C.  The determination of the type or class of business or businesses a taxpayer is engaged in or about to engage in shall be an administrative function of the collector. 
In cases where a taxpayer believes he or she is placed in the wrong business or class of business or businesses, he or she may apply in writing to the collector for a change in classification setting forth in full the reason for requesting such change. The collector shall conduct an investigation and shall thereupon render a decision in writing as to the proper classification or classifications. 
If the taxpayer is aggrieved by the collector's decision, he or she shall have the right of appeal by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
D.  The collector shall have such other powers as are set out in this chapter or as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.04.050 - Enforcement—Violation—Remedies. 
A.  The collector shall have the authority to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time-to-time be required by the city manager. Each department of the city which issues permits or entitlements of use shall require the production of a valid unexpired certificate prior to the issuance of such a permit. The immediately preceding sentence shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a certificate prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state. 
B.  Any person so violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the certificate herein provided for shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1.18 of this code. 
C.  The conviction and punishment of any person for engaging in any business without a valid certificate shall not relieve such person from paying taxes and penalties due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any tax or penalty prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed in this chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any sum required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the city, and any person who engages in any business without first obtaining and paying for a valid certificate as required by this chapter shall be liable in an action by and in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of any such sum. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 9, 3-13-2018)  
5.04.060 - Business license certificate required. 
It is unlawful for any person to commence, transact, engage in or carry on any business, trade, profession, calling, occupation or gainful activity within the city without first having obtained a valid business license certificate and having paid the business license tax imposed and prescribed by this chapter, or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.070 - Business license tax imposed. 
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, there are imposed upon all businesses, trades, professions, callings, occupations and gainful activities engaged in or carried on in the city, business license taxes in the amounts prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.080 - Businesses without fixed place of business in city. 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who engages in business within the city shall be required to pay the business license tax at the same rate prescribed in this chapter for persons engaged in the same type of business and conducting that business from place of business within the city. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.090 - Branch establishments. 
A separate business license certificate must be obtained for each branch of a business where activities of such business are transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each certificate shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such certificate; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments; and provided further, that any person conducting two or more types of businesses who uses a single set or integrated set of books and records, may, at his or her option, pay only one tax which shall be the tax that applies to the type of business of such person which requires the highest tax payment, except that a business license tax of ten dollars for each additional branch or location shall be paid upon issuance. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.100 - Constitutional apportionment. 
A.  None of the business license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the constitution of the United States and the state. 
B.  In any case where a business license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a certificate to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed business license tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The collector shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the tax to be charged, the collector shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the tax as prescribed by this chapter. Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of the tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant's business in the city or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of license tax therefor; provided, that no additional business license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual business license tax as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.110 - Exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the state from the payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed. 
B.  The following persons, organizations and activities are exempt from payment of the business license tax: 
1.  Business conducted by a charitable, nonprofit or eleemosynary corporation, association or organization if the net proceeds of the business are used exclusively by such corporation, association or organization for a purpose which would qualify as a charitable deduction under Section 172214 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state if the net proceeds were received as a gift by the organization; 
2.  The conduct of entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects, whenever the receipts are for a religious, educational or charitable purpose; 
3.  The conduct of entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by a religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, amateur theatrical group, military, state, county or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts are for the purpose and objects for which the organization or association is formed, and from which profit is not derived, directly or indirectly, by any individual; 
4.  A person doing business whose gross receipts do not exceed the maximum income allowed by U.S. law to persons drawing full Social Security benefits as provided by Title 42, U.S. Code, Section 403(f)(3), as presently written or as amended; 
5.  A disabled veteran holding an honorable discharge from a branch of the military service of the United States who is physically unable to earn a living by manual labor and who engages in itinerant vending or soliciting; 
6.  A person whose only business activity in the city is pursuant to a contract with the city for professional or consultant services. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.120 - Exemptions—Procedure for claiming. 
A.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to Section 5.04.110B shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. In the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter. 
B.  The collector shall, upon proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a business license certificate to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the business license tax required by this chapter. 
C.  The collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any certificate granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.130 - Issuance of business license certificate—Contents. 
A.  All business license certificates shall be issued by the collector upon submission of a completed application and payment of the prescribed business license tax. 
B.  The certificate shall contain the following information: 
1.  The business owner to whom the certificate is issued. 
2.  The business licensed; 
3.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
4.  The business certificate number; 
5.  The date of expiration of such certificate; 
6.  The following statement: "This license is issued without verification that the licensee is subject to or exempt from licensing by the State of California"; and 
7.  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the business license tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such items, the collector shall issue only one certificate; provided, that he may issue for each tax period for which the business license tax has been paid, one sticker, tag, plate or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such items. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 984, § 2, 6-12-2012)  
5.04.140 - Application for business license certificate—First certificate. 
A.  A person making application for the first certificate to be issued hereunder, or for a newly established business, or for a new ownership of a previously established business, shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth the following information: 
1.  The exact nature or kind of business for which a certificate is requested; 
2.  The place where such business is to be carried on and, if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residence of the owners of same; 
3.  In the event that application is made for the issuance of a certificate to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning the business; 
4.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a certificate to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names of residences of the officers or partners thereof; 
5.  In all cases where the amount of the business license tax to be paid is measured by gross receipts, or by the number of employees, or by the number of machines or vehicles or other devices, the application shall set forth such information as may be required to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by applicant; 
6.  Any further information which the collector may require to enable him to issue the type of certificate applied for. 
B.  If the amount of the business license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, the applicant shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the certificate to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of tax so determined shall be tentative only and such person shall, within thirty days after the expiration of the period for which the certificate was issued, furnish the collector with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the collector, showing the gross receipts during the period of such certificate and the business license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal taxes for other businesses after deducting from the payment found to be due the amount paid at the time such first certificate was issued. 
C.  The collector shall not issue to any person another certificate for the same or any other business until such person shall have furnished to him the sworn statement and paid the license tax as herein required. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.150 - Application for business license certificate—Renewal. 
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a business license certificate shall submit to the collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the business license tax to be paid by the applicant, a sworn statement upon a form to be provided by the collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the preceding year as may be required by the collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the business license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.160 - Application—Sworn statement—Conclusiveness. 
No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector or authorized employees of the city who are authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for a certificate as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of business license tax due, and who may demand that the licensee or applicant file a corrected statement. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.170 - Business license certificate—Validity. 
A certificate shall be valid only after the collector's stamp or endorsement has been affixed thereto indicating payment has been received of the amount of the tax and penalties thereon, if any. A certificate, however, which has been paid for by a check or bank draft which was subsequently dishonored by the bank upon which it was drawn shall not be a valid certificate even though the collector's stamp or endorsement appears thereon, and the person operating the business for which the certificate was issued shall be deemed to be operating without a valid certificate and shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter for so operating. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.180 - Business license certificate—Revocation. 
A.  Any certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be cancelled at any time for the following reasons: 
1.  A material false statement contained in the application; 
2.  Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The collector may cancel any certificate issued pursuant to this chapter. The collector shall set the matter for hearing and cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the holder of the certificate not less than five days prior to such hearing. At such hearing the collector shall determine whether such certificate shall be revoked. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector made pursuant to this section may appeal therefrom by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.04.190 - Business license certificate—Withheld. 
A.  The collector shall not issue a certificate to any person for conducting any business while there is pending any action under this chapter against the person as the holder of any certificate at the same location until such action has been concluded. 
B.  No certificate for any ensuing, current or unexpired period shall knowingly be issued or renewed to any person who at the time of making application therefor is indebted to the city for any unpaid business license tax. 
C.  If any person shall have upon two or more occasions made payment for his certificate with a check which was returned by the bank upon which it was drawn because of insufficient funds, the collector may thereafter require that such person make payment of his business license tax by cash payment or by money order or certified check. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.200 - Business license certificate not transferable. 
No certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a certificate is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a fee of five dollars, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the certificate at some other location to which the business is to be moved. Provided, further, that transfer whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person, are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.210 - Business license certificates—Duplicates. 
A duplicate business license certificate may be issued by the collector to replace any certificate previously issued thereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing a statement and paying to the collector a duplicate certificate fee of five dollars. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.220 - Business license certificates—Posting and keeping. 
A.  Any licensee, transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city, shall keep the certificate posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee, transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city, shall keep the certificate upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued. 
C.  Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine, or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a business license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment, the identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment in use during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or symbol is issued. 
D.  No person shall fail to affix, as required herein, any identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol to the vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment for which it has been issued at the location designated by the collector. 
E.  No person shall give away, sell or transfer any identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol, referred to above, to another person or permit its use by another person. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 984, § 3, 6-12-2012)  
5.04.230 - Records. 
All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases, expenditures, and any other record and data relevant to establishing and verifying the tax liability under this chapter. Such persons shall retain all such records for examination by the collector for a period of at least three years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the collector to examine the records at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.240 - Records—Confidentiality. 
The collector or any authorized employee of city shall not make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a business license certificate and to pay a business license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent: 
A.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee or agent for the collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
B.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials or the tax officials of another city or county if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena; 
C.  The disclosure of information and the results of the examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, or to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city; 
D.  The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when, in his opinion, the public interest would suffer thereby; 
E.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom business license certificates have been issued and the general type or nature of their business; 
F.  The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of taxes or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted by the city for taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; 
G.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.250 - Failure to obtain business license certificate or to file statement or corrected statement. 
A.  If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed or if, after demand therefor made by the collector, fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails to apply for and obtain a certificate, the collector may determine the amount of business license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. 
B.  If the collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in applications or statements filed, he may determine the amount of any business license tax due by means of any information he may be able to obtain. 
C.  If such a determination is made, the collector shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may appeal the determination by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.04.260 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1087, § 3, adopted Jan. 23, 2018, repealed former § 5.04.260 which pertained to appeals, and derived from Ord. 546, § 1, adopted in 1986.  
5.04.270 - Collector—Additional powers. 
In addition to all other power conferred, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding thirty days and, in such case, to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, except that seven percent simple interest shall be added to any tax determined to be payable. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.280 - Business license tax—When payable. 
A.  Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual business license taxes under provision of this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of July of each year; 
B.  Except as otherwise herein provided, business license taxes, other than annual taxes, required hereunder shall be due and payable in advance as follows: 
1.  Daily flat rate taxes each day; 
2.  Other flat rate taxes are payable on the first day of business and, thereafter, on the first day of any applicable period; 
3.  Monthly taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of each and every month; 
4.  Weekly flat rate taxes on Monday of each week; 
5.  Daily flat rate taxes each day; 
6.  Other flat rate taxes are payable on the first day of business and, thereafter, on the first day of any applicable period. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 984, § 4, 6-12-2012)  
5.04.290 - Business license tax—Delinquencies and penalties. 
For failure to pay a business license tax when due, the collector shall add a penalty of ten percent of the license tax on the first day of each month after the due date thereof; provided, that the total amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed fifty percent of the amount of the business license tax due. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.300 - Business license tax—Refunds. 
No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by this chapter shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the collector within a period of three years from the last day of the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made and all such claims for refund of the amount of the overpayment must be filed with the collector on forms furnished by him and in the manner prescribed by him. Upon the filing of such a claim and upon the determination by the collector that an overpayment has been made, he shall refund the amount overpaid. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986).  
5.04.310 - Prior license certificates and taxes—Exemptions and continuing obligation. 
A.  Adoption of the ordinance enacting this Chapter 5.04 of the Rocklin Municipal Code shall not relieve any person from any obligation or liability for payment to the city of a license tax arising under Rocklin City Ordinance No. 254 or any other ordinance heretofore enacted by the city, and the obligation or liability shall continue. 
B.  Where a business license, for revenue purposes, has been issued to any person by the city upon payment of a license tax pursuant to Rocklin City Ordinance No. 254 or any other ordinance heretofore enacted by the city, and the period of time for which the license was issued and the tax was paid has not expired, the business license tax prescribed for said person by this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of said period of time. 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986; Ord. No. 984, § 5, 6-12-2012)  
5.04.320 - Business license tax—Schedule of rates. 
A.  Every person engaging in any business, other than those businesses enumerated below in this section, shall pay an annual business license tax based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation of such business in accordance with the following scale: 
Annual Gross Receipts 	Business License Tax
per Year 
Less than $15,000.01 	$ 45.00 
$15,000.01—$25,000.00 	$ 70.00 
$25,000.01—$50,000.00 	$ 90.00 
Over $50,000.00 	$125.00 
 
B.  Professionals. Every person engaged in any professional business included, but not limited to the businesses hereinafter enumerated shall pay an annual business license tax in the amount of one hundred twenty-five dollars: 
Accountant 
Advertising agent 
Architect 
Attorney 
Auctioneer 
Auditor 
Broker or commission agent 
Chemist 
Chiropractor 
Collection agency or agent 
Credit reporting bureau 
Dentist 
Engineer 
Mortician 
Optician 
Optometrist 
Osteopath 
Pharmacist 
Physician 
Podiatrist 
Psychiatrist 
Psychologist 
Radio, television advertising 
Real estate broker 
Surgeon 
Tax consultant 
Veterinarian 
X-ray or clinical laboratory 
C.  Manufacturing and Public Utilities. Every person engaged in manufacturing and/or selling any goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale, and every public utility, except any public utility which makes an annual payment to the city under a franchise or similar agreement, shall pay an annual business license tax in the amount of one-hundred twenty-five dollars. 
D.  Contractors and Subcontractors. Every person engaged in business as a contractor shall pay an annual business license tax in the amount of one hundred twenty-five dollars. Every person engaged in business as a subcontractor shall pay an annual business license tax in the amount of eighty dollars. 
E.  Transportation and Trucking. Every person who does not have a fixed place of business within the city and who (1) makes retail deliveries of goods and services by motor vehicle within the city, (2) who maintains, installs or repairs goods, wares, and merchandise or equipment within the city, or (3) provides any other service within the city, shall pay an annual business license of fifty dollars for the first vehicle and twenty-five dollars for each additional vehicle used to conduct the business within the city. 
F.  Services. Every person engaged in any of the service activities included, but not limited to those listed below shall pay an annual business license tax in the amount of seventy dollars; provided, however, that if the annual gross receipts of the business are fifteen thousand dollars or less, the business license tax shall be forty-five dollars: 
Advertisement and bill posters 
Ambulance service - independent from undertaking 
Answering service 
Bar/Cocktail lounge for the sale of nonalcoholic beverages 
Barbershop 
Bath, Turkish or steam 
Beauty parlors 
Bicycle sales and/or repairs 
Business machine dealer and/or repairs 
Catering service 
Dancing academies 
Gardener-professional 
Garage without car sales 
Health studio and related services 
Home sales, per salesman 
Janitorial service 
Kennels 
Locksmith 
Mail order business (home) 
Magazines and papers 
Musical lessons 
Pawnshop 
Riding academy 
Security police 
Shoe repair shop 
Shoeshine stand 
Sign painter 
Skating rinks 
Stud and/or bull services 
Swimming pools, commercial 
Tailors 
Taxidermist 
Taxicabs 
Watch repair 
Welding 
Wig distributor 
Yards, fruit drying 
G.  Rental of Residential Real Property. Every person engaged in the business of renting or letting any apartment house containing three or more units; boardinghouse, dormitory, hotel, lodginghouse, motel or roominghouse containing three or more rental units; convalescent hospital, nursing or rest home caring for three or more physically or mentally afflicted persons; or any renting or letting accommodations for dwelling, sleeping or lodging and not otherwise specifically provided in this chapter shall pay an annual business license tax in the amount determined as follows: 
No. of Rental Units 	Business License Tax 
3—6 	$15.00 
7—12 	$30.00 
Over 12 	$30.00 plus $1.25 per room over 12 
 
H.  Rental of Commercial, Industrial and Agricultural Real Property. Every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing and granting a license to use commercial, industrial, or agricultural real property as a landlord, lessor or licensor shall pay an annual business license tax on the gross rental, lease or license payments received in accordance with the scale set out in subsection A of this section. 
I.  Coin-operated Laundries, Vending, Music and Amusement Machines. 
1.  Every person engaged in the business of furnishing coin-operated vending machines which sell tangible property or services, coin-operated laundry machines, or coin-operated music or amusement machines for use on property of others shall pay an annual business license tax based on gross receipts in accordance with the scale set out in subsection A of this section. 
2.  Every person who receives income from coin-operated vending machines which sell tangible property or services, coin-operated music or amusement machines, or coin-operated laundry machines in the person's place of business shall pay an annual business license tax based on the gross receipts resulting from the operation of the machines in the amount of .1 percent of such total gross receipts. 
J.  Miscellaneous Business Activities. Every person engaged in any business hereinafter enumerated shall pay a business license tax in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars annually; or seventy-five dollars quarterly; or thirty dollars monthly; or fifteen dollars daily: 
Athletic events, lecturer, shows, auto races, etc. 
Auction houses 
Dances 
Fireworks stands and Christmas tree lots 
Housemoving 
Itinerant vendor, peddler, or solicitor 
Photographer (without a fixed place of business in the city) 
Street stands, including nonexempt produce sales 
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 984, § 6, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 995, § 1, 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 5-27-2014)  
Chapter 5.08 - BINGO GAME LICENSE 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning: 
A.  "Authorized organization" means an organization which is exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 234701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California or which is a mobile home park association or a senior citizens' organization. 
B.  "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
C.  "Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. 320 § 1, 1977).  
5.08.020 - Required—Authorized organization—Use of proceeds. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo games in the city unless such person is an authorized organization, has been issued a license as provided by this chapter, and the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. 320 § 2, 1977).  
5.08.030 - Application—Issuance. 
A.  Application for license shall be made to the police chief on forms prescribed by him and shall be filed not less than thirty days prior to the proposed date of the bingo game or games. Such application form shall require from the applicant at least the following: 
1.  The name of the applicant and a statement that the applicant is an authorized organization under this chapter; 
2.  The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the applicant organization; 
3.  The particular properly within the city, including street number, together with the occupancy capacity of such place; 
4.  Whether the premises used for bingo are leased or owned by applicant; 
5.  The proposed day of the week and hours of day for the conduct of bingo games; 
6.  A list of all officers and directors of applicant; 
7.  The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of the fire chief that the premises to be used for bingo games complies with all laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations pertaining to fire prevention and protection. That certificate shall include any terms and conditions necessary to maintain such compliance. 
B.  Upon approval of any application for a bingo license, the police chief or his designated representative shall issue the license. 
(Ord. 320 § 3, 1977).  
5.08.040 - Fee—Designated. 
The fee for a bingo license, whether for the initial license or renewal, shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 458 § 1, 1981: Ord. 447 § 1, 1981: Ord. 435 § 8(part), 1980: Ord. 320 § 4(a), 1977).  
5.08.050 - Fee—Payment—Refund upon denial. 
The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application. If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. 
(Ord. 320 § 4(b), 1977).  
5.08.060 - Term. 
The term of a bingo license shall commence upon issuance of the license and shall terminate on the next succeeding December 31st. The term of renewal license shall be one calendar year. 
(Ord. 320 § 5, 1977).  
5.08.070 - Transferability. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall be issued to a specific authorized organization to conduct a bingo game at a specific location and shall in no event be transferable from one person to another or from one location to another. 
(Ord. 320 § 6, 1977).  
5.08.080 - Denial—Suspension—Revocation. 
A.  Grounds. The police chief may deny an application for a bingo license, or suspend or revoke a license, if he finds the applicant or licensee or any agent or representative hereof has: 
1.  Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be filed under this chapter; or 
2.  Violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Procedure. If after investigation, the police chief determines that a bingo license should be suspended or revoked or an application for such license denied, he shall prepare a notice of suspension, revocation or denial of application setting forth the reasons for such suspension, revocation or denial of application. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant's last address provided in the application or be personally delivered. Any person who has had an application for a bingo license denied by the police chief or who has had a bingo license suspended or revoked by the police chief may appeal the police chief's decision by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
(Ord. 320 § 9, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.08.090 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1087, § 3, adopted Jan. 23, 2018, repealed former § 5.08.090 which pertained to appeal, and derived from Ord. 320, § 10, adopted in 1977.  
5.08.100 - Inspection. 
Any peace officer of the city shall have free access to any bingo game licensed under this chapter. The licensee shall have the bingo license and lists of approved staff available for inspection at all times during any bingo game. 
(Ord. 320 § 8, 1977).  
5.08.110 - Salary, wage or profit unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized and licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 320 § 11, 1977).  
5.08.120 - Location of game. 
An authorized organization licensed to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter shall conduct such games only on property owned or leased by it, which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(a), 1977).  
5.08.130 - Public nature—Minors—Presence of participants. 
Any bingo game conducted under this chapter shall be open to the general public. No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. No person shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(b), 1977).  
5.08.140 - Prize value. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(c), 1977).  
5.08.150 - Operators—Staff. 
A.  A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. 
B.  Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. 
C.  No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game under this chapter shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(d), 1977).  
5.08.160 - Profits—Proceeds. 
All profits derived from a bingo game organized by an organization exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
A.  Such proceeds may be used for prizes. 
B.  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed ten percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes or five hundred dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(e), 1977).  
5.08.170 - Hours restriction. 
No bingo game shall be conducted between the hour of midnight and eight a.m. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(f), 1977).  
5.08.180 - Officer, director change report. 
The licensee shall report to the police chief in writing each change in its officers or directors. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(g), 1977).  
5.08.190 - Intoxicated persons. 
No intoxicated person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(h), 1977).  
5.08.200 - Alcoholic beverage barred. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed on the premises on which a bingo game is conducted. 
(Ord. 320 § 7(i), 1977).  
5.08.210 - Number of games. 
No more than eight hours of bingo games may be conducted by each authorized organization during any one-week period. 
(Ord. 522 § 1, 1984: Ord. 442 § 1, 1981: Ord. 320 § 7(j), 1977).  
5.08.220 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  A violation of Section 5.08.110 of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
B.  A violation of any other provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor as the same is defined by, and penalties established according to, the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 320 § 12, 1977).  
Chapter 5.12 - CARDROOMS AND GAMING CLUBS 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Cardroom" and "gaming club" means any space, room or enclosure where games of cards or similar games are played, and to which the public, or any portion of the public, is invited to participate in such games, with or without the payment of consideration. 
B.  "Games of cards or similar games" means any game played with cards, dice, or any device, for currency, check, credit or other thing of value, as a result of any such game, and which it not prohibited and made unlawful by the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 686 § 2 (part), 1993).  
5.12.020 - Cardrooms and gaming clubs prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, for himself or for any other person, to own, engage in, carry on, maintain, or conduct any cardroom or gaming club, either independently or as a use incidental to any other use or business, within the city. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to deal, play, or carry on, open, or caused to be opened, or to conduct or cause to be conducted, as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game of cards or similar game in a cardroom or gaming club, as those terms are defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 686 § 2 (part), 1993).  
Chapter 5.16 - CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS REGULATION 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Authority. 
The city of Rocklin, pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the city limits. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.020 - Findings. 
The council finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of Rocklin. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city may designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable television service to the public, and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this as an integral finding thereof. It is the further intent of this chapter to establish regulatory provisions that permit the city to regulate cable television franchises to the extent permitted by federal and state law, including but not limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations and applicable California law. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.030 - Short title. 
This chapter shall constitute the "cable television and communications regulatory ordinance" of the city of Rocklin and may be referred to as such. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.040 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
A.  "Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the transmission of local television broadcast signals. 
B.  "Cable television system" or "system," also referred to as "cable communications system" or "cable system," means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and any other lawful communications or telecommunications services and which is provided to one or more subscribers within the franchise area, but such term does not include: 
1.  A facility that serves only to transmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
2.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
3.  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
4.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
C.  "Cable service" or "cable television service" means the total of the following: 
1.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and 
2.  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
D.  "Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
E.  "Council" means the city council of the city of Rocklin. 
F.  "Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, ordinance, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement to obtain any other license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the city. 
G.  "Franchise agreement" means an agreement entered into by city under which a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter and containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
H.  "Franchise fee" means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee or its subscribers as compensation for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way, or solely because of grantee's status as a cable operator. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
1.  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers); 
2.  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
3.  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
4.  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
I.  "Grantee" means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under a franchise agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
J.  "Grantor" or "city" means the city of Rocklin as represented by the council or any delegate, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
K.  "Gross annual cable service revenues" means the annual gross revenues received by a grantee from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services, excluding refundable deposits, rebates or credits; bad debt; and any sales, excise or other taxes or charges collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal governments. Revenues collected as franchise fees from subscribers shall not be included in gross annual cable service revenues pending the final resolution of the franchise fee issue in United Artists Cable of Baltimore, 77 RR 2d 1306 (released April 6, 1995). If the final decision (following all judicial appeals) in this case results in a determination by the FCC or court that franchise fees shall not be excluded from gross annual cable revenues, then grantee agrees to pay the franchise fees owed to the city from the effective date of any franchise granted under this chapter based on such interpretation within ninety days of the final decision. 
L.  "Gross annual telecommunications service revenues" means the annual gross revenues received by a grantee from the operation of the cable system to provide telecommunications services, other than cable services. 
M.  "Installation" means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
N.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
O.  "Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities" means the total of the following: 
1.  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
2.  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
P.  "Section" means any section, subsection or provision of this chapter. 
Q.  "Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area within the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
R.  "Service tier" means a category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee. 
S.  "State" means the state of California. 
T.  "Street" or "public way" means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority and located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time. 
U.  "Subscriber" or "customer" or "consumer" means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefor. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.050 - Franchise purposes. 
A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes: 
A.  To engage in the business of providing cable television service, and such other services as may be permitted by law, including but not limited to telephony and data services, which grantee chooses to provide to subscribers within the designated service area. 
B.  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area. 
C.  To maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services, and such other services as may be permitted by law, including but not limited to telephony and data services. 
D.  To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.060 - Franchise required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the city within any public street without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.070 - Term of the franchise. 
A.  A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement. The term-shall commence on the grantor's adoption of a resolution granting the franchise; or, if grantor determines to grant a franchise by ordinance, the term shall commence upon the effective date of the ordinance. 
B.  A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law and of this chapter. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.080 - Franchise territory. 
Any franchise shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.090 - Federal or state jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.100 - Consent required for transfer. 
A.  Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the council shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section. 
B.  Except as may be expressly provided otherwise in a franchise agreement, the requirements of subsection (A) shall apply to any change in control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In determining whether a change of control will occur by a particular transaction the policies of the Federal Communications Commission defining de jure and de facto control changes in the cable television relay service shall be applicable. 
C.  Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control of ownership shall apply. 
D.  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist grantor in such inquiry. In seeking grantor's consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the grantee and/or the proposed transferee complete an application in accordance with Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or equivalent. An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than one hundred twenty days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the qualifications and financial and technical capability to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the legal, financial, character, and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall consent to the transfer of the franchise. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
E.  Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable television system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within ninety days of assuming such control that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding eighteen months unless extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. 
F.  Upon transfer, grantee shall reimburse grantor for grantor's reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with the transfer of the franchise or of control of the franchise, including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses. Any such reimbursement shall not exceed five thousand dollars and shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.110 - Geographical coverage. 
A.  Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the city, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement. 
B.  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area, service shall be provided within thirty days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty day period on reasonable terms and conditions. If the necessary right-of-way cannot be secured within such thirty day period, service shall be provided as soon as reasonably practicable. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.120 - Nonexclusive franchise. 
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law, provided that if the grantor grants an additional franchise on terms more favorable to the second grantee (whether by the grant of greater benefits or the imposition of lesser obligations), or if another entity utilizing the public rights-of-way offers services competitive with grantee, then the initial grantee's corresponding obligations shall be reduced or modified to establish terms and conditions which are not more burdensome or less favorable than those applied to any other grantee, or other competitive entity referred to above. Either grantor or grantee may, upon written notification to the other, invoke the mediation and arbitration provisions of Sections 5.16.390 and 5.16.400 to resolve disputes between grantor and grantee arising under this section. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.130 - Multiple franchises. 
A.  Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
1.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage. 
2.  The benefits that may accrue to cable subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service. 
3.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way. 
B.  Developers of new residential subdivisions with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two cable systems and dedicate the use of such conduit to the city. 
C.  Grantor may require that any new grantee be responsible for acquisition of necessary property rights and/or interest for undergrounding of its facilities, and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor's opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.140 - Filing of applications—Initial franchise. 
Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by the city shall accompany the application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.150 - Initial franchise—Applications—Contents. 
An application for an initial franchise for cable television system shall contain, where applicable: 
A.  A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area; 
B.  Resume of prior history of applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable television field; 
C.  List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership; or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder, if a corporation; 
D.  List of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
E.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant; 
F.  A current financial statement of applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city; 
G.  Proposed construction and service schedule; 
H.  Any reasonable additional information that the city deems applicable. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.160 - Consideration of initial franchise applications. 
A.  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city's manager or a delegate shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the city council. 
B.  A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the council. Within thirty days after the close of the hearing, the council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.170 - Franchise renewal. 
Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.180 - Consumer protection and service standards. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall comply with the consumer protection and service standards of the Federal Communications Commission as set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.309. 
B.  Upon request, grantee shall provide credits or refunds to subscribers whose service has been interrupted for four or more hours. All credits for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be issued promptly, but no later than thirty days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
C.  Subscribers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, grantee shall notify subscribers thirty days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(i). 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.190 - Verification of compliance with standards. 
A.  Upon the receipt of written complaints from subscribers indicating the existence of a violation of one or more of the consumer protection and service standards provided for above, the grantor may request the grantee to demonstrate compliance with the specific standard(s) which is the subject of the subscriber complaints. Grantor shall provide grantee a reasonable period of time to demonstrate compliance, which in no event shall be less than thirty days after grantee receives written notice from grantor. 
B.  A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection and service standards of Section 5.16.180, after grantee's receipt of due notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.200 - Subscriber complaints and disputes. 
A.  Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor. Said procedures shall include a requirement that grantee respond to any written complaint from a subscriber within thirty days of receipt. 
B.  Grantor shall have the right to review grantee's response to subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the subscriber's right to privacy. 
C.  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive service so long as the franchise remains in force. 
D.  In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.210 - Failure to operate system. 
If grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without prior approval or subsequent excuse of the grantor, the grantor may, at is sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall indemnify the grantor against any damages grantor may suffer as a result of such failure. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.220 - Identification of grantee's employees. 
All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers' premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for grantee. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.230 - Additional consumer protection and service standards. 
Additional consumer protection and service standards and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance or resolution of grantor, and grantee shall comply with such standards in the operations of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.240 - Franchise fee. 
A.  Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee on gross annual cable service revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise agreement. To the extent that grantee provides telecommunications service over the cable system other than cable service, the grantee shall pay to the grantor, in lieu of a franchise fee, compensation for the use of the public right-of-way, as set forth in the franchise agreement and in accordance with applicable law. 
B.  The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within sixty days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross annual cable service revenues, and if applicable, gross annual telecommunications service revenue, and all payments, deductions and, computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon thirty days prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee's records relating to gross annual cable service revenues, and if applicable, gross annual telecommunications service revenue, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of three percent or more, then the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such audit, not to exceed ten thousand dollars. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
D.  If any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, grantee shall pay as additional compensation: 
1.  An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prime lending rate of any national bank selected by grantor, plus one percent during the period for which payment was due; and 
2.  If the payment is late by forty-five days or more, a sum of money equal to those reasonable additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of delinquent payment. 
E.  Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.250 - Security fund. 
A.  Grantor may require grantee to provide a security fund, in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security fund shall be established based on the extent of the grantee's obligations under the terms of the franchise. 
B.  The security fund shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a franchise breach, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
C.  If the security fund is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security fund to be replenished to the original amount no later than thirty (30) days after each withdrawal by grantor. Failure to replenish the security fund shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.260 - System construction. 
A.  Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, and other cognizant public agencies. 
B.  In those areas of the city where transmission lines or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground. 
C.  In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and if the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee's cost. Notwithstanding the above, if the above ground facilities of the public utilities are placed underground and the cost of such placement is paid for by third parties, other than by utility rate payers generally or by the nondiscriminatory use of public funds, then the grantee shall be entitled to have the underground placement of its facilities paid for by such third parties as well, to the extent allowed by law. Certain of grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above ground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
D.  Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as "structures"), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and public ways shall be made under the direction of grantor's city engineer or a designee, who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof. 
1.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places, and not to interfere with existing public utility installations. 
2.  If any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the right granted to the grantee under this chapter or a franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore as nearly as practicable to their former condition said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged, and if any such property or improvement shall at any later time become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require restoration, repair or replacement because of such disturbance or damage by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of notice from the grantor and at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore as nearly as practicable to their former condition said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall be made in accordance with grantor's standard specifications then in effect. 
3.  Prior to commencing any work in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain, and comply with all conditions of, any and all permits lawfully required by grantor for such work. If emergency work may be required by the grantee, grantee shall obtain any and all such permits as soon as practicable but not later than three working days after the beginning of such emergency work, provided, that grantee shall give grantor prior notice of such emergency work prior to commencement. 
4.  There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any of the work herein provided for, and the grantee shall maintain such barriers, signs and warning signals during any such work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property. 
5.  If at any time during the period of this franchise the grantor shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or location of any street, alley or other public rights-of-way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense and in each instance comply with the requirements of the grantor. 
6.  The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all rules, regulations and ordinance of the grantor. 
7.  The grantee may be required by the grantor to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way, by utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefore; provided that in the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, either grantor or grantee, upon written notification to the other, may invoke the mediation and arbitration provisions of Sections 5.16.390 and 5.16.400 to resolve the dispute concerning joint use. 
8.  The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings, the expense of such temporary removal to be paid in advance by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes. 
9.  The grantee shall have the authority, except when in conflict with existing grantor ordinances, to trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee, except that at the option of the grantor, such trimming may be done by it, or under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee. 
E.  In all newly constructed subdivisions or other property development, grantee shall install in the public right-of-way and on individual lots for home service such facilities as are necessary to serve the new homes or other development, concurrently with the installation of underground utility services. The developer or property owner shall give grantee reasonable written notice of not less than thirty days prior to such construction or development, and forty-eight hours notice, weekends and holidays excluded, of the date on which open trenching will be available for grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at grantee's expense. Grantee shall not be responsible for any cost of the trenches, whether the trenching is performed by the developer or by a utility. The term "underground" shall include a partial underground system; provided, that upon obtaining the written approval of the city's manager, amplifiers in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be placed in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground. 
F.  The builder of each new home within the city constructed after the effective date of the ordinance that enacted this section shall prewire each new home with at least two outlets of cable service with materials supplied by the grantee. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.270 - Multiple franchises. 
A.  If more than one franchise is awarded, the city reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables per residence, or to require that the drop cable(s) be utilized only by the cable operator selected by the resident to provide service. 
B.  City may, in its sole discretion, grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchisee applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant's risk, with no recourse against the city if the pending franchise application is not granted. The city may, in its sole discretion, require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant's cost. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.280 - Technical standards. 
The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and FCC technical standards. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and guidelines. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.290 - Indemnification. 
A.  Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement. 
B.  Grantor shall indemnify, defend and hold grantee, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, in accordance with the terms provided in the franchise agreement. 
C.  As a condition of any franchise agreement granted under this chapter, grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless city, its officers, agents and employees, against any and all actions, claims, demands, damages, costs and expenses, including attorney's fees, and other defense costs and liabilities of any nature, that may be asserted by any person or entity (except grantee, its officers, employees, principals and agents), arising out of the application or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter relating to the responsibility for the cost of undergrounding a grantee's facilities under Section 5.16.260(C) and (E). 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.300 - Insurance. 
A.  Grantee shall maintain in effect throughout the term of a franchise agreement policies of liability, worker's compensation, and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance companies, as provided below. 
1.  General Liability. Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect a policy of commercial general liability insurance with limits no less than that specified in the franchise agreement for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage. If a general aggregate limit is used, either the general aggregate limit shall apply separately to this agreement, or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the required occurrence limit. 
2.  Worker's Compensation and Employer's Liability. Grantee shall fully comply with the law of California concerning worker's compensation. Said compliance shall include, but not be limited to, maintaining in full force and effect one or more policies of insurance insuring against any liability grantee may have for worker's compensation. Grantee shall also maintain in full force and effect a policy of employer's liability insurance with limits no less than that specified in the franchise agreement. 
3.  Automobile. Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect a policy of commercial automobile liability insurance with limits no less than that specified in the franchise agreement. 
4.  Property. Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect a policy of property insurance providing fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by the insurance. 
B.  The general liability and automobile policies are to contain, or be endorsed to contain, the following provisions: 
1.  The city, its officers, employees and volunteers shall be added as insureds with respect to liability arising out of automobiles owned, leased, hired or borrowed by or on behalf of grantee, and with respect to liability arising out of work or operations performed by or on behalf of the grantee including materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection with such work or operations. 
2.  For any claims related to work or operations performed by or on behalf of grantee, the grantee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the city, its officers, employees, and volunteers. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city, its officers, employees, or volunteers shall be excess of the grantee's insurance and shall not contribute with it. 
3.  Coverage shall not be cancelled by the insurer except after thirty days prior written notice has been given to the city. 
C.  The insurance company or companies providing grantee the coverages required by this chapter shall be admitted in the state of California and have a current A.M. Best's rating acceptable to city. 
D.  Any deductibles or self-insured retentions in the amount of ten thousand dollars or more must be declared to and approved by the city. At the option of city, either: the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the city, its officers, employees and volunteers; or the grantee shall procure a bond guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration and defense expenses. 
E.  The insurance shall be maintained from the time the work first commences until completion of the work and operations under the franchise agreement, and shall provide coverage on an occurrence basis. 
F.  Grantee shall include all subcontractors as insureds under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be subject to all of the requirements stated herein. 
G.  Within sixty days of the grant of a franchise, the grantee shall furnish city with fully completed and properly executed certificates of insurance for each type of coverage required. Certificates shall be on forms provided by the city. Grantee shall replace certificates of insurance for policies expiring prior to termination of the franchise agreement. 
H.  Within sixty days of the grant of a franchise, grantee shall furnish city with endorsements effecting coverage required by this chapter. The endorsements are to be signed by a person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The endorsements shall be on forms provided by the city or on insurance company issued forms which substantially comply with the city forms. 
I.  If grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty-eight hours notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. In order to account for increases in consumer prices but no more frequently than once during any five year period, grantor shall have the right to order grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance provided in the franchise agreement. Increases in insurance coverage shall be based upon current prudent business practices of like enterprises involving the same or similar risks. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.310 - Records and reports. 
Within ninety days alter the end of each calendar year, grantee shall file with the grantor, on request: 
A.  An annual ownership report listing the names and addresses of grantee's principal management personnel and of those parties having a ten percent or greater equity interest in grantee. 
B.  An annual gross revenues report for the previous fiscal year, prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis, certified by an officer of grantee. 
C.  Copies of all public filings made with the Federal Communications Commission with respect to the system. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.320 - Inspection. 
A.  After reasonable advance notice (seventy-two hours), grantor shall have the right to inspect the nonconfidential records of grantee relating to service within the franchise area. 
B.  Grantee shall maintain a record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, and such records shall be available for inspection by grantor, subject to the subscribers' right of privacy. 
C.  Grantee shall maintain a full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps showing the locations of the cable system cables and equipment installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers' homes. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.330 - Opinion survey. 
Upon request of the grantor, but not more than once in any three year period, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in grantee's invoice for cable services. The results of such survey shall be provided to the grantor on a timely basis. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.340 - Annual review. 
A.  Each year throughout the term of the franchise, if requested by the grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to this chapter, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee's response to complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within thirty days after the conclusion of a system performance review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the cable system's franchise compliance and quality of service. 
B.  If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or the grantee's franchise, and subject to the limitations of Section 624(e) of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. § 544(e)), grantor may direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the areas of noncompliance within the period specified therefor or to commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter, shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter and the franchise agreement considered appropriate by grantor. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.350 - Special evaluation sessions. 
The grantor may hold special evaluation sessions at any time during the term of a franchise, provided such sessions are held no more often than once every three years. The grantee shall be notified of the place, time and date thereof and the topics to be discussed. Such sessions may be open to the public and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least thirty days before each session. The sessions may include an evaluation of any items considered relevant to the cable system, the subscribers and the city. Either the grantor or the grantee may propose items for discussion or evaluation. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.360 - Remedies for violations. 
If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following notice from the grantor and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.16.380 of this chapter, and subject to the appeal rights under Sections 5.16.390 and 5.16.400, grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion: 
A.  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established herein if such violation is not cured within thirty days after written notice to the grantee of grantor's intention to cure and draw upon the security fund; 
B.  Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violation(s) if such violation is not cured, or if grantee has not commenced a cure, on a schedule acceptable to grantor, within thirty days after written notice to the grantee of grantor's intention to assess liquidated damages. Such assessment may be withdrawn from the security fund, and shall not constitute a waiver by grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney's fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such breach of the franchise. 
C.  Revoke the franchise, subject to Section 5.16.370. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.370 - Grantor's power to revoke. 
Grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and a material breach under the franchise grant: 
A.  If grantee shall default in the performance of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and shall continue such default after receipt of due notice and reasonable opportunity to cure the default; 
B.  If grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required in the franchise agreement; 
C.  If grantee shall violate any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee's franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by grantee by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith; 
D.  If grantee practices any fraud or deceit upon grantor; 
E.  If grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankruptcy. 
The termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any other remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.380 - Procedure for remedying franchise violations. 
Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in Section 5.16.360, 5.16.370, or otherwise, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  Grantor shall first notify grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall be not less than sixty days. If grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed, or fails to diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the grantor shall then give written notice of not less than twenty days of a public hearing to be held before the city council. Said notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred. 
B.  At the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider all other relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
C.  If the council finds that the grantee has corrected the violation, or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or that no material violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. In determining whether a violation is material, the council shall take into consideration the reliability of the evidence of the violation; the nature of the violation; the damage (if any) caused to the grantor and/or the public; whether the violation was chronic; and any justifying or mitigating circumstances and such other matters as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.390 - Appeal of finding of violation—Mediation and arbitration. 
A.  All remedies of grantor under this chapter or the franchise agreement are subject to grantee's right to invoke the mediation and arbitration provisions under this section and Section 5.16.400 and no remedy shall be implemented until the mediation and arbitration process, including any judicial appeals thereof has been concluded, or until the time for invoking such rights provided in this section, or other applicable law has expired. 
B.  Within ten days of written notification of a finding of violation by grantor, grantee may notify grantor in writing of its intention to invoke mediation procedures. Within fifteen days of such notification, grantor and grantee shall select a mediator to assist in the resolution of the dispute. If the dispute is not resolved through the mediation process within sixty days, grantee may invoke the arbitration procedures under Section 5.16.400 by providing grantor written notice within ten days after the mediation process is terminated. Arbitration shall not be available until mediation has been completed. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.400 - Procedures for arbitration. 
Any arbitration held pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted as follows: 
A.  Grantee and the grantor (or such substitute party to the arbitration) each shall, within fifteen days of the decision to proceed to arbitration, appoint one arbitrator experienced in the cable television business, which arbitrators shall mutually select a third arbitrator of similar qualifications. 
B.  Within thirty days after appointment of all arbitrators and upon fifteen days written notice to the parties to the arbitration, the arbitrators shall commence a hearing on the dispute. 
C.  The hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the request of either grantor or grantee. 
D.  At the close of the hearings and within thirty days, the arbitrators shall prepare written findings and serve such decision upon grantor and grantee. 
E.  Except as provided herein, the arbitration, including petitions for judicial review of the arbitrator's decision, shall be governed by Title 9 (commencing with Section 1280) of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
F.  Costs of arbitration, excluding judicial review, shall be shared equally by each party. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.410 - Force majeure—Grantee's inability to perform. 
If grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise agreement is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by Section 5.16.180(B) pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, fires, and other unforeseen circumstances, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable communications system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.420 - Abandonment or removal. 
A.  If the use of any property of grantee within the public rights-of-way is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve months, grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use. Grantor shall notify grantee in writing at least ninety days before initiating any abandonment process with respect to grantee's property. 
B.  Grantor, upon such terms as grantor may impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore any affected street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
C.  Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the franchise property abandoned. 
D.  At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above ground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty days. 
E.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter or a franchise agreement, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee. Moreover, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter or a franchise agreement, to the extent that any provider of utility services or any services similar to those provided by the grantee is not required to remove its property or otherwise incur expenses under the circumstances provided for in this section, then grantee shall be relieved of such obligation. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.430 - Restoration by grantor—Reimbursement of costs. 
If grantee fails to complete any work required herein or by any other law or ordinance, and if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of written notice thereof from grantor or, if more than thirty days are reasonably required therefor, if grantee does not commence such work within such thirty day period and diligently complete the work thereafter (except in cases of emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare), grantor may cause such work to be done and grantee shall reimburse grantor the costs thereof within thirty days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or grantor may recover such costs through the security fund provided by grantee. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.440 - Extended operation and continuity of services. 
Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for an extended period of time. Grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transition periods following franchise expiration or termination. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.450 - Receivership and foreclosure. 
A.  A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of grantor, to the extent consistent with applicable law, including the federal bankruptcy code, cease and terminate one hundred twenty days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty days, or unless: (1) such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivership or trustees within said one hundred twenty days shall have remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to the grantor; and (2) such receivers of trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted. 
B.  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise property, or any material part thereof, grantor may serve notice of termination upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty days after service of such notice, unless: (1) grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner that this chapter provides; and (2) such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.460 - Reservation of grantor rights. 
In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under any franchise. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.470 - Waiver. 
The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines (1) that it is in the public interest to do so, and (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
5.16.480 - Separability. 
If any provision of this chapter is held by any court or by any federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision thereof which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee, provided that grantor shall give grantee thirty days written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision of such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision. 
(Ord. 744 § 2 (part), 1996).  
Chapter 5.17 - STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES 
Sections: 
 
5.17.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter applies to all cable service or video service providers who are applying for, or have been awarded, a franchise under California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq., the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, ("DIVCA"), to serve any area within the city of Rocklin, including cable service or video service providers who are otherwise subject to DIVCA. By this chapter the city of Rocklin intends to exercise to the fullest extent possible all rights and privileges afforded to it by DIVCA and any other applicable law. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.020 - Definitions and interpretation of language. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in California Public Utilities Code, Section 5800 et seq., as amended from time to time. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and "including" and "include" are not limiting. The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
A.  "Access," "PEG access," "PEG use," or "PEG" means the availability of a cable or video system for public, educational, or governmental use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city of Rocklin and its exclusive city use channels or any existing agreement between the city and any incumbent cable operator, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a state franchise holder's editorial control. 
B.  "City" means the city of Rocklin, California. 
C.  "City council" means the city council of the city of Rocklin. 
D.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Rocklin or his or her designee. 
E.  "Director" means the director of public works of the city of Rocklin or his or her designee. 
F.  "State franchise holder," "holder of a state franchise," "holder of the state franchise," or "holder" means any person or group of persons who has been issued a franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5830, within any portion of the city of Rocklin. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.030. - State franchise fee. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a state franchise fee in the amount of five percent of gross revenues as defined by Public Utilities Code subsection (d) of Section 5860. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the city's ability to impose utility user taxes and other generally applicable taxes, fees, and charges that are applied in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008). 
(Ord. No. 1067, § 3A, 5-9-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1067, § 3A, adopted May 9, 2017, changed the title of § 5.17.030 from "State franchise holder fee" to read as herein set out.  
5.17.040. - PEG fees. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a public education and government ("PEG") fee in the amount of one percent of gross revenues, as set forth in Public Utilities Code subsection (n) of Section 5870 at such time as the city council determines, by resolution, to begin imposing and collecting this PEG fee. City shall provide a minimum of sixty days' written notice to the state franchise holders then operating within the city of the imposition of the PEG fee and the effective date that the PEG fee will commence. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008). 
(Ord. No. 1067, § 3B, 5-9-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1067, § 3B, adopted May 9, 2017, changed the title of § 5.17.040 from "State franchise holder PEG fee" to read as herein set out.  
5.17.050 - PEG access channels. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall designate a sufficient amount of capacity on its network to allow the provision of the same number of pubic, educational, and government (PEG) channel as were activated and provided as of January 1, 2007 within the city by the then incumbent cable operator. Nothing in this section prevents the city from requesting up to a total of three PEG channels pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 5870. Upon the receipt of such a request, the state franchise holder shall provide the channel(s) no later than three months from the date of the request, unless the state franchise holder can demonstrate that the provision of one or more of the channels is technically infeasible, as set forth in Section 5870. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008). 
(Ord. No. 1067, § 3C, 5-9-2017)  
5.17.060 - Interconnection for PEG programming. 
Each holder of a state franchise, and each incumbent cable operator operating under a city franchise issued pursuant to this code, shall negotiate with each other in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming including, but not limited to, any exclusive city use channel. Interconnection may be accomplished by any means authorized under California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(h). Each holder of a state franchise and any incumbent cable operator shall provide interconnection of PEG channels including any exclusive city use channel on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a holder of a state franchise and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the holder of the state franchise to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator's network at a technically feasible point on the state franchise holder's network as identified by the holder or as otherwise permitted by applicable law. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the holder of a state franchise shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the state franchise holder and the incumbent cable operator. To the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(h), the city manager or the city manager's designee may waive, modify, or defer this requirement of interconnection in his or her sole discretion. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.070 - Payment of fees. 
The state franchise holder shall pay quarterly all fees required pursuant to this chapter in a manner consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5860 and Chapter 5.16. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city by check or other means agreeable to the city manager, a separate payment for the state franchise fee and the PEG fee not later than forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report to the city manager summarizing the basis for the calculation of the payment. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.080 - Examination of state franchisee's business records. 
The city may examine the business records of the holder of a state franchise in a manner not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860(i) and Chapter 5.16. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.090 - Late payments. 
In the event a state franchise holder fails to make a state franchise fee payment required by this chapter on or before the due dates specified in this chapter, the city shall impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent unless a different rate is set by applicable law or resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.100 - Lease of city property or network. 
To the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5840(q)(2)(B), in the event a state franchise holder desires to lease access to city property or to a network owned or controlled by the city, the city may set terms and charge a fee for access to the property or city network separate and apart from any franchise fee or other fee charged to the state franchise holders pursuant to this chapter or DIVCA. The city council may set any such fee by resolution. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.110 - Customer service and consumer protection standards. 
Each state franchise holder shall comply with all applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, including, to the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900, all existing and subsequently enacted customer service and consumer protection standards established by local, state or federal law and regulation, including those set forth in or established in accordance with Chapter 5.16. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.120 - Penalties for violations of standards. 
A.  The city shall monitor compliance with and enforce the provisions of this chapter and DIVCA. 
B.  For any material breach, as defined in California Public Utilities Code Section 5900(j), by a state franchise holder of applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, the city manager, or the city manager's designee, in his or her sole discretion may impose the following fines or penalties: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
2.  For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation. 
3.  For a third or further material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
C.  Any penalties imposed by the city shall be imposed in a manner not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900. 
D.  To the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900, the city acting through its city manager or his or her designee in its sole discretion may waive, modify, or defer the imposition of a penalty. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.130 - Encroachment permits. 
A.  Prior to commencing any work upon, above or below any street, highway, sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public right-of-way of any kind whatsoever within the city, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain an encroachment permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 12.04 and shall comply with all other applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to, all applicable requirements of Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. (the California Environmental Quality Act). 
B.  The director shall either approve or deny an application from a state franchise holder for an encroachment permit within thirty days of receiving a completed application. 
C.  An application for an encroachment permit is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) of the Public Resources Code. 
D.  Any city denial of an application for an encroachment permit shall be in writing and shall contain a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. 
E.  A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit or whose permit has been revoked may appeal the denial or revocation to the city council in accordance with Chapter 12.04, whose procedures and terms shall govern the appeal. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.140 - Identification required. 
Employees, agents, contractors, and subcontractors of any state franchise holder shall at all times be properly identified as employees or agents of the state franchise holder while performing any work or other activity within the city on behalf of the state franchise holder. Identification shall include the name of the employee or agent. The name and telephone number of the state franchise holder shall appear on all trucks and vehicles used by such personnel. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.150 - Emergency alert systems. 
A.  Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder's network. 
B.  To the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5880, each state franchise holder shall incorporate into its network the capability to permit the city in times of emergency to override the audio portion of all channels simultaneously. In addition, if feasible, each state franchise holder may be required to designate a channel, which may be a PEG channel, to be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video signals. The state franchise holder shall cooperate with the city in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.160 - Notices. 
A.  Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall file with the city manager a copy of all applications that the state franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the Public Utilities Commission. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all notices or other documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city under this chapter or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to the city manager. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.170 - Rights reserved. 
The rights reserved to the city of Rocklin under this chapter are in addition to all other applicable rights of the city, whether granted or reserved by other provisions of the Rocklin Municipal Code or as otherwise authorized by federal or state law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right by the city of Rocklin shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city of Rocklin. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
5.17.180 - Compliance with law. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a state franchise holder from compliance with all applicable ordinances, rules, or regulations of the city of Rocklin now in effect or which may be adopted that are not inconsistent with this chapter or California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq., including but not limited to, the provisions of Chapter 12.04 of this code. Any reference in this chapter to these or other chapters does not exclude the applicability of any other provision of federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. 933 § 1 (part), 2008).  
Chapter 5.20 - MASSAGE SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1056, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2016, repealed Ch. 5.20 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.20, §§ 5.20.010—5.20.220 pertained to massage establishments and massage technicians, and derived from Ord. No. 954, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 2009. Prior ordinance history: Ords. 453, 494 and 699. 
 
5.20.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city of Rocklin to comply with California law while also protecting the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city through the enactment of standards of professional competence and operational requirements which promote the therapeutic use of massage therapy. 
This chapter is not intended to be exclusive and compliance with city regulations will not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal services businesses including, without limitation, all zoning applications; business license regulations; building, fire, electrical, and plumbing codes; and health and safety laws and regulations applicable to professional or personal services businesses. 
The California State Legislature implemented uniform statewide regulations pertaining to massage therapy and massage businesses (enacted by AB 1147 in 2014) now codified in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing at Section 4600 et seq.), hereinafter referred to as the "Massage Therapy Act", which created a statewide system for issuing massage worker permits, thereby preempting local permitting systems and requirements. The statewide permitting system is administered by the California Massage Therapy Council ("CAMTC"). 
The Massage Therapy Act allows local jurisdictions to enforce certain business licensing and to establish reasonable health and safety requirements for massage businesses, not in conflict with the Massage Therapy Act. To enable the city to carry out the local regulation and review of massage businesses found in the Massage Therapy Act, the city must maintain massage business regulations in the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
There is a continued need for local regulations because there is significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly trained or educated massage service providers and the city has a legitimate interest in providing reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss to such massage clients. Government Code Section 51034 specifically recognizes the powers of cities to regulate massage businesses. In addition, the city wishes to promote the ethical practice of massage therapy and to prevent and discourage the misuse of massage therapy as a front for prostitution activities in violation of the law, including but not limited to subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code. 
The adoption of qualification standards for massage service providers based upon the CAMTC certification program established under the Massage Therapy Act and the enhancement of the city's reasonable regulations on the operation of massage businesses and the conduct of massage service providers will serve to reduce the risk of potentially injurious and illegal activity. 
This chapter establishes a local regulatory system for massage businesses to operate within the city. This chapter is also intended to allow a transitional period for existing massage businesses to continue operating while their employees obtain state certification by March 1, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
A.  "Applicant" means any person that seeks a massage business permit as required by this chapter. 
B.  "Approved school of massage" means any school or institution of learning that is recognized as an approved school pursuant to Business and Professions Code Division 2, Chapter 10.5, as it may be amended. 
C.  "California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC)" means the California Massage Therapy Council created pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4602(a). 
D.  "Certificate" means the certificate, or conditional certificate, issued by the CAMTC to massage therapists, pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4601(h) and to massage practitioners pursuant to subdivision 4601(g), or 4604.1(a), 4604.2(c) that entitles the holder to practice massage. When used in this chapter, "certification" means a person who has an active and valid CAMTC certificate. 
E.  "Certified massage practitioner" means a person who is currently certified as a massage practitioner by the CAMTC, and who gives, performs or administers massage for compensation. 
F.  "Certified massage therapist" means a person who is currently certified as a massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who gives, performs or administers massage for compensation. 
G.  "Chief of police" means the chief of police or designee. 
H.  "City" means the city of Rocklin. 
I.  "City manager" means the city manager or designee. 
J.  "Compensation" means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, or gift of money or anything of value. 
K.  "Convicted" means having entered a plea, or receiving a verdict, of guilty. "Convicted" also includes having entered a plea of nolo contendere. 
L.  "Independent contractor" means a person who contracts to do work for another person according to his or her own processes and methods; the contractor is not subject to another's control except for what is specified in a mutually binding agreement for a specific job. 
M.  "Manager" means a person who supervises, inspects, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the conduct of the activities within a massage business. 
N.  "Massage" or "massage therapy" means the systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment involving the external manipulation or pressure of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. Massage therapy includes any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external surfaces of the body with hands, apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment, or other similar preparations. Massage therapy scope of practice does not include diagnosis, prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, nor any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, acupuncture, or podiatry is required by law. 
O.  "Massage establishment" means a fixed place of business; premises, facility or membership club where any person, gives performs or administers massage for compensation. 
P.  "Massage professional" means any person certified by the CAMTC to give, perform or administer to another person a massage for compensation. Massage professionals shall include certified massage practitioners and certified massage therapists. 
Q.  "Out-call massage services" means services in which a massage professional gives, performs or administers to another person a massage for compensation at a location other than a massage establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter. 
R.  "Owner" means any and all owners of a massage business including any of the following persons: 
1.  A sole provider as defined in subsection T. of this section; 
2.  Any general partner of a general or limited partnership that owns a massage business; 
3.  Any person who has an ownership interest in a corporation that owns a massage business; 
4.  Any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns a massage business; 
5.  All owners of any other type of business association that owns a massage business. 
S.  "Permit" means the massage business permit. 
T.  "Person" means any natural person, individual, group, firm, association, partnership, corporation, company, sole proprietorship, or any other legal entity. 
U.  "Reflexology" means massage of the hands or feet based on the belief that pressure applied to specific points on these extremities benefits other parts of the body 
V.  "Sole provider" means a massage business where the owner owns one hundred percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active certificate from CAMTC, and has no other employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.030 - Requirements for massage businesses. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to own, conduct, operate or maintain a massage business within the city without having a valid massage business permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Massage business permits shall also be required of any permanent or semi-permanent seated massage or reflexology installation. A massage business permit shall in no way be construed to allow any person to perform massage services within the city without an active and valid certificate from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to own, conduct, operate or maintain a massage business within the city unless all persons providing massage services at a massage establishment each hold an active and valid certificate from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.040 - Requirements for out-call massage services. 
It is unlawful for any person to own, conduct, operate or maintain out-call massage services within the city unless all persons providing massage services for the out-call massage business hold an active and valid certificate from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist.  
5.20.050 - Advertisements. 
It is unlawful for any person to advertise massage services within the city without complying with the requirements provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.060 - Massage business permit—Application. 
A.  An application for a massage business permit shall be made by the owner of the business. Such application shall designate the person or persons who will be the manager, if applicable, of the premises. 
B.  All applications for permits shall be filed with the chief of police on such forms as he or she may prescribe, and shall contain such information as reasonably deemed necessary for the proper processing of the application. The application for a permit does not authorize the operation of a massage business unless and until such permit has been granted. 
C.  Any application for a massage business permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual; the individual shall state his/her full legal name. 
b.  A partnership; the partnership shall state its complete name, address, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any. In addition, the application must designate the person who will provide all information required by this chapter. 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered agent for service of process. In addition, the application must designate the person who will provide all information required by this chapter. 
2.  The true, full and precise name under which the massage business is to be conducted, as well as any and all names under which the massage business is to be advertised. 
3.  The address where the massage business is to be located and all telephone numbers for the massage business. 
4.  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon or in which the proposed massage business is to be conducted and, if applicable, the lessor. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease containing specific language from the owner of the property acknowledging that a massage business will be located on his or her property. 
5.  The current residential address and telephone number of the owner, as well as the manager (if the manager is a different person) who will be principally in charge of the operation of the massage business, and the previous residential addresses and business addresses within the previous five years. 
6.  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes, and hair color. 
7.  Written proof, to the satisfaction of the city that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age. This may be in the form of a current U.S. government-issued I.D. with photograph (such as a driver's license, U.S. Passport, or military I.D. card). 
8.  The applicant's business, occupation or employment history for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
9.  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, previously operating in this city or another city, county or state under a license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended; and the reasons and dates for any such revocation or suspension. 
10.  All criminal convictions, except minor traffic infractions. 
11.  A complete current list of the names of all proposed massage professionals and other employees or independent contractors who are or will be employed or retained in the massage business, if known. If not known at the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall provide the required information no later than ten calendar days prior to opening for business. 
12.  A valid, government issued identification card and the full names and birthdays of each CAMTC massage professional that will be employed or retained to perform massage therapy either as employees, independent contractors, or in a rent space capacity for verification. If unable to verify, then the CAMTC photo identification cards for each proposed massage professional that will be employed or retained to perform massage therapy either as employees, independent contractors, or in a rent space capacity must be presented for verification. 
13.  A complete set of fingerprints (live scan) taken by the police department. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any fingerprinting fees. 
14.  Authorization for the city, its agents, and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application. 
15.  Such other identification and information as the chief of police may reasonably require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application. 
16.  The certificate of occupancy provided by the building division. 
17.  A current and valid policy of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of California evidencing that the applicant is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of one million dollars for injury or death to any one person arising out of the operation of any massage business and the administration of a massage. 
18.  If the owner will provide massage services, the owner's original CAMTC certificate and original CAMTC photo identification card, for copying by the police department. 
19.  Proof of current city of Rocklin business license for the massage business. 
20.  A statement in writing and dated by the person providing the information, that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury, that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
D.  In the event that the chief of police requires further information, or deems the application incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the required information within twenty calendar days of submitting the application. Additional information shall be provided within fifteen calendar days of the date of the request, after which time the application shall be deemed incomplete. Incomplete applications shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.070 - Term of massage business permits. 
A permit for a massage business shall be issued for a term of one year. It may be renewed by the chief of police for additional one-year periods upon application by the permittee unless the permit is suspended or revoked in accordance with Section 5.20.150. An application for renewal shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
During the term of a permit, if the permittee has any change in the information submitted on the original or any renewal application, the permittee shall notify the chief of police in writing of any such change within fourteen calendar days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.080 - Massage business permit fee. 
Every application for a massage business permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council. The application and fee required pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required by federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.090 - Massage businesses permit issuance—Investigation—Grounds for denial. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed massage business permit application, the chief of police shall conduct an investigation, including an inspection of the massage establishment, if applicable, to ascertain whether a permit should be issued as requested. The chief of police shall, within forty-five calendar days of receipt of the completed application, approve, condition, or deny the permit. 
B.  The chief of police may deny a permit provided for in this chapter if he or she finds any of the following: 
1.  The applicant, any owner, or any person directly engaged, employed, or retained in the massage business, has: 
a.  Been convicted of a violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or conduct in violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, subsections (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647, Penal Code Sections 653.22 or 653.23, or convicted of an attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership of a massage business or the practice of massage. 
b.  Been convicted of a violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058. 
c.  Been convicted of any offense in any other state or U.S. territory, which is the equivalent of any of the above mentioned offenses. 
d.  Been subjected to a permanent injunction against conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California. 
e.  Committed an act in another jurisdiction which, if committed in this state, would have been a violation of law and which, if done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. 
f.  Committed any act, which, if done by a permittee, would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit. 
g.  Has had a massage business permit or massage therapist/practitioner permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause by the city, any state, local agency or other licensing authority, or has had to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked. 
2.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application or in any documentation required to be filed in conjunction with said application. The application does not contain all the information required by Section 5.20.060 and applicant fails to complete the application after having been notified of any additional information or documents required. 
3.  The applicant is not at least eighteen years of age. 
4.  The massage establishment, as proposed, does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire, building, and safety requirements and standards imposed by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city, including this chapter. 
5.  The applicant failed to obtain all the necessary approvals from the necessary city departments or other governmental agencies, including but not limited to, the city's economic development department. 
6.  The applicant has refused to or cannot meet the requirements established by this code. 
7.  The required fees(s) have not been paid and/or any other requirements of this chapter have not been satisfied within the time specified. 
8.  The massage establishment is proposed in the same location in which a massage establishment has previously been closed due to criminal activity within five years prior to the date of the application. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection B., the applicant shall not be denied a permit solely on the basis that he or she has been convicted of a felony if he or she has obtained a certificate of rehabilitation under Section 4852.01 of the California Penal Code, or on the basis that he or she has been convicted of a misdemeanor not specified in this chapter. 
D.  If the chief of police, upon completion of the investigation, determines the applicant does not fulfill the requirements set forth in this chapter, the chief of police shall deny the application by dated written notice to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right of appeal as set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
E.  Upon issuance of any permit, the chief of police may limit the permit by any condition reasonably necessary to preserve the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such permit limitations shall be in writing to the applicant, with a signature from the applicant affirming they understand and will comply with the limitations as set by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.20.100 - Appeal from chief of police determination—Permit conditions and denials. 
The chief of police shall cause a written notice of his or her decision to issue, condition or deny a permit to be mailed to the applicant by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Applicants aggrieved by the police chief's decision to condition or deny a permit may appeal such decision by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. If an appeal is not timely filed pursuant to Chapter 5.01, the police chief's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.20.110 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1087, § 3, adopted Jan. 23, 2018, repealed former § 5.20.110 which pertained to hearing—city manager, and derived from Ord. No. 1056, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2016.  
5.20.120 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1087, § 3, adopted Jan. 23, 2018, repealed former § 5.20.120 which pertained to city manager action, and derived from Ord. No. 1056, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2016.  
5.20.130 - Suspension and revocation—Notice. 
Any permit issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police in writing upon determining that any of the grounds specified in Section 5.20.140 exist. No permit shall be revoked or suspended by virtue of this section until a hearing has been held by the chief of police. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the person to whom the permit was granted at least five calendar days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or suspending such permit. Service of notice may be either by personal delivery to the person to be notified, or by depositing it in the U.S. mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her address as it appears in his or her application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.140 - Grounds for suspension and revocation of an active permit. 
Any permit issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended or revoked if any permittee, his or her agent, employee, or independent contractor: 
A.  Has demonstrated a pattern of violating or failing to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
B.  Does any act which violates any of the grounds for denial of the permit. 
C.  Has demonstrated a pattern of violating any other provision of this chapter or any federal, state or local law or regulation relating to his or her permitted activity. 
D.  Has demonstrated a pattern of engaging in or permitting misconduct substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the permittee. 
E.  Conducts the massage business in a manner contrary to the peace, health, or safety of the public. 
F.  Has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application or in any documentation required to be filed in conjunction with said application. 
G.  Has been convicted of any of the crimes identified in Sections 5.20.090.B.1.a., B.1.b. or B.1.c. 
H.  Employs, retains or allows any person to provide massage services without an active and valid certificate from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
I.  Engages in unprofessional conduct, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Engaging in sexually suggestive advertising related to massage services. Engaging in any form of sexual activity on the premises of a massage establishment where massage is provided for compensation. 
2.  Engaging in sexual activity while providing massage services for compensation. 
3.  Practicing massage on a suspended or revoked permit. 
4.  Providing massage of the genitals or anal region. 
5.  Providing massage of the female breasts without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral from a licensed California health provider. 
6.  Dressing while engaged in the practice of massage for compensation or while visible to clients in a massage establishment, in any of the following: 
a.  Attire that is transparent, see-through, or substantially exposes the massage professional's undergarments. 
b.  Swim attire, if not providing a water based massage modality approved by the CAMTC. 
c.  A manner that exposes the massage professional's breasts, buttocks, or genitals. 
7.  A manner that constitutes a violation of Section 314 of the California Penal Code. 
a.  A manner that is otherwise deemed by the CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the profession in California. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.150 - Appeal from chief of police determination—Permit renewals, suspensions and revocations. 
Any permittee aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police in refusing to renew, suspending or revoking a permit may appeal by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. During the pendency of the appeal, the permit shall remain in effect. If such appeal is not timely filed, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.20.160 - New permit application after denial, revocation or suspension. 
If a massage business permit is suspended or revoked pursuant to this chapter, no permit shall be granted to the former permittee to conduct or carry on a massage business within five years after such suspension or revocation. Furthermore, when an application for a permit is denied for cause, no new application for a permit from the same person shall be accepted within five years after denial unless the applicant can show a material change in his or her situation that would justify the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.170 - Additional compliance period to obtain CAMTC certification. 
Each massage business holding an active and valid city-issued massage therapy permit under former provisions of Chapter 5.20 of the Rocklin Municipal Code which employs or retains any person who does not have an active and valid CAMTC certificate upon the effective date of this ordinance, will have until March 1, 2017 to comply with the requirements of Sections 5.20.030, 5.20.040 and 5.20.180 of this chapter. However, prior to December 1, 2016, proof that all massage professionals employed or retained by the massage business are enrolled in an approved school of massage will be required upon expiration of the massage business' current city-issued permit. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.180 - Minors. 
It is unlawful for any person to employ or retain anyone under the age of eighteen years as a massage professional. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen to perform services as a massage professional. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.190 - Health requirements. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of a massage professional to refrain from providing massage services, if the massage professional has reason to believe that he or she has any communicable or contagious disease, any open wound of any nature, or any other condition which may be hazardous to the health of a client. Any massage professional having reason to believe that he or she may have any such disease or condition shall promptly notify his or her employer, or, if the massage professional is an independent contractor, to notify the person with whom he or she has been retained, and it shall thereafter be unlawful for the employer or owner to utilize the services of the massage professional unless the disease or condition is no longer present. 
B.  The manager shall daily observe and question massage professionals as to their health and any communicable or contagious disease. Whenever the manager has reason to suspect that a massage professional has a communicable or contagious disease, he or she shall require the suspected individual to have an examination by a licensed physician. If the massage professional is found to have a disease or condition which may be hazardous to the health of a client, his or her employment or services rendered under contract shall be discontinued until reinstatement as a massage professional is approved in writing by a licensed physician certifying that the massage professional is free from communicable or contagious diseases. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.200 - Operating requirements for massage businesses—General conditions. 
A.  It is unlawful and a public nuisance to own, conduct, control, or operate a massage establishment unless the owner or manager designated in the application for the massage establishment is present within such massage establishment at all times. 
B.  An owner and/or manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all massage professionals while they are on the massage establishment premises. Any act or omission of any massage professional, whether an employee or an independent contractor, constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed an act or omission of the owner or manager for the purposes of determining whether the massage business permit shall be revoked, suspended, conditioned, denied, or renewed. 
C.  No massage professional shall provide massage of the genitals or anal region of any client or the breasts of any female client without the written consent of the female client and a referral from a licensed California health care provider, nor shall any owner or manager of a massage business allow or permit such massage to the above specified areas. A massage shall not be given and no client shall be in the presence of a massage professional, independent contractor, owner, manager, or other employee of a massage business unless the client's genitals and the female client's breasts are fully covered by a non-transparent covering. 
D.  The hours of operation of the massage establishment must be posted in the front window, or on the door if there is no front window, and clearly visible from the outside. 
E.  The owner and/or manager shall ensure that the CAMTC certificate for each on-duty massage professional is conspicuously displayed, visible from the entrance and/or reception and waiting area of the massage establishment, and that each massage professional has at his or her immediate disposal the CAMTC photo identification card at all times when working in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be provided upon request of a member of the public, the CAMTC, a member of law enforcement, or a city official. 
F.  No owner and/or manager shall employ or retain any person as a massage professional who does not have an active and valid CAMTC certificate. Every owner or manager shall report to the chief of police any change of employees or independent contractors, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, on the form and in the manner required by the chief of police. The owner or manager shall provide the name of the employee or contractor and the date of hire or termination within fourteen calendar days of the date of hire or termination. 
G.  All owners, managers, massage professionals, other employees and independent contractors of the massage business shall be fully clothed at all times while furnishing massage services. No such individual shall dress while engaged in the practice of massage for compensation in any manner as outlined in Section 5.20.150. 
H.  No massage business shall operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage. 
I.  The massage establishment shall be open to inspection by the chief of police, the fire chief, the building official, or their authorized representatives during normal business hours of the massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.210 - Operating requirements for massage businesses—Facilities. 
All owners and managers shall comply with the following operating requirements for massage businesses as well as any other conditions specified by the chief of police: 
A.  Structure. Massage businesses shall be carried on in a permanent building. The owner shall obtain all required building permits per the California Building Code ("CBC"). 
B.  Signs. Any signs shall be in conformance with the current sign ordinances of the city. Each owner and/or manager shall post and maintain, adjacent to the main entrance and the front of the business, a readable informational sign identifying the premises as a massage establishment. 
C.  Services List. Each owner and/or manager shall post and maintain a list of services available and the cost of such services in the lobby of the massage establishment in a conspicuous public place. The services shall be described in English. No owner or manager shall permit, and no person employed or retained by the massage business shall offer to perform, any services or charge any fees other than those posted. 
D.  Lighting. The interior of the massage establishment shall maintain adequate illumination to make the conduct of employees, independent contractors, and clients within the premises readily discernible. The lighting in each massage room shall be at least one, forty-watt white light bulb and shall be continuously activated at all times while the client is in a massage room. No strobe, flashing lights or dimmer switches shall be used. No colored lights shall be used nor shall any coverings be used which change the color of the primary light source. 
E.  Ventilation. In each massage room, the owner and/or manager shall provide minimum ventilation in accordance with the applicable building and fire codes. 
F.  Toilet Facilities. A minimum of one toilet and one separate wash basin shall be provided for clients in each massage establishment. The wash basin shall provide soap and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within close proximity to the massage rooms. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service towel dispenser or hand dryer shall be provided at the restroom wash basin. Bar soaps shall not be used. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room. 
G.  Dressing Rooms. A room, which may be the room where massage is administered for each client, shall be available on the premises with individual lockers or a separate storage area for the clothing of the client. A separate dressing area and clothing locker or storage area is required where the massage is performed in a place other than where the client changes his or her clothing. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
H.  Window Coverings. Any windows in the lobby shall not be covered. The lobby must be clearly visible from the exterior of the massage establishment at all times. 
I.  Maintenance. Wet and dry heat rooms, shower rooms and bath and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, but at least once each day the premises are open. All facilities for the massage establishment must be in good repair and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized at least on a daily basis when the massage establishment is in operation. 
J.  Massage Tables. A massage table shall be provided in each massage room and all massages shall be performed on the massage table, with the exception of "Thai," "Shiatsu," and similar modalities of massage therapy, which may be performed on a padded mat on the floor. No more than one client may occupy a massage table at the same time. Beds and floor mattresses shall not be permitted on the premises. 
K.  Front Door. One front door that enters into the lobby and/or other waiting room shall be provided for client use. All clients and any persons other than employees or independent contractors shall be required to enter and exit through the front door of the massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.220 - Operating requirements for massage businesses—Operations. 
All owners and managers shall comply with the following operating requirements for massage businesses as well as any other conditions specified by the chief of police: 
A.  Sanitation. Each owner and/or manager shall provide and maintain on the premises adequate equipment and supplies for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in providing massages. Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition. Appliances, apparatus, and equipment shall be disinfected after each use. 
B.  Linen. Shared use of towels or linen shall not be permitted. Towels and linen shall be laundered or changed promptly after each use. Separate enclosed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen and shall be plainly marked "clean linen" and "soiled linen" and shall have doors or covers. 
C.  Living Quarters Prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to reside, dwell, occupy or live inside a massage establishment at any time. A kitchen, if any, shall be for the sole use of employees and independent contractors, and shall be installed in an "employees only" area. 
D.  Persons Consuming Alcohol or Drugs. No person shall enter, be, or remain in any part of a massage establishment while consuming or using an alcoholic beverage or drug unless it is a drug prescribed for that individual. The owner or manager shall not permit any person consuming or using an alcoholic beverage or non-prescribed drug to enter or remain on such premises. Furthermore, no person shall administer or receive a massage while consuming or using an alcoholic beverage or drug unless it is a drug prescribed for that individual. 
E.  Recordings. No building or part thereof where massage or massage services are being conducted shall be equipped with any electronic, mechanical or artificial device used, or capable of being used, for recording or videotaping or monitoring the activities, conversation or other sounds in the treatment room or room used by clients. 
F.  Warning Devices. The presence of any device which can be utilized as an early warning system, to alert the employees or independent contractors of a massage business to the presence of law enforcement officers or city authorities is prohibited in any massage establishment. Said devices may include, but are not limited to, light or music dimmers, electronic detection devices, external or internal video equipment and alarm systems other than those used for fire alarms. 
G.  Coverings. Each massage establishment shall provide to all clients clean, sanitary, and opaque coverings of a minimum size of thirty inches by sixty inches, capable of covering the clients' specified anatomical areas, including but not limited to the genital area, buttocks, and female breasts. No shared use of such covering shall be permitted, and re-use is specifically prohibited unless adequately cleaned prior to its re-use. 
H.  Records. Every owner and/or manager shall keep a record of the dates and hours of each treatment or service, the name and address of the client as confirmed by valid identification, the name of the massage professional administering such service and a description of the treatment or services rendered. These records shall be prepared prior to administering any massage or treatment and shall be retained for a period of two years after such treatment or service. These records shall be open to inspection upon demand only by officials charged with enforcement of this chapter or emergency personnel for emergency purposes and for no other purpose. The police department may periodically inspect the records to ensure compliance with this section. 
I.  Hours of Operation. No massage establishment shall be open for business except during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on any day. 
J.  Doors. All exterior doors (accept a rear entrance for staff only) and interior doors must remain unlocked during business hours, unless there is no massage business staff available to assure the security of clients and massage professionals who are behind closed doors. This subsection shall not apply to sole providers as defined in Section 5.10.020.V. of this chapter. 
K.  Dress Code for Clients and Visitors. Except for a client who is inside a massage therapy room for the purpose of receiving a massage, no clients or visitors shall be permitted in or on the massage establishment premises at any time who are not fully clothed in outer garments of nontransparent material, or who display or expose themselves in underclothing, sheer clothing, or similar intimate apparel. 
L.  Advertising. 
1.  Any advertising matter published or distributed shall include in legible print the massage business license number. 
2.  No massage business shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that: 
a.  Depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective clients that any service is available other than legitimate massage services; or 
b.  Depicts individuals in suggestive poses that would reasonably suggest to prospective clients that any service is available other than legitimate massage services; or 
c.  Employs language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to prospective clients that any service is available other than legitimate massage services. 
d.  Advertise on a website known to advertise or promote illegal activities. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.230 - Operating requirements for out-call massage services. 
A.  All equipment and apparatus shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be disinfected after each use. 
B.  Massage professional performing out-call massage services shall be fully clothed at all times while furnishing massage services. No such individual shall dress while engaged in the practice of massage for compensation in any manner as outlined in Section 5.20.150. 
C.  Each massage professional performing out-call massage services shall have in his or her possession, their CAMTC photo identification card while administering a massage. 
D.  Out-call massage services must be performed in accordance with all other conditions as set forth in this chapter, and shall not include any services prohibited from being offered at a massage establishment under this chapter. 
E.  No out-call massage services shall be conducted except during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on any day. 
F.  No massage professional performing out-call massage services shall provide massage of the genitals or anal region of any client. No massage professional performing outcall massage services shall provide massage to the breasts of any female client without the written consent of the female client and a referral from a licensed California health care provider. 
A massage shall not be given and no client shall be in the presence of a massage professional performing out-call massage services unless the client's genitals and the female client's breasts are fully covered by a non-transparent covering. 
G.  A list of services shall be available for review of the client or authorized representative of the chief of police upon request and shall be described in English. No massage professional shall offer to perform out-call massage services other than those listed. 
H.  No person shall administer or receive an out-call massage while consuming or using an alcoholic beverage or drug unless it is a drug prescribed for that individual. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.240 - Display of permit/certificate. 
A.  Every massage business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed so that it may be easily seen by any client or other person on the massage establishment premises. 
B.  Any person providing massage services or out-call massage services shall have an active and valid CAMTC certificate and CAMTC photo identification card readily available for inspection at all times while providing such services, and shall show the certificate and identification card to any member of the public, the CAMTC, a member of law enforcement, or a city official upon request. 
C.  Any person who provides out-call massage services, or who is a sole proprietor or independent contractor leasing space at a massage establishment, shall have their permit available for inspection at all times while providing such services, and shall show the permit to any authorized representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.250 - Permit—Non-transferable, change of address or contact information. 
Any massage business permit issued pursuant to this chapter is valid only at the address, if applicable, and for the person specified therein and cannot be sold, transferred or assigned to any other person. Change of the massage business address requires the owner or manager to notify the chief of police in writing ten calendar days prior to the massage business moving to a new location and requires an inspection of the massage establishment prior to the massage business accepting clients for massage therapy. Failure to notify the chief of police of the change of address shall render any permit void and any operation of a massage business unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.260 - Exemptions. 
The following persons and businesses shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
A.  Persons holding an active and valid certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state of California and their employees and independent contractors, including, but not limited to, holders of medical degrees such as physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, naturopaths, podiatrists, acupuncturists, physical therapists, registered nurses, and licensed vocational nurses, when practicing the healing arts within the scope of an applicable license. 
B.  State-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, physiotherapy businesses, or other state-licensed physical or mental health facilities and their employees or independent contractors. 
C.  Approved schools of massage and their students in training provided such students provide massage therapy only under the direct personal supervision of an instructor. 
D.  Barbers and cosmetologists who are licensed under the laws of the state of California, while providing massage therapy within the scope of their licenses, provided that such massage therapy is limited solely to the neck, face, scalp, feet, and lower limbs up to the knees, and hands and arms, of their clients. 
E.  Persons who, acting within the scope of their employment, provide massage therapy to semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams, facilities or events. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.270 - Criminal penalties. 
It is unlawful and a public nuisance to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.280 - Civil injunction. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.290 - Administrative remedies. 
In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.300 - Cumulative remedies, procedures and penalties. 
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the remedies, procedures and penalties provided by this chapter are cumulative to each other and to any others available under state law or other city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.310 - Separate offense for each day. 
Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
5.20.320 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, word, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 9-13-2016)  
Chapter 5.24 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the uniform transient occupancy tax of the city. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax administrator" means the city finance manager, or his or her designee. 
"Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both, prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.030 - Tax imposed—Generally. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eight percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
The tax administrator may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement and administration of this chapter. Any such rule or regulation that may affect the amount of tax owed the city shall be subject to approval of the city council. The rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the tax administrator and maintained in an orderly and readily accessible manner. Taxes are considered paid only upon receipt of the return, and penalty, interest, and completed exemption certificate when appropriate. The burden to secure and comply with the rules and regulations shall be upon the operator. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.040 - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon any person if the imposition is beyond the power of the city as herein provided. Without limitation, the following are specifically exempt: 
Any federal or state employee when on official business. 
Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. When a claim of exemption is defective, the operator: (i) shall be responsible for all taxes due with respect to the purported exempt transient; and (ii) the tax administrator shall give notice to the operator of all taxes due as a result of rejection of the exemption claims. The operator shall pay all sums due within ten working days of notification. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.050 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment of the tax from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.060 - Registration. 
Within thirty days after commencing business each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him or her a "transient occupancy registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
No reports or statements of an operator shall be conclusive as to any matter affected by this chapter, nor shall the city be precluded from collecting any sum actually due and payable. Each report or statement and each of the items therein are subject to audit and verification pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.080 - Uncollectible accounts—Relief of operator from liability. 
An operator is relieved from liability for the remission to the city of the tax imposed under this chapter insofar as the measure of the tax is represented by accounts which have been found to be worthless and charged off for income tax purposes. If the operator has previously remitted the tax, he or she may, pursuant to procedures prescribed by the tax administrator, take as a deduction the amount of tax previously remitted for the worthless and charged off account. If any such accounts are thereafter in whole or in part collected by the operator, the amount so collected shall be included in the first return filed after such collection and the tax on such amount paid with the return. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.090 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance (including accrued and unpaid penalties and interest) on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax (including accrued and unpaid penalties and interest) in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section, and in addition to any other remedy available to the city in law or in equity, and in addition to any criminal liability. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.100 - Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax under this chapter and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report, and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. 
In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 5.24.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.110 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.120 - Records—Audit. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city. 
The tax administrator may require any operator, upon reasonable written notice, to provide the tax administrator with access to all of the operator's books and records relating to the operator's operation of the hotel, including rents charged by such operator that are subject to a tax pursuant to this chapter. If, as a result of any such audit, it is determined that a return required to be filed by such operator pursuant to Section 5.24.070 hereof is inaccurate and did not include and report the correct amount of tax due pursuant to this chapter, the operator shall forthwith pay to the city all taxes that are shown to be due as a result of such audit, regardless of whether the operator collected such taxes. 
If an audit conducted pursuant to the provisions of this section reflects that in any calendar month there was under-reporting of taxes due by five percent or more, which under-reporting was not corrected by the operator prior to the commencement of the audit, all costs associated with the audit shall be borne by the operator, and the cost thereof shall be subject to collection as a civil debt by the city. For this purpose, costs shall include all consultant costs, all staff costs, and other expenses incurred by the city. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.130 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section; provided, that a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.140 - City remedies. 
In addition to and cumulative with the penalties and interest specified in Section 5.24.090, the city shall have available to it any remedy specified in federal, state, or local law, including but not limited to those specified in this section. 
A.  Civil Action. 
1.  Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. Nothing in this section, or in any other section of this chapter, shall alter or otherwise affect the operator's status as a trustee of public funds in the operator's hands with respect to taxes collected by the operator under the provisions of this chapter, or its liability as a trustee. The city shall have the discretion to bring civil action on the basis that the tax collected is a debt of the operator, or on the basis that the operator has violated its fiduciary duty as trustee, or on both of those bases, or on any other basis available under this ordinance or otherwise. 
2.  If a civil action is required to enforce the collection of a tax from any person, and a recovery of such tax in any amount is granted in such a civil judicial proceeding, the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and its costs of the administrative process under this chapter, including, but not limited to other direct and indirect costs incurred by the city with reference to such litigation. 
3.  An action to collect the transient occupancy tax must be commenced within three years of the date the transient occupancy tax becomes delinquent. An action to collect the penalty for nonpayment of the transient occupancy tax must be commenced within three years of the date the penalty accrues. 
B.  Criminal Enforcement. 
1.  Unless provided otherwise, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Title 1 of this code. 
2.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, or who refuses to provide the tax administrator with access to the written records required to be kept by this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
3.  Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
4.  Pursuant to the provisions of California Penal Code Section 836.5, any officer or employee of the administrative services department of the city holding the position of finance manager or senior administrative analyst may enforce the provisions of this chapter by requesting that the Rocklin Police Department issue a criminal citation to a person or arrest a person without a warrant whenever that officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his or her presence which is a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. The police officer acting under the authority of this section shall follow the citation-release procedures prescribed in Chapter 5C, Title 3, Part 2 of the California Penal Code (sections 853.5, et seq.) or such procedure hereafter enacted by the state of California. 
C.  Security. 
The tax administrator, whenever he or she deems it necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, may require any operator to post such security as the tax administrator, in his or her sole discretion, may determine to be reasonable. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator, but, except as noted below, shall not be greater than twice the estimated average liability of operators filing returns pursuant to Section 5.24.070 or fifty thousand dollars, whichever amount is the lesser. The limitations provided in this chapter apply regardless of the type of security placed with the tax administrator, which shall be determined in the sole and exclusive discretion of the tax administrator. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to the limitations provided in this chapter. The tax administrator may sell the security at public auction if it becomes necessary to do so to recover any tax or amount required to be collected, or interest, or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who placed the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be addressed to the person at his or her address as it appears in the records of the tax administrator. Security in the form of a bearer bond issued by the United States or the state, and which has a prevailing market price may, however, be sold by the tax administrator at private sale at a price not lower than the prevailing market price thereof. Upon any sale any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who placed the security. 
D.  Lien. 
1.  If any tax is not paid when due, the tax administrator may, within three years after the amount is due, record in the office of the county recorder of such counties as the tax administrator may determine, a certificate of lien which specifies the amount of tax due and the name and address of the operator owning the tax. The certificate shall include a statement that the tax administrator has complied with all legal requirements in the determination of the tax owed, and a legal description of the property of the owner. Upon recording the certificate, the tax, together with any accumulated penalties and interest, constitutes a lien upon all real property owned or thereafter acquired by the operator. The lien has the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien, and shall continue for ten years from the time of filling of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. 
2.  At any time after the recording of a certificate of lien, the tax administrator may issue a check or warrant directed to any sheriff or marshal for the enforcement of the lien and the collection of the tax. The warrant shall have the same effect as a writ of execution, and be executed in the same manner and with the same effect as a levy and sale pursuant to writ of execution. The tax administrator may pay or advance to the sheriff or marshal such fees, commissions, and expenses for services as are provided by law. 
3.  Priority of Lien. The amounts required to be remitted and/or paid by any operator under this chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases: (i) whenever the operator is insolvent; (ii) whenever the operator makes a voluntary assignment of his or her assets; (iii) whenever the estate of the operator in the hands of executors, administrators, or heirs is insufficient to pay all the debts due from the deceased; and (iv) whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed, or absent operator required to pay any amount under this chapter are levied upon by process of law. This chapter does not give the city a preference over any recorded lien that is filed prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a lien. The preference given to the city by this section shall be subordinate to the preferences given to claims for personal services by Sections 1204 and 1206 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
E.  Seizure and Sale. At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the payment of any amount, the tax administrator may collect the amount in the following manner: the tax administrator shall seize any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect occupancy taxes shall be only of property of the operator not exempt from execution under the provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
F.  Successor Liability. 
1.  If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells his or her business or quits the business, a successor or assignee shall withhold sufficient funds from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax administrator showing that the tax has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
2.  If a purchaser of a hotel fails to withhold funds from the purchase price as required, he or she shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within sixty days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or within sixty days from the date the former owner's records are made available for audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than ninety days after receiving the request, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his or her address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax administrator to mail the notice shall release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of the successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
3.  Sale of a hotel, dismissal of the operator, or other termination of the operator's rights to operate the facility shall not relieve him or her from liability for taxes due or owing under this chapter. 
G.  Withhold Notice. If any operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of the amount required to be remitted or paid by him or her when a tax, penalty, and interest determination has been made by the tax administrator as provided in this chapter, the city may, within three years after the tax obligation became due, deliver a withholding notice personally or by registered mail to any or all persons, including the state or any local government or agency, having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the taxpayer. After receiving the withholding notice, the person so notified shall make no disposition of the taxpayer's credits, other personal property, or debts, until the city consents to a transfer or disposition or until sixty days elapse after the receipt of the notice, whichever expires earlier. All persons, upon receipt of the notice, shall advise the city immediately of all such credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control, or owning by them. If such notices seek to prevent the transfer or other disposition of a deposit in a bank or other credits or personal property or under the control of the bank, to be effective the notice shall be delivered or mailed to the branch or office of such bank at which the deposit is carried or at which such credits or personal property is held. If any person so notified makes transfer or disposition of the property or debts required to be held hereunder during the effective period of the notice to withhold, he or she shall be liable to the city to the extent of the value of the amount transferred or disposed up to the amount of the indebtedness owed by the taxpayer to the city. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.150 - Use of tax receipts. 
The tax administrator shall pay into the treasury all moneys, including taxes and penalties, collected by him or her pursuant to this chapter for deposit to the city general fund, to be used for general municipal purposes. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
5.24.160 - Privacy rights. 
It is unlawful for any person having an administrative duty relating to the tax under this chapter, to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of the records of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to knowingly permit any return or copy thereof or any abstract or particular thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the amounts of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax, penalties, and interest required to be collected. An operator may, by request made to the tax administrator, designate a person to whom information specified in this section may be released. The request shall be in writing and shall specify the information that the tax administrator shall be authorized to release. 
(Ord. 879 Exh. A (part), 2003).  
Chapter 5.28 - SOLICITORS 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given by this section, unless otherwise specifically provided: 
A.  "Soliciting" means the going from residence to residence within the city for the purpose of selling, or offering for sale, or vending any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other thing of value, for immediate or future delivery, or for the purpose of requesting monetary donations, pledges, or other things of value for a charitable, religious, cultural, or any other cause. 
B.  "Solicitor" means any person who, on his or her own behalf or as an agent or employee of another person, carries on or engages in soliciting. 
C.  "Residence" means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, for not more than one family. 
(Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to carry on or engage in soliciting, either on his or her own behalf or as an agent or employee of another person, without first applying for and securing a solicitor's permit from the city, unless exempt from the requirement to obtain a solicitor's permit under Section 5.28.025. 
(Ord. 850 § 1, 2001: Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.025 - Permit—Exception. 
The requirements of this chapter which require any person carrying on or engaging in soliciting to apply for, obtain, and carry on his or her person a solicitor's permit and photographic identification shall not apply to any person who meets all of the following requirements: 
A.  The person carrying on or engaging in soliciting is under the age of sixteen years. 
B.  The soliciting activity is being conducted solely as a fundraiser for a school or youth (including sports) program, the majority of whose beneficiaries reside within the city. 
C.  An authorized adult representative of the school or youth program sponsoring the fundraiser notifies the city manager or his or her designee of the fundraiser and the planned soliciting activity no later than twenty-four hours prior to the start of the fundraiser and obtains a copy of the notice described in Section 5.28.040(D). 
D.  Each person involved in the fundraiser and planned soliciting activity is provided a copy of the notice described in Section 5.28.040(D) prior to the start of the fundraiser and soliciting activity. 
This exception is limited to the requirements to apply for, obtain, and carry on his or her person a solicitor's permit and photographic identification. The prohibition in Section 5.28.090 and all other provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 850 § 2, 2001).  
5.28.030 - Administration. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered on behalf of the city by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.040 - Application—Form and contents. 
The city manager shall prescribe a form for making application for a solicitor's permit which shall require the following information: 
A.  The name and current street and mailing address of the solicitor and of the solicitor's employer or other person for whom the solicitor will solicit, if any; 
B.  If the solicitor's employer or principal is other than an individual, the name and address of the employer's or principal's officers and managers; 
C.  A general statement of the purpose for soliciting; 
D.  A notice to the solicitor in substantially the following form: 
 Section 5.28.090 of the Rocklin Municipal Code prohibits soliciting, as defined in Section 5.28.010 of that code, at any residence in the city where there is posted in plain view of any person standing on the sidewalk or in the public right-of-way adjacent to the residence, or at the front door of the residence, a sign so stating "No Solicitors" or words to the same effect or conveying generally the same meaning. Violation of this prohibition may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the city attorney. 
E.  An acknowledgment following the notice in substantially the following form: 
 I, the undersigned, have read the foregoing notice and am aware of and understand the prohibition described therein and in Section 5.28.090 of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
Date: _____
Signature of Solicitor _____
Name of Solicitor _____
Name of Solicitor's Employer 
or Principal _____
F.  A verification of the information provided by the solicitor under penalty of perjury. 
G.  A verification to be executed by the city manager or designee that the solicitor or his or her employer or principal has submitted proof of compliance with Chapter 5.04 of this code relating to business license certificates and business license taxes; and 
H.  A space for the signature or stamp of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.050 - Application—Submittal. 
Application for a solicitor's permit shall be made by submitting in person a fully completed application form, current business license certificate or a statement setting forth the facts supporting a claim that the applicant's proposed soliciting does not require a business license certificate, and a recognized government issued photographic identification to the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 850 § 4, 2001: Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.060 - Issuance of permit. 
Upon receipt of a completed application for a solicitor's permit in full compliance with Section 5.28.050, the city manager or designee shall execute the verification of proof of compliance with Chapter 5.04 of this code and shall sign or stamp the form in the space provided. The signed or stamped form with the executed verification shall be the solicitor's permit. The city manager or designee shall provide the solicitor and the solicitor's employer or principal with a copy of the permit. 
(Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.070 - Solicitor to carry copy of permit and photographic identification. 
A solicitor shall carry on his or her person a copy of the solicitor's permit and a recognized government issued photographic identification at all times he or she is carrying on or is engaged in soliciting and shall produce the permit and the identification at the request of any city enforcement officer or of any occupant of any residence at which the solicitor solicits. 
(Ord. 850 § 5, 2001: Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.080 - Nontransferable. 
No solicitor's permit shall be assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.090 - Prohibited activity. 
It is unlawful for any person to solicit at any residence in the city where there is posted in plain view of any person standing on the sidewalk or in the public right-of-way adjacent to the residence, or at the front door of the residence, a sign stating "No Solicitors" or words to the same effect or conveying generally the same meaning. 
(Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
5.28.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. 621 § 1 (part), 1990).  
Chapter 5.30 - RESIDENTIAL GARAGE SALES 
 
5.30.010 - Scope. 
This chapter shall regulate the conduct of any and all garage sales conducted on residential private property, and exempt from a special event permit, including but not limited to, sales conducted in a garage, or on the front, side or back yard. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-12-2016)  
5.30.020 - Garage sale defined. 
"Garage sale" means a sale of used household or personal articles (such as kitchen utensils small appliances, furniture, tools, or clothing) held on the seller's own premises. The term "garage sale" includes sales commonly referred to as estate sales, driveway sales, yard sales, porch sales, and other such sales. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-12-2016)  
5.30.030 - Garage sale limitations. 
A.  No more than three garage sales may be held on any residential property in any one calendar year. 
B.  No garage sale shall be allowed within sixty days of another such garage sale on the property. 
C.  Garage sales are prohibited Mondays through Thursdays. 
D.  No single sale shall be conducted for longer than seventy-two hours. 
E.  Items offered for sale may only be displayed on the property, or in structures thereon, at which the sale is being held. Items for sale shall not be stored or displayed on the public right-of-way, nor encroach onto other property without permission of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-12-2016)  
5.30.040 - Signs. 
Signs advertising garage sales are exempt from a sign permit, but shall comply with the city of Rocklin sign code as set forth in Chapter 17.75, Signs on Private Property, and Chapter 17.80, Signs on Public Property. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-12-2016)  
5.30.050 - Violation; enforcement. 
A.  Anyone violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative citation and fine as set forth in Chapter 1.14 of this code. 
B.  The code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 1090, § 10, 3-13-2018)  
Chapter 5.36 - HOTELS 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the definitions set forth in Rocklin Municipal Code Section 5.24.020 shall apply to terms used in Sections 5.36.020 through 5.36.040. 
(Ord. 877 § 1 (part), 2003).  
5.36.020 - Register required—Contents. 
Every person who is an operator of a hotel within the city of Rocklin shall keep a register containing the following information for each person who stays at the hotel: 
Name 
Address 
Vehicle Year, Make, Model, Color 
License Plate 
State in Which the Vehicle is Registered 
Date of Arrival 
Date of Departure 
Number of Guests 
(Ord. 877 § 1 (part), 2003).  
5.36.030 - Register—Inspection. 
The register shall be available and shall be presented for examination upon request of the chief of police, any sworn police officer of the city, and any other person with authority to exercise peace officer powers within the city as authorized by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 877 § 1 (part), 2003).  
5.36.040 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a hotel without complying with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 877 § 1 (part), 2003).  
Chapter 5.40 - REGULATION OF TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
Sections: 
 
5.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations governing the operation and permitting of taxicab and vehicle for hire companies and drivers. The further purpose of this chapter is to serve as the taxicab service policy of the City of Rocklin as required to be adopted by California Government Code Section 53075.5. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Driver" means any person in charge of or operating any taxicab or vehicle for hire, either as agent, employee, or otherwise, under the direction of the owner, or as the owner. If driver also owns the taxicab or vehicle for hire, for purposes of this chapter, driver is synonymous with owner/operator. 
B.  "Driver's permit" means the permit issued by the City of Rocklin for the operation of a taxicab or vehicle for hire as required by Section 5.40.120 of this chapter. 
C.  "For hire" means for any compensation, including but not limited to, payment, tip, contribution, donation, or barter. 
D.  "Operate" means to drive or to be in actual physical control of a vehicle defined in the section, either as an agent, employee, or otherwise for a monetary fee. 
E.  "Owner" means the person, firm, partnership, or corporation that is the registered owner of a taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
F.  "Owner's permit" means a the permit issued by the City of Rocklin for the operation of a taxicab or vehicle for hire company as required by Section 5.40.030 of this chapter. 
G.  "Pedicab" means a vehicle with three or more wheels propelled by human power capable of transporting persons and used for transporting persons for hire. 
H.  "Police chief" means the City of Rocklin Police Chief or his or her designee. 
I.  "Taxicab" means an automobile or other motor-vehicle designed to carry not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, which is used in the transportation of passengers at rates per mile or for wait-time, or both over the public streets of the city and which is equipped with a taximeter by which the fare is mechanically tabulated. The word "taxicab" does not mean or include vehicles which are used to transport passengers for hire over a defined route or upon a fixed schedule. 
J.  "Taximeter" means any instrument, appliance, device, or machine by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and which is regulated by a State of California County Sealer of Weights and Measures. 
K.  "Vehicle for hire" means every motor-propelled vehicle, or pedal powered taxi (Pedicab), other than taxicabs, used for the transportation of up to twelve passengers, excluding the driver, for hire from one location within the city to another location within the city or beyond, at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week, or per month. Vehicle for hire does not include animal drawn vehicles, taxicabs, vehicles licensed by the public utilities commission, ambulances, or courtesy vans used exclusively by the customers of a hospital, or other business or governmental entity that operates such courtesy van. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.030 - Owner's permit. 
A.  It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a taxicab or vehicle for hire company in the City of Rocklin unless the owner applies for and obtains an owner's permit and city business license to do so. 
B.  Upon applying to the police chief for an owner's permit, the applicant must pay to the city an owner's permit application fee for processing the application in the amount set by resolution of the city council. 
C.  The application for such owner's permit shall be completed on a form supplied by and filed with the Rocklin Police Department and shall include the following: 
1.  The name and address of the owner/applicant; 
2.  If the owner is a partnership, the names and addresses of all the partners; 
3.  If the owner is a corporation, the names and addresses of all directors and officers of the corporation and the names and addresses of all shareholders owning more than twenty percent of the voting stock of the corporation; 
4.  The number of vehicles proposed to be operated and a complete description of each vehicle including: vehicle identification number (VIN), manufacturer, model, year of manufacture, license number, and passenger seating capacity; 
5.  The date of birth, California Driver's License Number, and home or cell phone number of the owner; 
6.  Two recent color photographs of the owner(s); 
7.  Color scheme and insignia and/or any other distinguishing characteristics of the proposed vehicle(s); 
8.  Receipt for payment of the application fee; 
D.  Each owner(s) filing an application shall have his or her fingerprints taken for the purpose of conducting a criminal background check. 
E.  If an owner/applicant desires to be associated with another owner and use the other owner's colors, the applicant must also file a copy of the agreement in which permission is granted to use said owner's colors. 
F.  The owner shall submit with the application a mechanical inspection certificate for each taxicab's signaling and lighting systems, steering, brakes, and tires. The certificate shall indicate that the inspection had been conducted within fifteen days of the filing date of such application at a State of California Approved Inspection Station. Upon approval of the application and before operating any public motor vehicle, the owner shall submit proof of liability insurance as specified in Section 5.40.070. 
G.  The owner shall also submit a copy of the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) registration for each taxicab proposed to be operated. If the owner is a corporation, the registration must indicate that the vehicles are registered in the company name. 
H.  Whenever there is a change of twenty percent or more of the ownership of the business, or additional partners are added in a partnership agreement, the owners must apply for a new owner's permit. 
I.  Each owner shall complete and file with the police chief a City of Rocklin Taxicab and Vehicle For Hire Owner's Indemnity and Hold Harmless Agreement prior to issuance of the owner's permit. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.040 - Applicant misrepresentation of facts prohibited. 
Any person who knowingly or intentionally misrepresents to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in applying for an owner's permit or driver's permit as set forth in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.050 - Grounds for denial. 
The following reasons are sufficient grounds for denial of an owner's permit for a taxicab or vehicle for hire company: 
A.  The application is not in the proper form, and does not contain the information required to be contained therein by this chapter; 
B.  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is found to be false in any material detail; 
C.  The vehicles described therein are inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which they are to be used; 
D.  The color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia to be used upon such vehicles imitates or is substantially similar to any other color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by any other person or entity in such manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive, confuse, or defraud the public; 
E.  The applicant has had a permit for the operation of a vehicle for hire or taxicab suspended or revoked for cause; 
F.  The applicant does not have qualified drivers to operate the vehicles for hire or taxicabs; 
G.  The applicant has operated a vehicle for hire or taxicab in the city in violation of the requirements of this code; 
H.  The operation will threaten the peace health safety and/or welfare of the public; 
I.  For taxicab owner's permits only, that the public interest, convenience, and/ or necessity do not require the issuance of such permit; and 
J.  The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information or documents required. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.060 - Owner's permit; police chief's determination. 
A.  The police chief shall, within thirty days of the receipt of a completed application for an owner's permit, either approve the application and issue the owner's permit, or deny the application in writing setting forth the grounds for denial of the owner's permit. 
B.  If the owner's permit is denied, the applicant shall have ten days to request a hearing with the police chief for reconsideration of the denial. The hearing may be conducted in person or by submission and review of written materials. The final determination of the police chief shall be sent to the owner in writing within ten days of the hearing. 
C.  If after the hearing, the police chief has determined that the application should be denied, the applicant may appeal the police chief's decision as set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
D.  If an owner's permit application is denied on one or more of the grounds listed in Section 5.40.050 subparts A through I, the owner may not reapply for another owner's permit for a period of one hundred eighty days following the date of the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.40.070 - Owner insurance requirements. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner to own or maintain or to operate or cause or permit to be operated any taxicabs or vehicle for hire in the city unless there is in full force and effect at all times a public liability insurance policy covering each vehicle meeting the requirements of this section and Workers' Compensation coverage in compliance with California Labor Code provisions. 
B.  The policy of insurance shall be issued by a company duly authorized to conduct business in the state of California whereby the insurance company provides coverage to pay in full all claims for damages to persons or property resulting from the operation of the vehicles for hire or taxicabs referred to in the owner's permit application; provided that the insurance coverage shall include a minimum of two million dollars for personal injury and/or property damage of others arising from any one accident. 
C.  The insurance policy shall remain in full force and effect for the duration that the owner operates a taxicab or vehicle for hire in the city, and the city, its officers, employees, and agents shall be listed as an additional named insured. 
D.  The policy shall stipulate that the policy will operate as primary insurance and that no other insurance effected by the city or other named insured will be called on to contribute to a loss covered thereunder. 
E.  Before an owner cancels or reduces the insurance coverage required herein, he shall give thirty days' written notice to the police chief. 
F.  Each owner shall provide workers' compensation insurance that satisfies state and federal requirements for all of the owner's drivers, employees, or lessees. 
G.  Certificates of insurance coverage satisfying the insurance requirements set forth in this section shall be provided to the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.080 - Owner's permit duration and renewal. 
A.  Every owner's permit issued shall expire on the anniversary date of its issuance, unless the same is renewed for an additional year prior to expiration. The renewal application shall be submitted at least thirty days prior to expiration, contain the same information required in the original application updated as necessary to facilitate the renewal, and shall be reviewed by the Rocklin Police Department. A renewal application shall pay the application amount referenced in Section 5.40.030(B) above. 
B.  Permit renewal applications shall be approved or denied in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.40.060 above. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.090 - Suspension, modification, or revocation of owner's permit. 
A.  With a minimum of ten days' written notice, the police chief may suspend, modify, or revoke an owner's permit to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city for the following reasons: 
1.  A violation of the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  A violation of any ordinance or regulation relating to traffic or use of the streets; 
3.  Failure to pay any judgment for damages arising from the unlawful or negligent operation of the taxicab or vehicle for hire for which the permit was issued; 
4.  For making false statements to city officials; or 
5.  Upon the recommendation of the police chief that the permit should be revoked or suspended. 
B.  If the owner's permit is suspended or revoked, the owner shall have ten days to request a hearing with the police chief for reconsideration of the action. The hearing may be conducted in person or by submission and review of written materials. The final determination of the police chief shall be sent to the owner in writing within ten days of the hearing. 
C.  If after the hearing, the police chief has determined that the suspension or revocation is appropriate, the owner may appeal the police chief's decision as set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
D.  Upon suspension or revocation of an owner's permit, the owner may not reapply for another owner's permit for a period of one hundred eighty days following the date of the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.40.100 - Vehicle inspection and sticker. 
Every taxicab or vehicle for hire to be operated pursuant to an owner's permit shall be inspected annually for safety and readiness for public use by a state of California approved Inspection Station. "Safety and readiness for public use" as used herein shall mean that the integrity of the signaling and lighting systems, steering, brakes, and tires are safe and serviceable. On the passage of the inspection, the police chief shall issue a sticker to be displayed on the lower right-hand corner of front windshield of the taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.110 - Operational changes. 
It shall be the responsibility of each owner to notify the police chief in writing within ten days if any of the following conditions occur. Failure to comply with this reporting requirement may result in the revocation of the owner's permit: 
A.  Any change in the taxicab or vehicle for hire's year, make, model, license number, and vehicle identification number; 
B.  Any change in the number assigned to the taxicab or vehicle for hire by the owner; 
C.  If the taxicab or vehicle for hire inspection sticker number becomes stolen, mutilated or removed; 
D.  Any changes to the name of the registered owner of each taxicab or vehicle for hire; 
E.  Any addition to driver's or lessee's operating the owner's taxicabs or vehicles for hire; and 
F.  The company name under which the taxicab or vehicle for hire is operating. 
G.  Any addition to the number of taxicabs or vehicles for hire, or any substitution for a taxicab or vehicle for hire operated under the permit. 
H.  Sale or transfer of a taxicab or vehicle for hire operating under a valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.120 - Driver's permit. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab or vehicle for hire under this chapter unless the driver has applied for and obtained a valid driver's permit from the police chief. 
B.  Upon applying to the police chief for a driver's permit, the applicant must pay to the city a driver's permit application fee for processing the application in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
C.  The applicant shall submit the following to the police chief: 
1.  Completed driver application; 
2.  Receipt for payment of the application fee; 
3.  Two color photographs of the driver; 
4.  The name and address of the driver's controlled substance and alcohol testing program managers as specified under California Government Code Section 53075.5; 
5.  Applicant's fingerprints; 
6.  The applicant's California Department of Motor Vehicles Driver History Report obtained within ten days of the date of application for a driver's permit. 
D.  The police chief shall also investigate the background of each applicant to determine if the applicant has been convicted of any of the following: 
1.  A felony or violation of any drug or narcotic law in the preceding five years; 
2.  Any penal law involving moral turpitude in the preceding five years; 
3.  Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs in the preceding five years; or 
4.  Three or more moving violations or at-fault accidents in the twelve months preceding the date on which the application was filed. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.130 - Driver's permit; police chief's determination. 
A.  The police chief shall determine whether the applicant should be allowed to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire within the city. The police chief shall consider the following evidence in the course of processing the application and will approve/deny the application based upon: 
1.  False statements in the application; 
2.  Prior pertinent criminal convictions by the applicant; 
3.  Poor driving record as evidenced by the applicant being convicted of three or more moving violations during the preceding twelve months; the applicant being found at fault in three or more accidents in the preceding twelve months; or the applicant being involved in any combination of moving violations or accidents which numbers three or more during the preceding twelve months; 
4.  Positive test result under the controlled substance and alcohol testing program as set forth in Government Code Section 53075.5; and 
5.  The applicant being found unfit due to prior violation of this chapter. 
B.  If the permit application is granted, the police chief shall issue a driver's permit to the applicant. The police chief may impose such terms and conditions on the issuance of the permit as may be reasonable to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
C.  Within twenty days of receiving the completed application, the police chief shall either deny or approve the application for driver's permit. 
D.  If the driver's permit is denied, the applicant shall have ten days to request a hearing with the police chief for reconsideration of the denial. The hearing may be conducted in person or by submission and review of written materials. The final determination of the police chief shall be sent to the applicant in writing within ten days of the hearing. 
E.  If after the hearing, the police chief has determined that the application should be denied, the applicant may appeal the police chief's decision by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
F.  If the driver's permit application is denied for reasons other than an incomplete application, the applicant may not reapply for a period of one hundred eighty days following the date of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.40.140 - Duration of permit. 
A.  Every driver's permit shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire on the anniversary date of its issuance each year, unless suspended or revoked. An application for renewal of the driver's permit shall be filed not less than thirty days prior to expiration. The renewal application shall contain the same information as the original application and shall be updated as necessary to facilitate the renewal. The renewal application shall be reviewed by the Rocklin Police Department for approval in the same manner as an original application. A renewal application shall pay the application amount referenced in Section 5.40.120.B. above. 
B.  If a driver with a duly issued driver's permit leaves his employment or changes employers, his driver's permit shall become null and void. The owner shall become responsible for retrieving the identification card as outlined in Section 5.40.160. Should a driver become employed by another company, said driver shall apply for a new driver's permit under the new company. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.150 - Suspension, modification, or revocation of permit. 
A.  The police chief, in the exercise of sound and reasonable discretion, and when the public safety and interest may require, may suspend or revoke a driver's permit for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Violation of any provision of the California Vehicle Code that is punishable by suspension or revocation of a driver's license; 
2.  Upon the driver been convicted of a violation of sections 20001, 20002(a), 20002(b), 23103, 23152, 23153, 23220, or 23222 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California; 
3.  Upon any two or more convictions within one year for any moving violation of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, while driving such taxicab or vehicle for hire; 
4.  Upon the driver been convicted of any crime involving physical violence or moral turpitude; 
5.  If the driver is operating without the required insurance or vehicle registration; 
6.  If the driver tests positive for controlled substances or alcohol; 
7.  Upon violation of any other provision of this chapter or any local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation relating to his or her licensed activity. 
B.  Prior to the suspension or revocation of the driver's permit, the police chief shall give the driver at least ten days' written notice of the impending suspension or revocation of the permit and the reasons therefore. 
C.  If the driver's permit is suspended or revoked, the driver shall have ten days to request a hearing with the police chief for reconsideration of the action. The hearing may be conducted in person or by submission and review of written materials. The final determination of the police chief shall be sent to the owner in writing within ten days of the hearing. 
D.  If after the hearing, the police chief has determined that the suspension or revocation is appropriate, the driver may appeal the police chief's decision by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. 
E.  Notwithstanding the procedure set forth above, the city manager may suspend a driver's permit for a period not to exceed ten days without a prior hearing if the city manager determines that the public safety and welfare are endangered by the driver's continued operation. 
F.  Upon permit denial or revocation of a driver's permit, the driver may not reapply for another driver's permit for a period of one hundred eighty days following the date of the denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.40.160 - Driver identification card. 
The police chief shall issue an identification card to the driver which is evidence of the permit. The identification card shall have a frontal view picture of the individual as well as the date the permit was issued and the name of the driver's employer. The identification card shall be conspicuously attached to the outermost garment worn by the driver while he is operating a taxicab or vehicle for hire. Each owner shall notify the police chief in writing within two days after a driver leaves his employment and shall submit to the police chief such driver's identification card. Each owner shall also be responsible for recovering and turning in the identification cards of drivers who have had their driver's permit revoked, nullified or voided. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.170 - Driver's log. 
A.  The driver of every taxicab and vehicle for hire shall maintain a log, written or electronic, of every service rendered, including the following information: 
1.  Location and time of entry; 
2.  Number of passengers; 
3.  Location where passengers were discharged; 
4.  Amount of fare collected; and 
5.  Driver information, including the driver's name, date, time of shift, and taxicab or vehicle for hire number. 
B.  The driver shall make the log available to any police officer upon request at any time that the driver is operating the taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.180 - Driver appearance and conduct. 
The driver of any vehicle for hire, or taxicab shall be neat in dress and clean in appearance. A driver may not wear as outer clothing the following: underwear, tank tops, tube tops, body shirts, swimwear, bathing trunks, or cut off shorts. A driver shall not smoke while carrying persons. A driver shall not operate or occupy a vehicle for hire or taxicab while his or her ability is impaired by either alcohol or drugs. A driver shall not operate his or her vehicle for hire or taxicab in such manner or at a speed which endangers users of other vehicles, pedestrians or his or her persons. A driver shall act any reasonable, prudent, and courteous manner. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.190 - Taximeter. 
A.  Every taxicab subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be equipped with a taximeter which conforms to all of the applicable requirements of the laws and regulations of the state of California. Every taximeter shall be sealed by a California County Sealer of Weights and Measures and mounted so as to be visible at all times to the passengers therein. The face of every taximeter shall be illuminated at all times that the taxicab is in operation between the hours of sunset and sunrise. 
B.  Every taximeter shall be subject to inspection by the police chief and the county sealer of weights and measures or their authorized deputies at any time. In the event that any taximeter is found to be inaccurate or if it is found in any respect not to meet the requirements of this section or the applicable laws and regulations of the state, the taxicab in which such taximeter is mounted shall be placed out of operation. The taxicab shall remain out of operation until such time as the taximeter is repaired and is found to be in proper operating condition, or is found to meet the requirements of this section or the applicable laws and regulations of the state by the police chief or the county sealer of weights and measures. 
C.  Any owner or operator of a taxicab who has made repairs or adjustments to the taximeter installed therein, or who has installed a new or repaired taximeter in the vehicle, or who has made any adjustments to the vehicle which may affect or alter the accuracy of the taximeter shall, within twenty-four hours after such repair, adjustment or installation, notify a California County Sealer of Weights and Measures and request a test of the taximeter for accuracy. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.200 - Operational requirements for taxicabs only. 
A.  Exclusive Use. When a taxicab is engaged, the occupants shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment, and it is unlawful for the owner or driver of such vehicle to solicit or carry additional passengers contrary to such right except with the consent of the original passengers, or when the police chief finds that public necessity temporarily requires the grouping of passengers in taxicabs. 
B.  Light Inside Vehicle. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a light within such vehicle, arranged to illuminate the entire persons' compartment. The light shall be constantly lit while any persons are in such vehicle, except when the same is in motion, from one half-hour before sunset of any day until one half hour after sunrise of the next day. It is unlawful for any shade or blind to be drawn over any window in a taxicab while the taxicab is occupied. 
C.  Driver to Use Direct Route. The taxicab driver shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely, lawfully, and expeditiously to their destination. 
D.  Trip Denial. Taxicab drivers cannot deny a trip to a passenger due to destination. Taxicab drivers must make every effort to take the passenger to their destination, but may re-route or change the destination upon consultation with the passenger if there are safety or security concerns. 
E.  The fictitious business name of the company under which the owner operates shall be painted or decaled on the sides of the taxicab. 
F.  An identification card, no less than four inches by six inches in size, shall be conspicuously displayed in full passenger view in the taxicab and include: the name of the owner or fictitious company name under which the owner operates, the address and telephone number of the business, the owner's identifying number for such taxicab or vehicle for hire, and for taxicabs, the rates of fare to be charged for the use of said taxicab and currently on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.210 - Schedule of fares; payments. 
A.  The owner of every taxicab operating in the city shall file with his or her owner's permit application a schedule of fares to be charged for the transportation of passengers in vehicles operated by such owner. Such owner shall not change the fare without first filing such changed fares with the city clerk thirty days prior to the effective date of such change. No person shall charge any other compensation for the use of such taxicab than the fare specified in the schedule of fares on file with the city clerk and at the time in effect. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab, obtain a ride in the same, and thereafter depart the taxicab without paying the driver the legal fare. In the case of a disagreement between the driver and the passenger regarding the legal fare to be paid, the driver shall convey the passenger to the nearest police station, where a police officer shall immediately decide the case. If the decision is in favor of the passenger, the driver shall convey the passenger from the police station to the original destination without additional charge. If the passenger is found to be in error, there is no requirement for the driver to convey the passenger to the destination without additional charge. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to ask for or require up-front or pre-payment of fare for trips originating in, traveling through, or disembarking in the City of Rocklin. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.220 - Operational requirements for taxicabs and vehicles for hire. 
A.  Receipt for Fares. At the request of the passenger, the driver of a taxicab or vehicle for hire shall provide a written receipt for the fare paid. 
B.  Taxicabs or Vehicle for Hire from Other Municipalities. The driver of a taxicab or vehicle for hire authorized to operate in any municipality may drive to a destination within or beyond the city limits, provided that the driver shall not seek nor accept passengers within the city. 
C.  Found Property. The taxicab or vehicle for hire driver shall deliver any personal property left in the taxicab or vehicle for hire by passengers originating or disembarking in the City of Rocklin to the Rocklin Police Department within twenty-four hours of the time the driver finds the property. 
D.  Firearms Prohibited. It is unlawful for any owner to allow, cause, or permit any owner or driver to carry a firearm on the owner's person, on the driver's person, or in a taxicab or vehicle for hire while said vehicle is being operated as a taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
E.  Condition of Vehicles for Hire and Taxicabs. All vehicles for hire and taxicabs shall be kept clean, in good repair, in good mechanical condition and good working order. Vehicles for hire and taxicabs shall have heating and air conditioning systems in good operating condition for seasonal use. 
F.  Vehicle Inspection. The police chief, or any member of the Rocklin Police Department, shall have the right, after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any taxicab or vehicle for hire for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of this chapter are being violated. Any taxicab or vehicle for hire which is found after such inspection to be unsafe or unsuitable for service shall be immediately removed from service. The taxicab or vehicle for hire shall be placed in a safe and operative condition before being placed back into service. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.230 - Records. 
The owner of any vehicle for hire and taxicab shall maintain for a minimum period of three years and disclose to the city upon request the following records. 
A.  The driver's log as required by Section 5.40.170, other driver's trip records, and payments to drivers. 
B.  Receipts and disbursements from vehicle for hire or taxicab operations. 
C.  Mileage record of each motorized vehicle. 
D.  Liability insurance coverage information and policies and Workers' Compensation coverage, if required. 
E.  Financial statements. 
F.  Copies of all citations issued by a California law enforcement officer or copies of the Department of Motor Vehicles print out. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.240 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the operation of taxicabs or vehicle for hire transporting passengers: 
A.  From a point outside the city to a destination within the city; or 
B.  En route from a point outside the city to a destination outside the city; or 
C.  By government entities charged with providing transportation for a fee. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
5.40.250 - Penalties. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
Chapter 5.44 - ADULT RELATED BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
5.44.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
A.  "Adult live entertainment theater" means any place, building, enclosure or structure, partially or entirely used for "live adult entertainment," as defined in this section, performances or presentations characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, displaying, or describing or relating to "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity" for observation by patrons or customers therein. "Live adult entertainment" means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the employees expose to public view "specified anatomical areas" for entertainment value or appear in a "state of nudity" or a "state of partial nudity" for any form of consideration. 
B.  "Adult motion picture" or "video arcade" means any business where coin, paper, note, or token-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to four or fewer persons per machine, at any one time, and where the predominant character or theme of the images so displayed is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, or relating to "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity." For purposes of this chapter, motion pictures receiving up to an "NC17" rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization shall not be deemed to be included in the definition of an adult motion picture or video arcade. 
C.  "Adult motion picture theater" means any business, other than a hotel or motel which regularly provides closed-circuit viewing to each individual room as a secondary service to its hotel or motel customers, with the capacity for five or more persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions in which the predominant character and theme is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting or relating to "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity" as defined in this section are regularly shown. This includes, without limitation, showing any such slides, motion pictures or videos by means of any video tape system which has a display, viewer, screen, or a television set. For purposes of this chapter, motion pictures receiving up to an "NC17" rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization shall not be deemed to be included in the definition of an adult motion picture theater. 
D.  "Adult related business" means any establishment, business or concern which, as a regular course or conduct of the business, offers or engages in the display of "specified anatomical areas," "specified sexual activity," or men and/or women in a "state of nudity," or "state of partial nudity," as defined in this section, by patrons, employees or anyone on the premises, and includes without limitation the following types of establishments: 
1.  Adult Related Book and Video Store. An "adult related book and video store" means an establishment, business or concern with more than twenty-five percent of its display area devoted to and offering for sale or rent, stock-in-trade consisting of adult related book and video products, or an establishment where twenty-five percent or more of the retail or wholesale value of merchandise displayed or offered for sale or rent consists of adult related book and video products. The term "adult related book and video products" means books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, paintings, sculptures, photographs, drawings, motion pictures, slides, films, tapes, video cassettes, records, DVD, CD-ROM, or other visual or audio representations or any material in digital format, which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
2.  Adult Related Sexual Device Store. An "adult related sexual device store" means an establishment, business or concern which sells, rents, displays, exhibits or offers for sale any of the following products: 
a.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed or reasonably intended to be used in connection with "specified sexual activities"; or 
b.  Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate "specified anatomical areas," or goods designed or reasonably intended to be placed on or in "specified anatomical areas" or reasonably intended to be used in conjunction with "specified sexual activities." Such goods include, but are not limited to, devices that are physical representations of the human genital organs, and devices with non-sex related utility being marketed or offered for sale or rent in a manner promoting sexual or sadomasochistic uses, including, but not limited to, leather whips, straps, harnesses, restraints and ligatures. 
The following items are expressly not included within the definitions in this section: (1) devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy; (2) candles and incense; (3) body oils, creams and lotions; (4) lingerie, stockings and undergarments; (5) massage devices that are not replicas of human genital organs; (6) health care or personal hygiene products; and (7) food products. 
3.  "Sexual encounter center" means any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
4.  "Adult live entertainment theater" as the term is defined in this section. 
5.  "Adult motion picture" or "video arcade" as the term is defined in this section. 
6.  "Adult motion picture theater" as the term is defined in this section. 
E.  "City manager" means the city manager or his/her designee. 
F.  "Chief of police" means the chief of police or his/her designee. 
G.  "Employ," "employee," and "employment" describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
H.  "Establish" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult related business as defined in this section; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult related business, to any adult related business as defined in this section; 
3.  The relocation of any adult related business; or 
4.  The addition of any of the "adult related businesses" as defined in this section to any other existing adult related business. 
I.  "Exceptions." An "adult related business" shall not include: 
1.  Bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical and psychological personnel with necessary medical or professional credentials for the treatment of patients. 
2.  Persons depicting "specified anatomical areas" in a modeling class operated: 
a.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue; 
b.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue; or 
c.  In a structure operated either as a profit or not-for-profit facility which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, and where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
J.  "Figure modeling" or "modeling studio" means any business featuring a live person displaying "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity" as defined in this section for compensation, whether monetary or any other form of consideration and for the purpose of being observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted. "Figure modeling" or a "modeling studio" does not include an artist studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists which is not open to the public and does not provide, permit or make available for viewing "specified sexual activities" on the premises. 
K.  "Nudity" or "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or anus, with less than a fully opaque fabric covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque fabric covering of any part of the areola, or the showing of completely or opaquely covered (by fabric) male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
L.  "Operate" means to own, lease (as lessor or lessee), rent (as landlord or tenant or as agent for the purpose of representing a principal in the management, rental or operation of the property of such principal), manage, conduct, or direct an adult related business. 
M.  "Operator" means and includes the owner, manager or person in charge of any adult related business. 
N.  "Partial nudity" means a state of dress in which clothing covers no less than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks and nipple, areola and the lower portion below the lowest point of the areola of the female breast. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
O.  "Regularly features," "regularly shown," "regular basis" or "regularly" means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the business. 
P.  "Religious institution" means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship, religious education incidental thereto and related religious activities. 
Q.  "School" means any public or private educational facility primarily attended by minors, including large family day care homes, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, and special education schools, and includes school grounds. 
R.  "Specified anatomical area" includes the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, and/or the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
S.  "Specified sexual activity" includes the following: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation and intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, sodomy, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
3.  Human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; 
4.  Erotic or lewd touching of nude human genitals or pubic region; 
5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, lewd fondling or other lewd contact with an animal by a human being; or 
8.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigations. 
T.  "Zoning district" means the zoning designation on the city zoning map or the corresponding designation on the general plan land use map. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.020 - Permit required for operation of an adult related business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises the operation of an adult related business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit (referred to in this chapter as "adult related business permit") from the city as required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.021 - Application for permit for an adult related business. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain an adult related business permit to operate an adult related business for which a permit is required pursuant to Section 5.44.020 shall apply to the chief of police on a form provided by the city clerk. Before submitting the application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation required by this chapter. Upon payment, the city shall issue a receipt to the applicant showing that such permit application fee has been paid. The applicant shall provide the receipt or a copy thereof to the chief of police at the time of applying for a permit under this section. 
The application to the chief of police shall be deemed complete when it contains the following information: 
1.  The full and true name and any other names of each person with an ownership interest of at least twenty percent in the adult related business and of each operator of the adult related business; 
2.  The present business addresses and telephone number (if any) of the applicant; 
3.  The two previous business addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and any operator; 
4.  Written proof provided in the form of a valid government issued photo identification card, issued within the United States that the applicant and any operator is at least eighteen years of age; 
5.  The height, weight, color of eyes and hair of the applicant and any operator; 
6.  Two color photographs of the applicant and any operator; 
7.  The business license or tax certificate history of the applicant and any operator for any adult related business for the preceding five years, including whether the person while previously operating in this or another city, county or state under the business licensee or tax certificate, has had a business license or tax certificate revoked or suspended, and the reason(s) for the revocation or suspension; 
8.  A list of all other licenses and/or permits issued to and/revoked from the applicant, in the five years prior to the year of the permit application, such other license and/or permit relating to similar business activities as in the permit application, including the type, current status, and issuing agency for each license/permit. If the applicant had any licenses or permits suspended or revoked, the applicant shall also provide a written explanation as to the findings and disposition; 
9.  For each person with at least a twenty percent ownership interest in the adult related business and all operators, a list of the date and type of conviction for any offense listed in Section 5.44.027(A)(2) that the owner or operator was convicted of five years prior to the date of the application; 
10.  The name and address of the lessor of the real property on which the business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease agreement or other documentation to establish that the owner and/or landlord of the premises consents to the establishment of an adult related business on the premises; 
11.  The name and address of the person or persons who will manage or conduct the business within or upon the premises, such address to be the place where the applicant desires notices to be mailed pursuant to this chapter; 
12.  The address, location and a diagram of the site and interior of the building as the business will be operated. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The drawing of the site and interior of the building must be a configuration of the premises demonstrating it will comply with the requirements of this chapter and of Chapter 17.79; 
13.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown on its articles of incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder holding an interest of twenty percent or more of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and the residence address of each of the partners holding an interest of twenty percent or more of the ownership of the company. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. 
14.  A description of the security measures that the applicant intends to implement at the business. 
15.  The name and/or type of such additional or other lines of business as will be conducted in conjunction with the maintenance or operation of the business within or upon the premises. 
B.  The chief of police shall take fingerprints of the applicant and any operator for the purpose of conducting a background investigation. 
C.  The application for a permit does not authorize conducting an adult related business until a permit has been granted. The issuance of a business license certificate pursuant to this title shall not authorize conducting an adult related business until the necessary adult entertainment business permit required by Section 5.44.020 has been lawfully granted. 
D.  All personal information provided by an applicant shall be deemed confidential and not disclosed except as required by law. 
E.  The provisions of subsections (A)(4) and (A)(5) of this section shall not apply to any corporate applicant; however, such information shall be provided for any operator. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.022 - Land use permits and fees. 
Adult related businesses shall comply with the terms, conditions, guidelines and regulations placed on any property in a planned development zone by a general development agreement or which is covered by a development agreement, including payment of fees applicable to such districts or agreements in the same manner as any other business seeking to locate on the property. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.023 - Adult employee permits. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall be employed in an adult related business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect an adult related business employee permit (referred to in this chapter as "adult employee permit") and complies with all requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
B.  The issuance of a business license certificate and/or payment of business license taxes pursuant to this title shall not authorize any person to perform any act for which an adult employee permit is required until the necessary permit has been lawfully approved. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.024 - Application for adult employee permit. 
A.  An application for an adult employee permit shall be made to the chief of police on a form provided by the city clerk. Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall pay the city a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council to defray, in part, the cost of investigation required by this chapter. The city shall issue a receipt to the applicant showing that a permit application fee has been paid. The applicant shall provide the receipt or a copy thereof to the chief of police at the time of applying for a permit under this section. 
B.  The application to the chief of police shall be deemed complete when it contains the following information: 
1.  Legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant; 
2.  Principal place of residence, and residence addresses for the last five years; 
3.  Age, date and place of birth; 
4.  Driver's license number and state of issuance, if any, of the applicant; 
5.  Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and tattoo descriptions and locations; 
6.  Two color photographs of the applicant; 
7.  Written proof provided in the form of a valid government issued photo identification card, issued within the United States that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age; 
8.  The name and address of the adult related business(es) where the applicant is to be employed or is to perform and the name of the owner(s) of each of the business(es). If after the applicant receives a permit, the applicant gains employment from any other adult related business not listed on the application, the applicant shall immediately notify the chief of police of the new employer and the chief may request that the application be reviewed under Section 5.44.035; 
9.  The names and addresses of any adult related business(es) where the applicant previously engaged in or participated in live performances displaying specified anatomical areas or depicting or involving specified sexual activities or acted as a figure model; 
10.  Whether the applicant has pled guilty, nolo contendere, or been convicted of any offense specified in Section 5.44.027(A)(2) within five years of the date of application; and 
11.  The adult employee permit or license history of the applicant including whether applicant has had any adverse action taken against a permit or license held by the applicant, the reason therefore and the applicant's business activity or occupation subsequent to the adverse action. 
C.  The chief of police shall take fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant for the purpose of conducting a background investigation. 
D.  All personal information provided by an applicant which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to the risk of harm will not be disclosed under the California Public Records Act. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant's residence address, telephone number, date of birth and age, driver's license and social security number. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein as determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this Chapter by ensuring that the applicant's privacy, confidentiality or security interest are protected. The city clerk shall cause the same to be redacted from any copy of a completed application form made available to any member of the public, the above mentioned information. And, the application form itself shall include a notation that this designated date is exempt from disclosure under the Public Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.025 - Verification of application. 
Every application for a permit under this chapter shall be verified as provided in the California Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.026 - Investigation and recommendations for an adult related business permit. 
A.  Upon receiving an application for an adult related business permit, the chief of police shall: 
1.  Stamp the application as received on the date of receipt, and determine whether the application contains all the information required by Section 5.44.021. If the chief of police determines that the application is incomplete or has been completed improperly, the chief of police shall send written notice to the applicant at the address provided by the applicant of that fact within ten calendar days and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten calendar days to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time; 
2.  Within ten calendar days of the date of filing of a complete application, refer the application to the community development department and the fire department; and 
3.  Within a reasonable period, not exceeding thirty-five calendar days after the filing of a complete application, the community development department and the fire department shall investigate the application and recommend approval or denial to the chief of police. A failure to make a recommendation within the specified time period shall not be considered a recommendation for approval or denial. 
B.  The community development department and the fire department shall inspect the proposed premises and make separate recommendations to the chief of police, within thirty-five calendar days after the filing of the completed application. 
1.  If the proposed location for an adult related business is not complete, the departments shall review the diagrams or plans submitted for the business and make a recommendation for approval based on the plans submitted. 
2.  No adult related business may operate until the city departments have inspected the completed adult related business and verified that the business has been constructed in conformance with the plans submitted and in conformance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.027 - Issuance of permit for an adult related business. 
A.  The chief of police shall grant or deny a completed application for an adult related business permit within sixty calendar days after the date of filing a completed application. The chief of police shall grant the permit unless the chief of police finds: 
1.  That the applicant or the proposed operation fails to meet the requirements of this chapter; 
2.  That the applicant or any operator has pled guilty, nolo contendere, or been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside of the state of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state of California: Sections 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314.1, 314.2, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, or as those sections may thereafter be amended or renumbered, or any other crime with substantially similar statutory elements to the ones listed herein; provided, however, that the chief of police shall issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described above if: 
(a)  The person is otherwise qualified for a permit; and 
(b)  The longer of the following time periods has passed: 
(i)  Five years from date of the conviction; or 
(ii)  Five years from release from confinement; or 
(iii)  Five years from formal release from probation period; or 
(iv)  Five years from formal release from parole. 
3.  That the applicant has knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
4.  That the applicant or any operator has had a permit for an adult related business denied, revoked or suspended for cause by this city or any other city or county within the last five years; 
5.  That the applicant or operator is not at least eighteen years of age; 
6.  That the applicant has not paid the required application fee; or 
7.  That the diagrams or plans submitted by the applicant for the adult related business premise are not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Not later than five calendar days after the date of the decision of the chief of police, a notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant, postage prepaid, at the address shown in the application and shall state whether the decision of the chief of police was to grant or deny the permit. If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an adult related business permit. 
C.  If the chief of police neither grants nor denies the permit within sixty calendar days from the date a completed application is filed the application shall be deemed granted. 
D.  If, after receiving a completed application for an adult related business permit, a city official required under this chapter fails to inspect the premises of the adult related business in the time frame required under this chapter, the inspection requirement for which the city has failed to fulfill its duty of inspection shall be deemed satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.028 - Issuance of adult employee permit. 
A.  Upon the filing of a completed adult employee permit application, the chief of police shall issue a temporary permit to the applicant which shall expire of its own accord thirty days from the date of issuance. The temporary permit shall allow the employee to begin working as an adult employee until the city makes a final decision to either grant or deny the application for an adult employee permit. The chief of police shall review the application, conduct an investigation into the information provided and grant or deny approval of the completed application within thirty calendar days based on the criteria provided in this chapter for an adult employee permit. 
B.  The chief of police shall grant the permit unless the chief of police finds: 
1.  That the applicant has pled guilty, nolo contendere, or been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside of the state of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state of California: Sections 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314.1, 314.2, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, or as those sections may hereafter be amended or renumbered, or any other crime with substantially similar statutory elements to the ones listed herein; provided, however, that the chief of police shall issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described above if the person is otherwise qualified for a permit; and the longer of the following time periods has passed: 
a.  Five years from date of the conviction; 
b.  Five years from release from confinement; 
c.  Five years from formal release from probation period; or 
d.  Five years from formal release from parole. 
2.  That the applicant has knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
3.  That the applicant has had a permit relating to an adult related business denied, revoked or suspended for cause by this city or any other city or county within the last five years. An applicant shall not be disqualified, however, by a permit denial, suspension, or revocation within the last five years if such denial, suspension, or revocation was the result of a criminal conviction for an offense listed in subsection (B)(1) and more than five years have passed from the date of conviction or release from confinement, probation, or parole related to the offense; 
4.  That the applicant is not at least eighteen years of age; or 
5.  That the applicant has not paid the required application fee. 
6.  The adult employee permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by the laws of the state or city or a business that does not have a valid adult related business license. 
C.  Notice of Decision. The decision on an applicant's permit application shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant postage prepaid, or hand delivered, to the residence address listed on the application, within five calendar days after the decision of the chief of police. If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. Such notice shall also provide that the permit applicant may appeal the denial by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01 of this code. If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an adult employee permit. If a permit is denied for an adult employee, the applicant shall immediately cease activities. 
D.  Failure of the chief of police to render a decision on an adult employee permit within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval, subject to appeal to the city council, pursuant to Section 5.44.34. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.44.029 - Appeal of decisions to deny business and employee permits. 
A.  Adult Related Business Permits. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police relating to the issuance or denial of a permit for an adult related business may appeal the decision by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. If an appeal is not timely filed, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
B.  Adult Employee Permits. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police relating to the issuance or denial of any adult employee permit may appeal the decision by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. If an appeal is not timely filed, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.44.030 - Term and renewal of adult related business permits. 
A.  An adult related business permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
B.  A permit which has not been suspended or revoked may be renewed for the period specified in subsection A on written application to the chief of police. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for permit applications. Before submitting the renewal application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable renewal fee as established by resolution of the city council to defray, in part, the cost of reviewing the renewal application. The application shall be filed at least sixty calendar days but not more than ninety calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. When a timely and complete application for renewal is filed, the expiration of the permit shall be stayed until a decision on the renewal application is issued. When the application for renewal is filed less than sixty calendar days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit shall not be stayed. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.031 - Term and renewal of adult employee permits. 
A.  An adult employee permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
B.  A permit which has not been suspended or revoked may be renewed for the period specified in subsection A on written application to the chief of police. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for permit applications. Before submitting the renewal application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable renewal fee as established by resolution of the city council to defray, in part, the cost of reviewing the renewal application. The application shall be filed at least ten calendar days but not more than sixty calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. When a timely and complete application for renewal is filed, the expiration of the permit shall be stayed until a decision on the renewal application is issued. When the application for renewal is filed less than ten calendar days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit shall not be stayed. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.032 - Name and place of business—Change of location. 
No person granted a permit for an adult related business shall operate the adult related business under any name or at any location not specified in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.033 - Suspension, revocation or other action relating to adult related business permits and adult employee permits. 
A.  An adult related business permit and an adult employee permit may be suspended, revoked or other action may be taken against a permittee by the chief of police in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
B.  On determining that grounds for permit suspension, revocation or other action exists, the chief of police shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension, revocation or action to the permittee. The notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Municipal Code Sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Hearings pursuant to this Section shall be conducted by the chief of police or a designated hearing officer designated by him/her which can include a retired judge. Hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the chief of police or designated hearing officer but, at a minimum, shall include the following: 
1.  All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel. 
2.  The chief of police or designated hearing officer shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. 
3.  Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the permittee. Extensions of time for continuances sought by a permittee shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on permit suspensions or revocations. Extensions for convenience shall not exceed thirty days. 
C.  A permit may be suspended or revoked based on the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permit holder, or an employee, independent contractor, partner director, or manager of the permittee: 
1.  The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the adult related business fails to comply with all of the provisions of these regulations and this section relating to adult related businesses, including the adult related business operational standards contained in this chapter and in Chapter 17.79 of the Rocklin Municipal Code pertaining to adult related businesses, and all other applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health, and zoning requirements of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
2.  The permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required city licenses and permits. 
3.  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city as part of the application for a permit. 
4.  The permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued. 
5.  That an individual employed by, or performing in, the adult related business (whether classified as an employee or an independent contractor) has pled guilty, or nolo contendere, or been convicted of any crime listed in Section 5.44.027. 
6.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more. 
7.  The permittee or operator of an adult related business has knowingly allowed or permitted, or has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult related business: 
a.  Any action included in the definition of "specified sexual activities" in this chapter; 
b.  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for any sexual act, including but not limited to those within the definition of "specified sexual activities" in this chapter; 
c.  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code; 
d.  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318, or subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; 
e.  California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4; 
f.  The appearance of men or women in a "state of nudity" in any area of the adult related business premises by employees or patrons; 
g.  The appearance of an employee or patron in a state of partial nudity or displaying specified anatomical areas on the premises, except when performing on stage as provided for in this chapter; 
h.  Violation of any federal, state or local law regulating the sale, consumption, or possession of alcohol on the premises; 
i.  Violation of any of the development and operational standards, rules or regulations governing the conduct or operation of an adult related business by an employee or patron with knowledge by an employee or manager where no immediate action is taken by the owner or operator to stop the offending action; 
j.  Employment of any person without an adult related business employee permit as required by this chapter; or 
k.  Any act by an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
8.  Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed. 
9.  Conviction of any of the crimes specified in Section 5.44.027 by an owner or operator of an adult related business. 
D.  After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the chief of police or designated hearing officer finds and determines that there are grounds for action to be taken against a permittee, based upon the severity of the violation, the chief of police shall impose one or more of the following: 
1.  Conditions upon the permit reasonably related to address the violation(s); 
2.  Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months; or 
3.  Revocation of the permit. 
The police chief or designated hearing officer shall render a written decision that shall be delivered by hand or overnight mailed to the permittee within five days of the hearing. 
E.  Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police relating to the revocation or suspension of a permit for an adult related business or an adult employee permit may appeal the decision by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. If an appeal is not timely filed, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
F.  In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this section, another adult related business permit or adult related business employee permit shall not be granted to the permittee within twelve months after the date of such revocation. 
G.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the adult related business for the purpose of establishing a violation of this chapter, or for purposes of permit denial, suspension, or revocation if a permittee allowed, either knowingly or through negligent failure to supervise, a violation of this chapter to occur. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.44.034 - Appeals of decisions to deny, suspend or revoke business and employee permits. 
A.  The decision of the police chief or designated hearing officer to deny, suspend, or revoke adult related business permits and adult employee permits shall be appealable by following the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01. If an appeal is not timely filed, the decision of the police chief or designated hearing officer shall be final. 
B.  The city council shall conduct an appeal hearing within thirty days from the date the written appeal was filed. 
C.  The hearing shall be recorded. 
D.  Witnesses are not required to be sworn. 
E.  The applicant shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel. 
F.  The hearing shall be an administrative hearing wherein the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Hearsay can be presented to supplement and/or explain direct evidence, as provided in California Government Code Section 11513(c). Police reports shall be admissible, even if they are written by non-sworn personnel. 
G.  The city council shall independently review the entire record, including the transcript of the hearing and any oral or written arguments which may be offered to the city council by the appellant and respondent. The city council shall hear all other relevant evidence from competent persons relating to denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall decide to sustain the decision, modify the decision, or order the decision stricken and issue such order as the city council finds is supported by the entire record. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive, shall be rendered in writing within four working days, and such written decision shall be immediately mailed or delivered to the appellant(s) and there shall be no additional right of appeal. 
H.  Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this division or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applications shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decision on applications. Extensions of appeal shall not exceed thirty days. 
I.  Failure of the city council to render a decision to grant or deny an appeal of a license denial, suspension or revocation within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval of adult related business permit or the adult employee permit. 
J.  The city council may set an appeal fee for appeals provided in this section. The appeal fee shall be set at a level designed to recoup the cost of the appeal, including but not limited to costs of the court reporter. 
L.  The time for a court challenge to a decision of the city council is governed by the California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. 
M.  Notice of the city council's decision and its findings shall include citation to the California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. 
N.  Any applicant or permittee whose permit has been denied, suspended, or revoked pursuant to this Section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-23-2018)  
5.44.035 - Review of permit—Fee required. 
Any review of an existing and currently active adult related business permit or adult employee permit, if ordered by the chief of police, shall require the payment of a permit review fee, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.040 - Register of adult related business employees. 
A.  The operator of an adult related business requiring an adult related business permit pursuant to Section 5.44.020 shall maintain a register on the premises of all employees of the business and their permit numbers. 
B.  The register required by subsection A shall include the current employees, as well as employees during the previous twelve months. The register shall remain confidential, except that it shall be available for inspection by law enforcement personnel or the county health officer for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The operator of the business shall provide the register immediately upon demand during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.041 - Adult employee identification card. 
The chief of police shall provide to each adult employee granted a permit or temporary permit, an identification card containing the name, photograph and permit number of the adult employee. The identification card shall remain confidential, except that an adult employee shall deposit his or her identification card with the on-site manager of an adult related business while the adult employee is on the premises. The on-site manager shall make the identification cards available for inspection by law enforcement personnel or the county health officer at all times while the adult related business is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.042 - Employment of persons under the age of eighteen years prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the permittee or operator of an adult related business to employ, or permit to perform services or entertainment on the premises, any person who is under the age of eighteen years. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.043 - Display of permit. 
Every adult related business granted a permit shall display the permit in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the adult related business at all times during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.044 - Business license tax. 
Nothing in this title shall relieve the owner of any adult related business, or any adult employee, from paying the applicable business license tax pursuant to this title. The issuance of a business operations tax certificate shall not authorize conducting an adult related business until the necessary regulatory permit required by Sections 5.44.020 or 5.44.023 has been lawfully granted. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.045 - Transfer of adult related business permit. 
Adult related business permits are not transferable. Upon sale or relocation of an adult related business, the permit therefore shall be void; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee, the establishment may continue in business for ninety days to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit pursuant to this section, provided, however, that the executor of the estate shall be required to renew the application within the ninety days and shall comply with all other requirements of this code. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and upon such attempt the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.046 - Employment of adult related business employees. 
A.  No permittee or operator of an adult related business shall employ any person unless that person possesses a valid adult employee permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each employee shall have first obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter and shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter. 
B.  No permittee or operator of an adult related business shall employ at an adult related business, any person who has pled guilty, nolo contendere, or been convicted of an offense specified in Section 5.44.027(A)(2) within the previous five years. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.047 - Hours of operation. 
A.  An adult related business shall not be open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. An adult related business which has a license issued by the State Department of Alcohol Beverage Control may remain open as permitted by state law, but may not provide "live adult entertainment" as defined in this chapter after 11:00 p.m. 
B.  It is unlawful for any performer of an adult related business to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.048 - Development and operational standards. 
The following development and operational standards shall apply to all adult related businesses, including those providing "live adult entertainment" and shall be in addition to those found in the zoning code: 
A.  Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire department and building regulations and standards adopted by the City of Rocklin. 
B.  No adult related business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, displaying, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or men and/or women in a state of nudity or state of partial nudity as defined in this chapter, from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open in such a way as to permit the observation of men or women in a state of partial nudity or displaying sexually anatomical areas, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. 
C.  No person, including employees or patrons, may appear in a state of nudity nor shall a person wear clothing or other apparel which simulates the appearance of a state of nudity in an adult related business. No person shall appear or display specified anatomical areas or be in a state of partial nudity, except employees while in the employee's dressing room or while an employee is performing on a stage as permitted in this chapter. 
D.  All off-street parking areas and the exterior areas of an adult related business shall be illuminated as specified in the zoning ordinance. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises. 
E.  The building entrance to an adult related business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen years of age are precluded from entering the premises. 
F.  All interior areas of an adult related business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level: 
Area ..... Foot-Candles 
Bookstores and other retail establishments ..... Twenty 
Theaters and cabarets ..... Five (except for the stage area during performances, at which times lighting may be as low as 1.0 foot-candles on the stage, but 5.0 at all other locations within the adult related business premises) 
Motels/hotels ..... Twenty (in public areas) 
Modeling studios ..... Twenty 
Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within seventy-two hours. 
G.  The adult related business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and female patrons and male employees and female employees. No person of the opposite sex may enter a male or female restroom, except an employee may enter to carry out duties of repair, maintenance or cleaning while the restroom is closed for use. The restroom shall be free of any adult material and shall not contain television monitors, or other motion picture or video projection, recording, or reproduction equipment. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case the sexually oriented business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The attendant shall insure that no person of the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, and that not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by law, and, with the exception of urination, that no persons engage in any specified sexual activity in the public portion of the restroom. 
H.  No employee shall make physical contact with the person or the clothing of any patron and no patron shall make physical contact with the person or the clothing of any employee except for purposes of collecting money by hand to hand transfer (subject to the limitations of Section 5.44.049(H)), rendering emergency medical aid or handing something to the other in the ordinary course of business. It is the intent of this section to prohibit any touching of a sexual nature between patrons and employees. 
I.  Adult related businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain public peace and safety and to assure compliance with the regulations relating to adult related businesses and based upon the following standards: 
1.  Adult related businesses featuring "live adult entertainment" or "individual viewing booths" at adult motion picture theaters or adult arcades shall provide at least one security guard inside the facility at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy of the adult related business featuring live entertainment or individual viewing booths at adult motion picture theaters or adult arcades is greater than thirty-five patrons, an additional security guard shall be on duty inside the building premise. Where an adult related business features "live adult entertainment," as defined in this chapter, an additional security guard shall be present outside the facility to provide patrol in the parking lots at all times the business is open or in the alterative, the business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas. 
2.  Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner to be readily identified by the public as a security guard and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. At the request of the chief of police, security guards shall provide written confirmation to the city that they are duly licensed and registered as required by law. No security person required pursuant to this section shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, entertainer or performer or shall be the sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
J.  The manager on duty shall make reasonable efforts to control the conduct of patrons so as to prevent or minimize disorderly or unlawful conduct within the establishment and within fifty feet of the establishment. Such efforts shall include keeping an orderly line to enter the establishment that does not block public sidewalks, entrances, exits, or other public rights-of-way, and preventing patrons from loitering outside the establishment. The distance shall be measured in a straight line from the property line of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.049 - Adult related businesses providing live adult entertainment. 
In addition to the development and operational standards provided in Section 5.44.048 and those found in the zoning code, the following additional requirements shall also apply to adult related businesses providing "live adult entertainment" as defined in this chapter: 
A.  No person shall perform "live adult entertainment" for patrons of an adult related business except upon a stage which is at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor and which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an adult employee. Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches in height shall be maintained at the Ten-foot perimeter point to establish the separation between adult employees and patrons as required by this subsection. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt the adult related business from compliance with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to handicapped accessibility. 
B.  No owner or operator of an adult related business which provides "live adult entertainment" and for which an adult related business permit is required pursuant to this chapter shall permit any person to be on the premises of the adult related business in a "state of nudity," except for performers changing clothes in the dressing room. 
C.  No owner or operator of an adult related business which provides live entertainment for which an adult related business permit is required by this chapter shall permit any person to appear in any public area of the premises in a state of dress less than a state of partial nudity, except when performing on a stage as permitted by this chapter. While performing on stage, employees providing "live adult entertainment" may appear in a state of dress less than partially nude but may not be nude as those terms are defined by this chapter. 
D.  No person, other than an employee of the adult related business who has been issued a valid adult employee permit, may provide "live adult entertainment" in an adult related business and the owner and/or operator and manager may not permit any person to appear in a state of dress less than a state of partial nudity in an adult related business. 
E.  The adult related business shall provide separate dressing rooms for adult employees which are exclusively dedicated to the adult employees' use, and to which no patron shall be admitted. No patron shall be permitted in the employees' dressing room. The adult related business shall provide a separate walkway between the dressing room facilities and the stage in a location which is not open to patrons, located at least ten feet from patrons and which is at least three feet wide with a fixed solid barrier at least thirty inches in height separating the adult employees approaching or leaving the stage from all patrons. 
F.  The adult related business shall provide an entrance/exit from the adult related business premise for an employee that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
G.  No employee shall solicit tips or other gratuities from any patron or other employees. No gratuity or tip may be given to an employee providing "live adult entertainment" except by placing the tip or gratuity into a non-human receptacle placed at the rail separating the employees from the patrons and at least ten feet from the stage. Employees, other than those providing "live adult entertainment," may accept gratuities or tips but only by means of hand to hand transfer or another method not involving physical contact between the patron and the employee. Any transfer of tips or gratuities between patrons and employees shall comply with this section's prohibitions on physical contact between adult employees and patrons. 
H.  Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. And, if necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by employees or independent contractors of the establishment. 
I.  Manager Stations. All indoor areas of the adult related business providing "live adult entertainment" within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view within a direct line of sight at all times by the management from a designated manager station. Manager stations shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in area. Manager stations may include video monitoring of the adult related business, but all areas of the business must be visible by a direct line of sight as described in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.050 - Adult motion picture theater—Additional operating requirements. 
In addition to the development and operational standards provided in Section 5.44.048 and those found in the zoning code, the following additional requirements shall also apply to adult related businesses that are "adult motion picture theaters" as defined in this chapter: 
A.  If the theater contains a hall or auditorium areas, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
1.  Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium areas; 
2.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and 
3.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium areas which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium areas. 
B.  If an adult motion picture theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeters of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those patrons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, child day care facility, public park, school, or religious institution or any residentially zoned property occupied with a residence. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.051 - Management requirements. 
There shall be present on the premises of an adult related business at all times while the business is open, a manager who is at least eighteen years of age, who shall be in charge of all of the activities on the premises and who shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all requirements set forth in this chapter. No performer may serve as the manager. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.052 - Persons under the age of eighteen years prohibited on premises of adult related business. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for the permittee or operator of an adult related business to permit to enter, or remain within, the adult related business, any person who is under the age of eighteen years. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of eighteen to enter, or remain within, the adult related business. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.053 - Inspection. 
To the extent authorized by law, an applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, planning and inspections division, and other city departments or government agencies to inspect the premises of an adult related business for the purpose of insuring compliance with this code and the development and operational standards applicable to adult related businesses, at any time it is open for business. A person who operates an adult related business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. Nothing in this section shall permit or authorize warrantless searches of property on the premises, except as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.054 - Conditions of adult related business permit. 
The requirements, regulations and provisions set forth in this chapter shall be deemed conditions imposed upon every adult related business permit approved, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension, revocation or other action on the permit issued pursuant to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.055 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate an adult related business in violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, patron or employee to knowingly violate any provision of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as follows: 
A.  Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. 
C.  In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, any adult related business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult related businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoin from further operation by any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration and/or abatement of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
5.44.056 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part, or any part thereof is held for any reason to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall not be affected thereby. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part regardless of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be determined to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 2, 4-14-2009)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the text otherwise requires, the following terms and words shall have the meanings set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (part), 1982).  
6.04.020 - Animal. 
"Animal" means any dog, cat, swine, livestock, wild animal or fowl subject to regulation pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 660 § 1, 1991: Ord. 483 § 1.2 (a), 1982).  
6.04.030 - Animal control center. 
"Animal control center" means the facilities provided by the county for the impounding and care of animals. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (b), 1982).  
6.04.040 - Animal control officer. 
"Animal control officer" means that person and his or her duly authorized assistants and deputies employed by the city who are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this title and carry out the intent hereof. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2(c), 1982).  
6.04.050 - At large. 
"At large" means the presence of any animal when it is off the premises of its owner and not restrained by a leash or tether under the control of a person physically capable of retaining control of the animal, or when the animal is on the premises of its owner and not restrained by a leash, tether, fence or other adequate enclosure sufficient to prevent ingress and egress of the animal or not under the control and in the immediate presence of its owner. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2(d), 1982).  
6.04.060 - City. 
"City" means the city of Rocklin. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (e), 1982).  
6.04.065 - City animal shelter. 
"City animal shelter" means the facilities provided by, or contracted with, the city for the impounding and care of animals. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 1, 6-12-2012)  
6.04.070 - City manager. 
"City manager" means the manager of the city of Rocklin. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (f), 1982).  
6.04.080 - County. 
"County" means the county of Placer. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2(g), 1982).  
6.04.085 - Domestic. 
"Domestic," when used to describe an animal, means adapted to life in intimate association with people and able to live and breed in a tame condition. 
(Ord. 660 § 2, 1991).  
6.04.090 - Domestic fowl. 
"Domestic fowl" means any common farm fowl including, but not limited to, turkeys, geese, ducks, chickens and pigeons. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (h), 1982).  
6.04.100 - Health officer. 
"Health officer" means the health officer of the county or any of his duly authorized representatives. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (i), 1982).  
6.04.110 - Impoundment. 
"Impoundment" means the taking up and confining of an animal by the animal control officer in a manner consistent with recognized standards of humane treatment. Animals impounded pursuant to this title shall be impounded at the animal control center or at such other place as may be approved by the animal control officer for the impoundment of animals. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (j), 1982).  
6.04.120 - Keep. 
"Keep" means keep, harbor, maintain or permit to keep, harbor or maintain. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (k), 1982).  
6.04.130 - Kennel. 
"Kennel" means for the purposes of this title shall have the same meaning as is set forth in Section 17.04.290 of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (l), 1982). 
(Ord. No. 953, § 1, 9-8-2009)  
6.04.140 - Livestock. 
"Livestock" means any common farm animal, including, but not limited to, cows, horses, sheep and goats, but excluding fowl and domestic swine. 
(Ord. 660 § 3, 1991: Ord. 483 § 1.2 (m), 1982).  
6.04.150 - Owner. 
"Owner" means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trust or organization of any kind, having an interest in, harboring or having control, custody or possession of, an animal. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (n), 1982).  
6.04.160 - Person. 
"Person" means one or more individual human beings or any fictitious entity or entities. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (o), 1982).  
6.04.165 - Potentially dangerous animal. 
"Potentially dangerous animal" shall be defined as set forth in California Food and Agricultural Code § 31602, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 2, 6-12-2012)  
6.04.170 - Premises. 
"Premises" means any parcel(s) of property owned, leased, occupied or under the control of a person. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (p), 1982).  
6.04.180 - Vaccination. 
"Vaccination" means the inoculation with an antirabies vaccine approved by, and administered in the manner prescribed by, the State Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (q), 1982).  
6.04.190 - Vicious animal. 
Vicious animal shall be defined as set forth in California Food and Agricultural Code § 31603, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.2 (r), 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 3, 6-12-2012)  
6.04.200 - Wild animal. 
"Wild animal" means any of the following: 
A.  Following members of the class Reptilia: 
1.  Order Ophidia (such as, but not limited to, racers, boas, water snakes and pythons) over eight feet in length; and 
2.  Order Loricata (such as, but not limited to, alligators, caymans and crocodiles) over four feet in length. 
B.  Following members of the class Aves: 
1.  Order Falconiformes (such as, but not limited to, hawks, eagles and vultures which are not kept pursuant to federal or state permit); and 
2.  Subdivision Ratitae (such as, but not limited to, ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, and emus). 
C.  Following members of the class Mammalia: 1. Order Carnivora, expressly excepting the domestic dog (Canis familiaris) and the domestic cat (Felis catus), but including, but not limited to, the family Felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars), the family Canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes and jackals); and 
2.  Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and opossums); and 
3.  Order Chiroptera (bats); and 
4.  Order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos); and 
5.  Order Proboscidea (elephants); and 
6.  Order Primata (including, but not limited to, monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas); and 
7.  Order Ungulata (expressly excluding domestic swine and any animal which is included within the definition of "livestock" in Section 6.04.140 of this chapter and including, but not limited to, nondomestic swine, antelope, deer, bison, and camels). 
D.  Any nondomestic species when kept, maintained or harbored in such numbers or in such a manner as to constitute the likelihood of danger to the animals themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings. 
E.  Any species of animal which is venomous to human beings, whether its venom is transmitted by bite, sting, touch or other means, except honey producing bees. 
(Ord. 660 § 4, 1991; Ord. 483 § 1.2 (s), 1982).  
Chapter 6.08 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Responsibility. 
The animal control officer is responsible for the enforcement of this title, and all laws of the state of California pertaining to the control of dogs and other animals and the humane treatment of animals. His duties shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  To take up and impound animals found within the city which are in violation of this title; 
B.  To remove and dispose of the carcass of any animal found on any public highway, street, alley or other public place within the city; 
C.  To cooperate with the county health officer in the quarantine of animals; 
D.  To administer licensing programs as provided for in this title; 
E.  Such other duties as the city manager may, from time to time, prescribe. 
(Ord. 483 § 2.1, 1982).  
6.08.020 - Rules and regulations. 
The animal control officer may formulate rules and regulations in conformity with, and for the purposes of carrying out the intent of, this title, and compliance with such rules and regulations shall be a prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any license or permit issued under this title. 
(Ord. 483 § 2.3, 1982).  
6.08.030 - Summary action. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, if in the judgment of the animal control officer: 
A.  There is an immediate threat to the health or safety of any person or animal, the animal control officer may enter upon a building or premises to abate the same; 
B.  An animal at large is found to be unfit, dangerous, injured or ill and should be destroyed, the animal control officer, may, at any time, in a humane manner, destroy such animal. 
(Ord. 483 § 2.8, 1982).  
6.08.040 - Dogs killing livestock. 
The animal control officer may kill any dog found in the act of killing, wounding or persistently pursuing or worrying livestock or poultry on land or premises which are not owned or possessed by the owner of the dog. 
(Ord. 483 § 2.2, 1982).  
6.08.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 985, § 4, adopted June 12, 2012, deleted § 6.08.050, which pertained to authority to use tranquilizers and derived from Ord. 483 § 2.6, 1982.  
6.08.060 - Right of entry. 
A.  Except in cases where there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare, whenever it is necessary to make an inspection or whenever the animal control officer or his duly authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises or property any condition which may be in violation of this title, the animal control officer, or his authorized representative, may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same, or to perform any duty imposed upon the animal control officer by this title or any other ordinance of the city; provided, that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make reasonable efforts to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the animal control officer or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
B.  When the animal control officer or his authorized representative shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made, to permit entry by the animal control officer or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection or performance of his duties pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 483 § 2.7, 1982).  
Chapter 6.12 - CARE AND CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Prohibited acts—Generally. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to violate any of the provisions of this title hereinbefore or hereinafter set out, or to commit any of the acts set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (part), 1982).  
6.12.020 - Animals at large. 
A.  No person shall allow any animal, except the domestic cat, to run at large. 
B.  A dog shall not be considered at large if it is: 
1.  A trained service animal as defined in California Civil Code § 54.1(6) through 54.1(7)(b). This exception only applies to individuals whose disability prevents them from using a restraint. In such a case, the individual must maintain voice, signal or other effective control of the animal. 
2.  Assisting or in training to assist a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties. 
3.  Within the confines of a city designated dog park. 
4.  Securely confined in a vehicle. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (a), 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 5, 6-12-2012)  
6.12.030 - Trespass. 
No person shall allow any animal, except the domestic cat, to enter upon public property or upon any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (b), 1982).  
6.12.040 - Removal of license tag. 
No person shall, if unauthorized, remove from any dog or domestic swine any collar or harness or other device to which a license tag is attached or remove a current license tag therefrom. 
(Ord. 660 § 5, 1991: Ord. 483 § 3.1 (c), 1982).  
6.12.050 - Counterfeit tags. 
No person shall attach to or keep upon, or cause or permit to be attached or kept upon any dog or domestic swine any license tag, except a tag issued for such dog or swine under the provisions of this title. No person shall attach to or keep upon, or cause or permit to be attached to or kept upon any dog or domestic swine, or make, or cause or permit to be made, or to have in possession, any counterfeit or imitation of any tag provided for by this title. 
(Ord. 660 § 6, 1991: Ord. 483 3.1(d), 1982).  
6.12.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 985, § 7, adopted June 12, 2012, deleted § 6.12.060, which pertained to licensing dogs over four months of age and derived from Ord. 483 § 3.1(e), 1982.  
6.12.070 - Rabies vaccination. 
No person shall possess any dog, over four months of age, which does not have a current vaccination for rabies as evidenced by an official certificate thereof, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (i), 1982).  
6.12.080 - Interference with animal control officer. 
No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist the animal control officer while he is engaged in the performance of any act authorized by this title. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (f), 1982).  
6.12.090 - Dangerous dogs at large. 
No person shall allow any dog known to be dangerous or vicious to run at large upon any street or other public place within the city. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (1), 1982).  
6.12.100 - Loud noises—Nuisance. 
No person shall allow any animal to habitually make loud noise or act in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (m), 1982).  
6.12.110 - Adequate food and shelter. 
No person shall allow any animal to go without adequate food, water, shelter or proper care. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (j), 1982).  
6.12.120 - Mistreatment prohibited. 
No person shall damage, harm, mutilate, maim, tease or in any other way mistreat any animal. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (k), 1982).  
6.12.130 - Female dogs in heat. 
No person shall fail to confine any female dog, while in heat or breeding condition. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (g), 1982).  
6.12.140 - Abandonment. 
No person shall abandon any animal in the city. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.1 (h), 1982).  
6.12.150 - Dogs and swine which are habitual nuisance—Complaint and investigation. 
Whenever the animal control officer receives in writing complaints by three or more persons, each having a separate residence or regularly employed in the neighborhood at separate locations, that any dog or domestic swine is a habitual nuisance by reason of its howling, barking or by its actions, is potentially vicious, or in any other manner is causing undue annoyance, the animal control officer shall investigate the complaint. If he or she finds such conditions to exist, he or she may issue an order to conform requiring the owner or custodian to obey such conditions within a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. 660 § 7, 1991: Ord. 483 § 3.3, 1982).  
6.12.160 - Cats which injure persons or property. 
No owner of a domestic cat shall permit or suffer the cat to damage property, public or private, real or personal, or to bite, scratch or claw any human being or other animal which is the property of another. Any domestic cat which has damaged property or has bitten, scratched or clawed a human being or animal shall be subject to impoundment. 
(Ord. 483 Art. 9, 1982).  
6.12.170 - Animals causing damage to livestock or poultry. 
If any person has any loss or damage to livestock or poultry, which is caused by animals, the person may file a complaint in writing with the animal control officer. Such complaint shall state when and where the damage occurred and how much damage was done, and, if known, the name of the person who owns the animal(s) or the custodian in charge of the animal(s) causing such damage or loss. The animal control officer shall investigate the complaint and if he finds conditions exist in violation of this title, he may issue an order to conform requiring the owner or custodian to abate such conditions within a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.2, 1982).  
6.12.180 - Taking up stray animals. 
Any person who takes up a stray animal shall notify the animal control officer within forty-eight hours of taking up the animal. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.6, 1982).  
6.12.190 - Unlawful to sell or give away live animals on street, highway, etc. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or give away live animals as described and set forth in Section 597.4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 8, 6-12-2012)  
Chapter 6.16 - DOG LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to maintain within the city a dog over the age of four months without first obtaining from the city a license authorizing the maintaining of such dog within the city except a licensed kennel in compliance with California Food and Agricultural Code § 30807. 
(Ord. 483 § 7.1, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 9, 6-12-2012)  
6.16.020 - Issuance. 
The dog license required by this chapter shall be issued upon payment of the fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council and upon showing a valid certificate of rabies vaccination, or a valid certificate exempting the dog from vaccination issued pursuant to Section 66.24.010 for each such dog to be licensed under this title. The dog license shall be issued for a period not to exceed thirty-six months, commencing upon the date of application. The dog license shall expire on the expiration date of the rabies certificate or, where the dog license was issued upon certification exempting the dog from vaccination, upon the expiration of thirty-six months or expiration of the exemption certificate, whichever occurs first. The cost of the dog license may be prorated to coincide with the expiration of the rabies certificate or exemption certificate. 
(Ord. 696 § 1, 1994: Ord. 542 § 1, 1986: Ord. 483 § 7.2, 1982).  
6.16.030 - Fees—Penalty for nonpayment. 
A.  An annual license fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council shall be paid by each owner of a dog, male or female, over the age of four months, located within the city, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
B.  Upon proper presentation of a certificate from a licensed veterinarian that a dog has been spayed or neutered, the license fee for the spayed or neutered dog shall be one-half of the fee for a dog that has not been spayed or neutered. 
C.  The license fee shall be paid on the date of application. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, the license fee shall become due on the expiration of the current license. Except as provided in subsection E of this section, any person failing to procure and pay for such license on or before the due date shall pay a late fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council as a penalty for such failure. Such late fee shall be in addition to the license fee payable for such dog. 
D.  Any person who acquires ownership, custody or control of a dog not currently licensed pursuant to this title and any person who owns or has custody of a dog which attains the age of four months shall be immediately liable for payment of the license fee. 
E.  The late fee penalty provided in subsection C of this section, shall not apply in connection with the initial licensing of any dog reaching the age of four months or whose owner first brings such dog into the city or acquires ownership, custody or control of the dog. 
(Ord. 542 § 2, 1986: Ord. 483 § 7.3, 1982).  
6.16.040 - Identification tag. 
The animal control officer or duly authorized designee shall procure and issue serial numbered license tags stamped with the name of the city. Such tags shall only be issued upon the application of the owners who have complied with the vaccination and fee provisions of this title. The license tag will be permanently issued for each dog and shall remain with that dog. 
(Ord. 542 § 3, 1986: Ord. 483 § 7.4, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 9, 6-12-2012)  
6.16.050 - Collars. 
Every dog shall be provided by the owner with a suitable collar or other device to which a dog license tag may be attached. 
(Ord. 483 § 7.5, 1982).  
6.16.060 - Lost license tags—Replacement fee. 
In the event a license tag is lost from the body of any dog for which the same was issued, the owner shall, within ten days thereafter, procure another license tag for the dog from the city for which he shall pay a fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. As often as any license tag is lost, the same shall be replaced in the same manner as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 542 § 4, 1986: Ord. 483 § 7.7, 1982).  
6.16.070 - Renewal notices. 
The animal control officer or duly authorized designee shall mail renewal notices monthly to the owners of dogs whose licenses are due to expire the following month. 
(Ord. 542 § 5, 1986: Ord. 483 § 7.8, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 9, 6-12-2012)  
6.16.080 - Service animal—Exemption. 
A fee shall not be levied for any dog license issued for a service animal in compliance with California Food and Agricultural Code § 30850. 
(Ord. 483 § 7.6, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 9, 6-12-2012)  
Chapter 6.20 - KENNELS 
Sections: 
 
6.20.010 - Prohibited. 
Kennels shall only be allowed as set forth in Chapter 17.64 of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 483 Art. 8, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 4, 11-14-2017)  
Chapter 6.24 - RABIES CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
6.24.010 - Vaccination required. 
A.  Every dog over four months of age shall have a current vaccination with a canine antirabies vaccine approved by the Health Department of the state. Such vaccination shall be administered by a veterinarian or as provided through county-recognized vaccination clinics. 
B.  Every person who owns or comes to own an unvaccinated dog over four months of age shall have ten days in which to comply with the provisions of this section. 
C.  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this chapter, no dog need be vaccinated for rabies where: 
1.  A licensed veterinarian has examined the dog and certified at such time that a vaccination would endanger the dog's health because of physiological reasons; and 
2.  Such certificate is presented to the health officer within five days of such examination; and 
3.  The health officer concurs in the opinion of the veterinarian, contained in such certificate, and endorses on such certificate his approval thereof. Such certificate must bear the date of issuance and must be renewed each year. 
D.  Every veterinarian, after vaccinating a dog for rabies, shall issue a certificate and furnish one copy of the certificate to the owner of the dog and one copy to the animal control officer. The certificate shall be in the form prescribed by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.7, 1982).  
6.24.020 - Duty to report bite. 
Any person having knowledge that any animal capable of transmitting rabies has bitten a human being within the city shall immediately report the fact to the Placer county health department, the animal control officer or the Rocklin police chief and shall furnish complete information thereof. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.5, 1982).  
6.24.030 - Quarantine. 
A.  The animal control officer shall ensure that all animals falling into the following categories shall be isolated or quarantined at the place and under the conditions prescribed by the health officer and pertinent state laws and regulations: 
1.  Known rabid animals; 
2.  Suspected rabid animals; 
3.  Animals that have bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies; 
4.  Animals, of a species subject to rabies, which have been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or have been in intimate contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of an animal to violate any of the conditions of isolation or quarantine prescribed by the health officer, the animal control officer, or their duly authorized representatives. 
(Ord. 483 § 6.1, 1982).  
6.24.040 - Delivery of carcass. 
Upon the death of any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or animal which has bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies, the animal control officer shall obtain and turn over to the health officer the carcass of the animal or an adequate specimen thereof. 
(Ord. 483 § 6.2, 1982).  
Chapter 6.28 - IMPOUNDMENT 
Sections: 
 
6.28.010 - Animals subject to impoundment. 
Any animal which is, to the knowledge of the animal control officer, engaged in an activity or is existing in a condition prohibited by this title or applicable state law shall be taken and impounded. 
(Ord. 483 § 4.1, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 10, 6-12-2012)  
6.28.020 - Authority of police officers. 
In addition to the power vested in the animal control officer for the impoundment of animals found at large or otherwise in violation of this title, any peace officer is empowered to impound such animal and to turn such animal over to the animal control officer for impoundment. 
(Ord. 483 § 4.2, 1982).  
6.28.030 - County regulations to govern. 
Once impounded at the animal control center, the disposition or redemption of the animal shall be governed by the ordinances and regulations of the county. 
(Ord. 483 § 4.3, 1982).  
6.28.040 - Impoundment at city animal shelter 
Once impounded at the city animal shelter, the disposition or redemption of the animal shall be governed by the ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 11, 6-12-2012)  
6.28.054 - Establishment of fees for animal control services. 
Fees for animal control services related to Title 6 of the Rocklin Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, fees for redemption, boarding, surrender, and disposal, shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 985, § 17, 6-12-2012)  
Chapter 6.32 - POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.32.010 - Control by owner. 
The owner of any potentially dangerous or vicious animal shall have the duty to take such reasonable steps as are necessary to prevent his animal from biting or attacking another human being or from killing, attacking, or causing damage to any other animal. 
(Ord. 483 § 3.4, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 13, 6-12-2012)  
6.32.020 - Harboring prohibited. 
No person shall harbor or hide, or cause to be harbored or hidden, any potentially dangerous or vicious animal and shall surrender any such animal to the animal control officer upon demand. 
(Ord. 483 § 5.7, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 13, 6-12-2012)  
6.32.030 - Impoundment. 
The animal control officer shall cause any potentially dangerous or vicious animal to be impounded and shall, within seventy-two hours after the animal has been impounded, notify the owner, if known, that the animal has been impounded under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 483 § 5.1, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 13, 6-12-2012)  
6.32.040 - Disposition of potentially dangerous or vicious animal. 
The animal control officer may do any of the following with regard to a potentially dangerous or vicious animal: 
A.  Retain such animal for purposes of observation for a period not to exceed thirty days; 
B.  Release such animal to the control of its owner, subject to the condition that such owner is required thereafter at all times to keep such animal in a secure enclosure, or upon such other conditions as may be reasonably required to insure the public safety; 
C.  Notify the owner of such animal that reasonable cause exists, and a concise statement of reasons therefore, to believe that such animal will continue to be a menace to the safety of human beings and that the animal is to be destroyed, subject to the proceedings set forth in Section 6.32.050. 
(Ord. 483 § 5.2, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 13, 6-12-2012)  
6.32.050 - Destruction—Notice—Appeal. 
A.  In the event the animal control officer determines that a potentially dangerous or vicious animal is to be destroyed pursuant to the provisions of subsection 6.32.040 C., the animal control officer shall notify the owner of such animal at least five days in advance of the intended action, and further inform such owner of their right to appeal as provided in this section. 
B.  The owner of such animal may, prior to the date upon which the animal is to be destroyed, appeal the determination to the animal control officer to the city council by filing a notice of such appeal with the city clerk. 
C.  After receipt of the notice of appeal, the city clerk shall calendar the same for hearing by the city council and shall notify the owner and the animal control officer of the date set for hearing. In no event shall the hearing be set for a date later than twenty days after the animal was impounded. 
D.  The animal control officer shall not thereafter destroy such animal until the appeal is heard and a decision rendered pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Any owner of a potentially dangerous or vicious animal failing to appeal after notice as provided in this section shall be deemed to have waived any right in, or claim upon, such animal, or to claim any damages or other relief by reason of any action or inaction by the animal control officer pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 483 § 5.3, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 14, 6-12-2012)  
6.32.060 - Decision of council on appeal. 
On the date set for the appeal, the city council shall conduct a hearing on the matter. After hearing testimony from all interested parties as it may deem proper, the city council may: 
A.  Uphold the decision of the animal control officer to destroy the animal; 
B.  Order the return of the animal to its owner and impose such conditions upon such return as may be reasonably necessary to insure the public safety; 
C.  Take such other action as it may reasonably find necessary to protect the public safety, including a continuation of the impoundment of such animal for a period not to exceed thirty days from the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. 483 § 5.4, 1982).  
6.32.070 - Action to carry out decision. 
After the decision of the city council has been rendered as provided in Section 6.32.060, the animal control officer shall take such action as is necessary to carry out the decision. 
(Ord. 483 § 5.5, 1982).  
6.32.080 - Fee. 
The fee charged for the impoundment of any animal under the provisions of this chapter shall be as provided by the city if impounded at the city animal shelter or county if impounded at the county animal control center. 
(Ord. 483 § 5.6, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 13, 6-12-2012)  
Chapter 6.34 - SWINE 
Sections: 
 
6.34.010 - Keeping of domestic swine. 
No person shall keep or maintain within the city any domestic swine which is more than eighteen inches at the shoulder or which weighs more than ninety-five pounds. Domestic swine within these limitations may be kept as household pets on property on which there is an occupied single-family dwelling, subject to the provisions and restrictions of this chapter and title. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.020 - Minimum lot area. 
A.  No person shall keep or maintain any domestic swine in or about any duplex, triplex, fourplex, mobile home park or apartment unit. 
B.  No person shall keep or maintain any domestic swine in or about a single-family dwelling located on a lot of less than six thousand square feet. 
C.  No person shall keep or maintain two domestic swine in or about a single-family dwelling located on a lot of less than ten thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.030 - Number of domestic swine. 
No person shall keep or maintain more than two domestic swine, or any combination of domestic swine and dogs exceeding three. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.040 - Domestic swine to be spayed/neutered. 
No person shall keep or maintain any male domestic swine that has not been neutered or any female domestic swine that has not been spayed. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.050 - Vaccinations. 
Every domestic swine kept under the provisions of this chapter and title shall have an annual leptospirosis vaccination. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.060 - Minimum yard area. 
Any person who keeps or maintains any domestic swine in the city shall provide in the yard of the single-family dwelling at which the domestic swine is kept an outdoor, paved and securely fenced enclosure of no less than one hundred twenty square feet. The domestic swine shall be restricted to the enclosure while out-of-doors, unless on a leash or tether under the control of a person physically capable of retaining control of the animal. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.070 - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain within the city a domestic swine without first obtaining a license authorizing the maintaining of such domestic swine within the city. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.080 - License—Issuance. 
A.  The license required by this chapter shall be issued upon satisfaction of all of the following requirements: 
1.  Payment of a fee in the amount established by resolution of the council; 
2.  Showing proof of current leptospirosis vaccination for the swine to be licensed under this title; 
3.  Certification that the swine has been spayed or neutered; 
4.  Certification by the animal control officer that the premises where the swine is or is to be kept and maintained comply with the provisions of this title and chapter and are clean and sanitary; and 
5.  Determination of the animal control officer, upon a review of the number and nature of complaints and citations filed against the applicant concerning maintenance and treatment of animals regulated by this title, that the applicant is not likely to violate this title or create a nuisance in the keeping and maintaining of domestic swine during the term of a license. 
B.  The license shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve months, commencing upon the date of application, and shall be renewed annually for as long as the domestic swine is kept or maintained. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.090 - Fees—Penalty for nonpayment. 
A.  The license fee shall be paid on the date of application. The license fee shall become due on the expiration of the current license. Any person failing to procure and pay for such license on or before the due date shall pay a late fee in the amount established by resolution of the council as a penalty for such failure. Such late fee shall be in addition to the license fee payable for the swine. 
B.  Any person who acquires ownership, custody or control of swine not currently licensed pursuant to this title shall be immediately liable for payment of the license fee. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.100 - Identification tags. 
The animal control officer or duly appointed designee shall procure and issue one, permanent, serial numbered domestic swine license tag stamped with the name of the city, for each swine licensed under this chapter. Such tags shall only be issued upon the application of the owners who have complied with the provisions of this title. The license tag shall be permanently issued for each swine and shall remain with the swine. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 15, 6-12-2012)  
6.34.110 - Collars. 
Every domestic swine shall be provided by the owner with a suitable collar or other device to which the domestic swine license tag shall be attached. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.120 - Lost license tags—Replacement fee. 
In the event a license tag is lost from the body of any domestic swine for which the same was issued, the owner shall, within ten days thereafter, procure another license tag for the swine from the city for which he shall pay a fee in the amount established by resolution of the council. As often as any license tag is lost, the same shall be replaced in the same manner as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991).  
6.34.130 - Renewal notices. 
The animal control officer or duly appointed designee shall mail renewals notices to the owners of domestic swine whose licenses are due to expire the following month. 
(Ord. 660 § 8 (part), 1991). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 15, 6-12-2012)  
Chapter 6.36 - LIVESTOCK 
Sections: 
 
6.36.020 - Registration—Five or less animals. 
Any person keeping or maintaining five or less livestock of a particular kind shall report the following information to the animal control officer within five days after bringing such animal(s) within the city: 
A.  The type of each animal; 
B.  A general description of each animal; 
C.  The location where the animal(s) will normally be pastured or kept; 
D.  The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) owning the animal(s), if different from the person keeping or maintaining the animal(s); 
E.  The name, address and telephone number of a person to be contacted concerning the animal(s) in case of emergency. 
(Ord. 483 § 10.2, 1982).  
6.36.030 - Registration—Five or more animals. 
Any person keeping or maintaining five or more livestock of a particular kind shall report the information listed in Section 6.36.020 to the animal control officer, except that such information need not include a general description of each animal, but shall specify the approximate number to be kept in a specific location. 
(Ord. 483 § 10.3, 1982).  
6.36.040 - Restrictions. 
No person shall keep livestock unless: 
A.  It is upon premises upon which, pursuant to Chapter 17.78 of the zoning title, livestock may be kept, provided that the number of animals does not exceed the number permitted within the zone; 
B.  Such livestock are kept within a substantial fence or barricade which consists of any of the following: 
1.  At least three barbed wires, evenly spaced, the top of which shall be at least four feet from the ground, and which shall be securely fastened to posts of metal or wood, the space between which is not greater than twelve feet, 
2.  A chain link fence six feet in height, 
3.  A solid wood fence six feet in height; 
C.  Any shelter provided for such livestock is at least one hundred and fifty feet from any adjoining building or structure; 
D.  At least six thousand square feet of area is provided for each animal. 
(Ord. 483 § 10.4, 1982).  
6.36.050 - Grazing animals utilized for weed abatement. 
The restrictions set forth in Section 6.36.040 above shall not apply to goats and sheep utilized for weed abatement purposes consistent with the city's weed abatement and open space management grazing program. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on grazing activities, unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the city evidencing enrollment and participation in the citywide weed abatement and open space management grazing program. 
(Ord. No. 950, § 2, 3-24-2009)  
Chapter 6.40 - WILD ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.40.010 - Keeping prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any wild animal. 
(Ord. 483 § 11.1, 1982).  
6.40.020 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Persons who use wild animals for diagnostic or research purposes, when the use has been approved by the state pursuant to applicable law; 
B.  Persons who use wild animals for teaching purposes in recognized educational institutions; 
C.  Veterinarians who keep wild animals for boarding or treatment; 
D.  Persons operating game farms or game breeding establishments licensed by the state; 
E.  Persons operating nonprofIt zoological gardens open to the public; 
F.  Persons operating commercial establishments which sell animals and maintain wild animals solely at their places of business; 
G.  Persons who use wild animals for circus or entertainment purposes. 
(Ord. 483 § 11.2, 1982).  
Chapter 6.44 - MISCELLANEOUS ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.44.010 - Restrictions on domestic fowl. 
No person shall keep any goose or turkey, or more than ten, whether singly or in combination, of the following: ducks, chickens or pigeons. 
(Ord. 483 § 12.1, 1982).  
6.44.020 - Enclosures for domestic fowl. 
Domestic fowl shall be kept in a sanitary enclosure which shall not be located within twenty feet of any building or property line. 
(Ord. 483 § 12.2, 1982).  
6.44.030 - Restrictions on rabbits. 
No person shall keep more than ten rabbits. 
(Ord. 483 § 12.3, 1982).  
6.44.040 - Enclosures for rabbits. 
Rabbits shall be enclosed within a sanitary facility which shall not be located less than twenty feet from any building or property line. 
(Ord. 483 § 12.4, 1982).  
6.44.050 - Household pets—Generally. 
A.  Animals including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, guinea pigs, white rats, mice, parakeets, parrots and other animals generally considered by the public to be tame, and commonly considered as pets, may be kept. 
B.  Domestic swine may be kept as household pets as provided by this title. 
(Ord. 660 § 10, 1991: Ord. 483 § 12.5, 1982).  
6.44.060 - Restrictions on household pets. 
Except when kept within a dwelling unit, restrictions applicable to rabbits as set forth in Sections 6.44.030 and 6.44.040 of this chapter shall apply to those animals covered in Section 6.44.050 (A) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 660 § 11, 1991: Ord. 483 § 12.6, 1982).  
6.44.070 - Bees. 
No person shall keep more than two hives of bees. 
(Ord. 483 § 12.7, 1982).  
6.44.080 - Bees—Distance from building. 
Bees shall be kept at least five hundred feet from any building or structure in which persons or animals normally live or are kept. 
(Ord. 483 § 12.8, 1982).  
6.44.090 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to those persons specified in Section 6.40.020. 
(Ord. 483 § 12.9, 1982).  
Chapter 6.48 - DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.48.010 - Dead animal defined. 
"Dead animal," as used in this chapter, means the dead body of any dead horse, mule, cow, ox, bull, or other animal which weighs fifty pounds or more at the time of death. 
(Ord. 483 § 13.1, 1982).  
6.48.020 - Unlawful disposal prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or having under his control a dead animal to permit such dead animal to remain unburied or frozen for a period in excess of twenty-four hours. 
(Ord. 483 § 13.2, 1982). 
(Ord. No. 985, § 16, 6-12-2012)  
6.48.030 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to any animal killed for purposes of consumption, provided that the remains of such dead animal are processed in such a manner as to prevent such dead animal from spoiling. 
(Ord. 483 § 13.3, 1982).  
6.48.040 - Cost of removal. 
In addition to any other penalty in this title, the city shall be entitled to dispose of any dead animal coming within the prohibitions of this chapter if such animal remains unburied for a period in excess of twenty-four hours. Such costs of removal and burial shall be a lien and charge against the owner and person in control of such animal immediately prior to its death. The city shall attempt to contact the owner of such dead animal prior to disposing of same. 
(Ord. 483 § 13.4, 1982).  
Chapter 6.52 - VIOLATIONS AND LIABILITY 
Sections: 
 
6.52.010 - Nonliability of city. 
No liability shall be incurred by the city for the disposition of any animal made pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 483 § 1.3, 1982).  
6.52.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the punishment prescribed for an infraction in the general laws of the state. 
(Ord. 483 § 2.4, 1982).  
6.52.030 - Violation—Public nuisance. 
In addition to all other remedies provided in this title, the city attorney, in the name of and on behalf of the city and the people of the state, may institute appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or abate any violation of this title as a public nuisance. It is declared that the keeping, harboring or maintaining of any animal in violation of the provisions of this title constitutes a public nuisance and may be restrained by any court of competent jurisdiction in the manner set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 483 § 2.5, 1982).  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.01 - APPEALS PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
8.01.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Appeals Procedure" for Title 8. 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.01.020 - Right to appeal and fees. 
A.  Right to Appeal. Except where a procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this title, any person objecting to the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license, permit or entitlement of any nature, the determination or issuance of which is under any of the provisions of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any city official, if the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of such license, permit or entitlement or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised under any of the provisions of this code, may appeal such decision in writing as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Appeals Fees. The city council may establish a schedule for appeals fees by resolution. 
C.  Appeals Regarding Administrative Citations. The regulations set forth in Title 1 of the Rocklin Municipal Code shall govern the appeal of administrative citations, or notices of violation, as such terms are defined in Chapter 1.08, issued for violation of any provision of Title 8. 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.01.030 - Procedure for filing an appeal. 
A.  Appeal to City Manager. If a party is aggrieved of an administrative decision under this Title 8, they may appeal the decision to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days after the date upon which the written administrative decision was deposited in the U.S. mail. The notice of appeal shall contain a statement of the grounds to be relied upon for reversing the decision being appealed. In the event the last calendar day of the filing period falls on a non-business day, the appeal period shall be extended to include the next business day. In the absence of a timely appeal and the payment of any applicable appeal fee, the original administrative decision shall be final. 
The city manager shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal not later than forty-five calendar days after the notice of appeal is received. At least ten calendar days' notice shall be given to the appellant of the time and place of the hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail to the address provided by appellant in his/her notice of appeal. The city manager may hear the appeal in person and shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the hearing. The city manager's written decision shall include appellant's right to appeal the decision to the city council. 
B.  Informal Resolution. Persons denied a permit or otherwise aggrieved by a determination of a city official under this title may meet and/or confer with the city official who issued the decision or the appropriate department head in an effort to informally resolve the matter. Such efforts to informally resolve the matter do not extend the time for filing a formal appeal under subsection A above. In the event the matter is informally resolved prior to the hearing date set by the city manager, the city will refund any appeals fees paid provided the appellant has withdrawn their formal appeal. 
C.  Appeal to City Council. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council by filing a notice of appeal containing appellant's grounds for appeal with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days after the date upon which the city manager's decision is made. In the absence of a timely appeal and payment of any applicable appeal fee, the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
The city clerk shall fix a time and place for the city council hearing of such appeal not later than forty-five calendar days after the notice of appeal is received. At least ten calendar days' notice shall be given to the appellant of the time and place of the hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail to the address provided by appellant in his/her notice of appeal. 
At such hearing before the city council, the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action appealed from should be reversed. The city council may continue the hearing from time to time; provided, however, that the hearing shall occur and be concluded no later than thirty calendar days after the original date set for hearing. The city council shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing and its decision to affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
Chapter 8.04 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Abatement officer" means the police chief or designee. 
B.  "Building" means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy and includes any house, garage, duplex, apartment, condominium, stock cooperative or other residential structure, and includes all retail, commercial and industrial structures. 
C.  "Owner" means any person owning property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for city taxes, or the lessee, tenant, or other person having control or possession of the property. 
D.  "Property" means all property within the city and includes any building located on such property. 
E.  "Unreasonable state of partial construction" means any unfinished building or structure which has been in the course of construction two years or more, and where the appearance or other conditions of said unfinished building or structure substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or reduces the property value in the immediate neighborhood. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.04.020 - Unlawful property nuisances. 
It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain or to allow to be maintained such property in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon, except as may be allowed by this code: 
A.  Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment and furnishings or shopping carts on the property so as to be visible from a public street; 
B.  Overgrown vegetation visible from a public street likely to harbor rats, vermin or other nuisances or which obstructs the view of drivers on public streets or private driveways, or which impedes, obstructs or denies pedestrian or other lawful travel on sidewalks, walkways, or other public rights of way; 
C.  Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds, or other vegetation constituting unsightly appearance, dangerous to public safety and welfare and visible from a public street; 
D.  Packing boxes, cardboard boxes, lumber, junk, trash, barrels, drums, salvage materials, or other debris kept on the property for an unreasonable period and visible from a public street; 
E.  Attractive nuisances dangerous to children and other persons, including abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, appliances, refrigerators and freezers, hazardous pools, ponds and excavations; 
F.  Personal property, such as vehicles, boats, trailers or vehicle parts which are abandoned or left in a state of partial repair for an unreasonable period of time in front yards, side yards, driveways, sidewalks or walkways and visible from a public street; 
G.  Vehicles parked or stored in residential zoning districts on property, other than on driveways or other impervious surfaces, and visible from a public street; 
H.  Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed, left in an unreasonable state of partial construction or have been declared substandard or dangerous by the building official; 
I.  Unpainted buildings and those having dry rot, warping or termite infestation. Any building on which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation as to render the building unsightly and in a state of disrepair; 
J.  Buildings with windows containing broken glass or no glass at all, where the window is of a type which normally contains glass, which constitutes a hazard and/or invites trespassers and malicious mischief. Plywood or other material used to cover such window space, if permitted under this code, shall be painted in a color or colors compatible with the remainder of the building; 
K.  Building exteriors, walls, fences, driveways, sidewalks or walkways which are maintained in such condition as to become defective or unsightly or are materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements; 
L.  Construction equipment, farm machinery, or machinery of any type or description parked or stored on the owner's property when it is visible from a public street, except: 
1.  During excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit which are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property, 
2.  During active farming operations, or 
3.  When such machinery in an agricultural or industrial zoning district is appropriately stored; 
M.  Property which lacks appropriate landscaping, turf or plant material so as to cause excessive dust; 
N.  The keeping, storing, depositing or accumulation for an unreasonable period of time of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, and other similar materials, which manner of keeping, storing, depositing or accumulation constitutes visual blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the senses; 
O.  Maintenance of property so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment or use of such adjacent properties. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.04.030 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Any property found to be maintained in violation of the foregoing section is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by rehabilitation, removal, demolition or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.18 of Title 1 of this code. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2002). 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 11, 3-13-2018)  
8.04.040—8.04.200 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1090, § 12, adopted March 13, 2018, repealed former §§ 8.04.040—8.04.200 which pertained to notification of nuisance; hearing to abate nuisance; notice of hearing; hearing by abatement officer; procedure—no appeal; appeal procedure—hearing by city council; decision by council; service of order to abate; hearing procedure before abatement officer and council; abatement by city; limitation of filing judicial action; demolition; notice of intent to demolish; record of cost of abatement; assessment lien; alternative actions available; violations, and derived from Ord. 864 § 1, adopted in 2002.  
Chapter 8.08 - NUISANCE VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Abatement officer" means the chief of police or designee. 
B.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street. 
C.  "Public property" does not include "highway" except in Section 8.08.040(A). 
D.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.020 - Provisions supplementary. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.030 - Nuisance declared—Findings. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660, et seq., of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as a public nuisance, the council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, and promote criminal activities, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly excepted from this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.040 - Exemption for junkyards, enclosed vehicles. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner or where it is otherwise not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or junkyard. 
These exceptions shall not, however, authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this chapter. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.050 - Administration—Right of entry. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the abatement officer. In the enforcement of this chapter, the abatement officer may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or part thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle believed to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.060 - Notice of intent to abate. 
A.  Whenever the abatement officer determines that an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperable vehicle, or part thereof, is present on private or public property, except as expressly excepted from this chapter, he shall cause a notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter to be mailed at least ten days prior to such removal by certified mail to (1) the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and (2) to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. 
B.  Mailed notice of intention to abate is not required if both the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. 
C.  The notice shall advise the owner of the property and the owner of the vehicle that if the nuisance is not abated within ten days of the date of the notice, the city will abate the nuisance by causing the vehicle to be removed and disposed of as described in this Chapter 8.08, and the cost of abatement will be assessed against the property and will constitute a lien upon such property until paid. 
D.  The notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property and of the owner of the vehicle, including notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or, in lieu of appearing, may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.070 - Hearing—Request. 
A.  Upon the request of the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located, a public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement, removal, and disposition of the vehicle or part thereof. 
B.  The request for public hearing shall be made to the clerk in writing within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. 
C.  If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement within the time for filing a request for a hearing denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land under Section 8.08.060(D), this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting the request. 
D.  Upon receiving a timely request for hearing pursuant this Section 8.08.070, the clerk shall schedule the public hearing and shall serve notice of the hearing upon the owner of the vehicle and the owner of the property on which the vehicle or part thereof is located in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.08.060(A). Notice of the hearing shall be served no less than seven days prior to the time fixed for the hearing. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.080 - Hearing—Conduct. 
The hearing shall be held before the abatement officer. If a sworn statement by the property owner has been submitted under Section 8.08.070(C), the hearing does not require the presence of the requesting owner. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.08.090 - Abatement officer action—Service of order. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, if the abatement officer finds that the vehicle or part hereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property, the abatement officer shall prepare written findings and an order directing the same removed as a public nuisance and disposed of in accordance with this chapter. The order shall state the time within which the abatement shall be completed. The abatement officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate. The order for removal and disposal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available. The written findings and order shall be served on all parties making an appearance at the hearing (either in person or by written presentation) in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.08.060(A). 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.100 - Appeal. 
Any interested person who was present at the hearing or who submitted a sworn written statement to the abatement officer may appeal the abatement officer's findings and order as set forth in Chapter 8.01 of this title. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1100, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, changed the title of § 8.08.100 from "Appeal to council—Decision—Limitation on filing judicial action" to read as herein set out.  
8.08.110 - Abatement by city. 
A.  If abatement of a vehicle found to be a nuisance under this chapter is not accomplished as ordered, the abatement officer shall cause the same to be abated by city employees or private contract. 
B.  If neither the vehicle owner nor the property owner requests a hearing within ten days of the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, the vehicle or part thereof may be abated, removed and disposed of without a hearing. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.120 - Cost of abatement. 
The cost of abatement shall be billed to the owner of the vehicle and, except as provided in Section 8.08.160, the owner of the property on which the vehicle or part thereof was located and shall become due and payable thirty days thereafter. Cost of abatement shall include, but not be limited to, all personnel costs, both direct and indirect; costs incurred in documenting the nuisance; the actual costs and expenses of the city in determining vehicle and property ownership and noticing and conducting hearings and letting and administering contracts and inspecting the work; and the costs of printing and mailing required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.130 - Disposal—Contractor right of entry. 
A.  Vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, junkyard, or any other suitable site as determined by the city. Such disposition shall be in accordance with Section 8.08.140. 
B.  The city may contract with or grant a franchise to any person for the removal of vehicles under this chapter. Such person shall be authorized to enter upon private or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance to be abated pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.140 - Reconstruction. 
No vehicle removed from property under this chapter shall be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. Any vehicle which qualifies for either of the above-mentioned license plates may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.150 - DMV notice of abatement and registration. 
Within five days of the removal of any vehicle or part thereof, the abatement officer notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state of California identifying the vehicle or part thereof. Any evidence of registration available including, but not limited to, registration cards, certificates of ownership and license plates, shall also be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.160 - Assessment exemption for landowner. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that the landowner had not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the cost of abatement, together with administrative costs (including attorneys fees), shall not be assessed against the property or no other attempt to collect such costs from the landowner shall be made by the city. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.08.170 - Costs—Assessment. 
The cost of abatement may be assessed against the property on which the vehicle or part thereof was located, and become a lien thereon, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.16 of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.08.180 - Failure to receive notice. 
Failure of any person to receive any notice required by this chapter or Chapter 1.16 of the Rocklin Municipal Code shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this chapter. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.08.190 - Violations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. 
B.  Any person who removes or defaces any notice or order posted as required by this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
C.  No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in the vehicle, or the property on which the vehicle or part thereof is located, which has been ordered to be abated and removed whenever any such representative of the city or person is engaged in abating and removing any such vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 863 § 1 (part), 2002).  
Chapter 8.10 - FIRE SAFE VEGETATION AND DEBRIS MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
8.10.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt regulations in addition to those already in effect in Title 15 to further increase protection from fire of residents and their property within the city of Rocklin. This chapter is intended to include additional fire control regulations and not to amend any existing fire safety regulations in Title 15. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 3(Exh. A), 5-28-2019)  
8.10.020 - Additional definitions. 
As used in this chapter, certain additional terms and words are defined as follows: 
"APN" means the assessor's parcel number as assigned by the county of Placer. 
"Building or structure" means any structure used for support or shelter of any use or occupancy. 
"Flammable vegetation and materials" means any growth or refuse piles that will readily burn, including, but not limited to, dead pine needles or leaves, dry weeds and grasses over four inches in height, dead or dying trees or tree limbs, other dry invasive or noxious plants, or refuse piles, that constitute a fire hazard and endanger people or property. 
"Refuse piles" means accumulations of flammable vegetation, rubbish and/or scrap materials, including, but not limited to, waste paper, wood, hay, straw, weeds, litter or other flammable waste. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 3(Exh. A), 5-28-2019)  
8.10.030 - Classification of nuisances. 
The following acts and conditions, when performed or existing upon any lot, piece or parcel of land within the city of Rocklin, are hereby defined as and declared to be public nuisances because they are deemed to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare and they have a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property or cause damage to public rights-of-way: 
A.  Improved property less than or equal to 0.50 acre: The entire property shall be mowed or cleared of all flammable vegetation and materials, as defined in this chapter. Any plant, tree, or shrub adjacent to or overhanging a building and/or structure shall be free of dead or dying wood. 
B.  Improved property greater than 0.50 acre: Both (1) as measured from the perimeter of the structure, a one hundred-foot perimeter surrounding all structures; and (2) as measured from the property line, a twenty-foot perimeter surrounding the property, shall be mowed or cleared of all flammable vegetation and materials, as defined in this chapter. Any plant, tree, or shrub adjacent to or overhanging a building and/or structure shall be free of dead or dying wood. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 3(Exh. A), 5-28-2019)  
8.10.040 - Declaration of nuisance. 
Whenever the fire chief or his or her designee finds that a nuisance, as defined by Section 8.10.30, exists on any premises located within the city, he/she is authorized to advise the property owner of the nuisance and direct him/her to abate the nuisance by a specified date. The amount of time allowed to abate a nuisance shall be determined by considering the severity of the nuisance and its effect on the health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community. The property owner shall be notified of the existence of the nuisance in writing. The notification shall detail the violations. If the property owner is absent, such notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to the said owner at the last known address as revealed by the tax rolls, and additional addresses as may be known by the fire chief or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 3(Exh. A), 5-28-2019)  
8.10.050 - Voluntary abatement of nuisances. 
The owner of any building, structure or property found to be a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter may abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period established under the provisions of Section 8.10.040, by rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition. The fire chief or his or her designee shall be advised of the abatement and shall inspect the premises to ensure that the nuisance has in fact been abated. Any necessary permits and/or approvals shall be obtained by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 3(Exh. A), 5-28-2019)  
8.10.060 - Failure to voluntarily abate a declared nuisance. 
If a nuisance is not properly abated within the period established under the provisions of Section 8.10.050, the property is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by rehabilitation, removal, demolition or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapters 1.08 through 1.18 of Title 1 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 3(Exh. A), 5-28-2019)  
8.10.070 - Enforcement. 
The fire chief or his or her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 3(Exh. A), 5-28-2019)  
Chapter 8.12 - WEEDS AND RUBBISH 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Abatement by statutory provisions. 
Weed and rubbish abatement in the city shall be performed pursuant to the provisions of Title 4, Division 3, Part 2, Chapter 13, Article 2 of the Government Code of the state of California (Sections 39560 et seq.) except as modified by this chapter. 
(Ord. 434 § 1, 1980).  
8.12.020 - Strict superintendent duties. 
Any duties imposed upon the street superintendent by the Government Code sections cited in Section 8.12.010 may in the alternative be performed by the city manager, his assistants or designees. 
(Ord. 434 § 2, 1980).  
8.12.030 - Maintenance standards for vacant parcels. 
The city council, upon recommendation of the fire chief, shall adopt standards for the maintenance and control of weeds on vacant parcels. The standards shall be reviewed and may be amended from time-to-time in response to environmental or geographical conditions. Standards shall be effective upon adoption by the city council. 
(Ord. 541 § 1, 1986).  
Chapter 8.16 - GENERAL HEALTH AND SANITATION 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - County regulations adopted. 
The Placer County Health and Sanitation Regulations, Chapter 8 of the Placer County Code as revised on September 1, 1980, is adopted by reference. There are three copies of those regulations on file in the office of the clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. 441 § 1, 1981).  
8.16.020 - Violation—Enforcing authority. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code adopted in Section 8.16.010, any person who violates any provision is guilty of a misdemeanor, as such is now, or may hereafter be defined, by the laws of the state of California. For the purposes of Ordinance No. 353, the official or officials designated as the enforcing authority under the code adopted by Section 8.16.010, and/or the city manager, shall be the enforcing authority. 
(Ord. 441 § 2, 1981).  
Chapter 8.18 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE 
Sections: 
 
8.18.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares: 
A.  That a number of businesses in the city are engaged in the handling, storage, use, processing, and disposal of hazardous material; 
B.  That the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city may be endangered by the handling, storage, use, processing, and disposal of such hazardous material; 
C.  That there have been incidents in which the fire department responded to businesses in which hazardous material was handled, stored, used, or processed, but the firefighters who responded to the fire had no knowledge of the presence of such hazardous material, which could have endangered their lives and endangered the community in general; 
D.  That it is necessary for the protection of the citizens of the city that all businesses disclose the presence of such hazardous material to the fire chief; 
E.  That this disclosure is necessary so that firefighters who respond to fires or other emergencies in structures which house such hazardous material can respond appropriately and take measures to protect their own lives and to protect the community in general; 
F.  That this disclosure is also necessary so that the city may quickly respond to any fire or other emergency created by the handling, storage, use, processing, and disposal of hazardous material, so that the source of such hazardous material may be quickly identified in the event of such an emergency, and so that the city may study and reevaluate its current zoning laws to determine the appropriate location of businesses using such hazardous material. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.18.020 - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Rocklin Hazardous Materials Ordinance." 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms listed in this section shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Carcinogen" refers to a substance or agency which causes cancer. For purposes of this chapter, carcinogens are those substances specified on the list developed by the United States Department of Health and Human Services in its second annual report on Carcinogens. 
B.  "CAS number" means the unique identification number assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Service to specific chemical substances. 
C.  "Chemical name" means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Service. 
D.  "Common name" means any designation or identification such as code name, code number, trade name or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name. 
E.  "Disclosure form" means the written request for information prepared pursuant to Section 8.18.070. 
F.  "EPA Waste Stream Code" means the identification number assigned pursuant to the regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to specific types of hazardous waste. 
G.  "Hazardous substance" means any substance or product: 
1.  For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare a MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Section 6360, Chapter 2.5, Part 1 of Division 5 of the California Labor Code) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation; 
2.  Which is listed as radioactive material set forth in Title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 20.3, Items 12 and 13, maintained and updated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 
H.  "Hazardous waste" means hazardous or extremely hazardous waste as defined by Sections 25115 and 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code, and set forth in Sections 66680 and 66685 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. 
I.  "Handle" means to generate, treat, store, or dispose of a hazardous waste in any fashion. 
J.  "MSDA" means a Material Safety Data Sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the California Labor Code or pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor. 
K.  "Person" means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, city, county, district, and the state, or any department or agency thereof. 
L.  "Physician" means any person who holds a valid certificate from the state to practice the healing arts. 
M.  "Release" means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment. 
N.  "SIC code" means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification code to specific types of businesses. 
O.  "Use" includes the handling, processing, or storage of a hazardous substance. 
P.  "User" means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.040 - Designation of a hazardous material. 
A.  A material may be added to the list of hazardous materials set forth in Section 8.18.030 upon a finding by the fire chief that it satisfies the following criteria: The material, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the community. 
B.  A material added to the list of hazardous materials pursuant to subdivision A shall be designated as either a hazardous substance or hazardous waste by the fire chief. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.050 - Filing of a hazardous material disclosure form. 
A.  Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must annually submit a completed disclosure form to the fire chief at the time of application for or renewal of a city business license. 
B.  Within fifteen days of any: 
1.  New use or significant change in the use or handling of a hazardous material; 
2.  New use or handling of a previously undisclosed hazardous material; 
3.  Change of business address; 
4.  Change of business ownership; or 
5.  Change of business name; 
The user shall submit a disclosure form detailing the new use or handling or other appropriate information. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.060 - Administrative procedure—Disclosure of information. 
A.  The fire department shall maintain files of all disclosure forms received. Subject to the provision of Section 8.18.110 relating to trade secrets, these files shall be open to the public during normal business hours. The disclosure forms shall be filed by street address and parcel number and cross-referenced by the SIC numbers and the CAS numbers or EPA waste stream codes listed on the disclosure form. 
B.  The fire department shall keep a record of all persons who request access to the hazardous materials disclosure forms. The record shall include: 
1.  The person's name, address, and telephone number; 
2.  Name and address of the person, business, or governmental agency such person represents; and 
3.  Identity of the specific file(s) examined or requested to be copied. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.070 - Content of the disclosure form. 
A.  The disclosure form shall be prepared by the fire department with the assistance of the county health officer, the planning department, and other interested parties. The disclosure form shall include, but not be limited to, requests for the following: 
1.  A copy of the MSDS for every hazardous substance used by the person completing the disclosure form, provided however, that the fire department has on file a copy of the MSDS; 
2.  A listing of the chemical name, any common names, and the CAS number of every hazardous substance used by the person completing the disclosure form; 
3.  The EPA waste stream code of every hazardous waste handled by the person completing the disclosure form; 
4.  The maximum amount of each hazardous material disclosed in either subdivision 2 or 3 of this subsection which is handled or used at any one time by the user over the course of the year; 
5.  Sufficient information on how and where the hazardous materials disclosed in subdivision 2 or 3 of this subsection are handled or used by the user to allow fire and safety personnel to prepare adequate emergency responses to potential releases of the hazardous materials; 
6.  Sufficient information on any releases of the hazardous materials disclosed in subsections 2 and 3 into the air, water, sewers, or land to permit the city to understand the sources and content of hazardous material releases; 
7.  The SIC code of the business, if applicable; 
8.  The name and phone number of the person representing the business and able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during nonbusiness hours. 
B.  Upon request all users must provide information in addition to that required in the disclosure form filed pursuant to subsection A of this section as follows: 
1.  To the fire department any information determined by the fire department to be necessary to protect the public health, safety, or the environment; and 
2.  To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient; 
Any additional information furnished under this subsection shall be subject to the trade secret provisions of Section 8.18.110. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.080 - Exemptions from disclosure. 
The following materials, persons, or entities shall be exempt from disclosure under this chapter: 
A.  Hazardous substances contained in food, drug, cosmetic, or tobacco products; 
B.  Hazardous substances contained solely in consumer products packaged for use by and distributed to the general public; 
C.  Any person, while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident thereto, provided that such storage takes place outside the corporate boundaries of the city or such storage place was already disclosed pursuant to the requirement of this chapter, and provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in accordance with the provisions of 49 Code of Federal Regulations, subchapter c; 
D.  No MSDS shall be required for any hazardous substance for which an MSDS is not available at the time disclosure is required under Section 8.18.050, provided, however, that such MSDS shall be submitted to the fire department within fifteen days after receipt by the user of the MSDS. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to exempt from disclosure the remaining information contained in Section 8.18.070. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.090 - Fees. 
The city council may establish a schedule of fees to be paid by persons using or handling hazardous materials which is sufficient to cover the costs to the city of administering this chapter. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.100 - Enforcement. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly violate any provision of this chapter. In addition, any such violation shall be deemed a public nuisance, and the city attorney is authorized to institute and maintain an action to enjoin such violation. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
8.18.110 - Trade secrets. 
A.  If a user believes that a request for information made by either the disclosure form or otherwise pursuant to this chapter involves the release of a trade secret, the user shall so notify the fire department in writing. As used in this section, herein, trade secret shall have the meaning given to it by Section 6254.7 of the Government Code and Section 1060 of the Evidence Code. 
B.  Subject to the provisions of this section, the fire department shall protect from disclosure any trade secret coming into its possession when requested to do so in writing by the user. 
C.  Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the fire department, or any of its representatives or employees, which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection A of this section shall not be disclosed to anyone except: 
1.  To an officer or employee of the city of Rocklin, the state of California, or the United States of America, in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health, or to contractors with the city and their employees if in the opinion of the fire chief such disclosure is necessary and required for the satisfactory performance of a contract for performance of work; or 
2.  To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient. 
D.  For the purposes of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and county health personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the city shall be considered employees of the city. 
E.  Any officer or employee of the city, or former officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position has obtained possession of or has access to information, the disclosure of which is prohibited by this section, and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and wilfully discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any contractor with the city and any employee of such contractor, who has been furnished information as authorized by this section, shall be considered to be an employee of the city for purposes of this section. Any physician who has been furnished information or who has obtained information pursuant to subsection B of this section and who, knowing that the disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and wilfully discloses the information, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
F.  Information certified by appropriate officials of the United States, as necessarily kept secret for national defense purposes, shall be accorded the full protections against disclosure as specified by such official or in accordance with the laws of the United States. 
G.  The provisions of this section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required pursuant to this chapter to the fire department. 
(Ord. 491 § 1 (part), 1983).  
Chapter 8.20 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Hazardous material cleanup—Liability for costs. 
A.  The fire department is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste deposited upon or into property or facilities within the city; and any person or persons who intentionally or negligently cause such deposit shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the city as a result of such cleanup or abatement activity. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
B.  For purposes of this section, "hazardous substance or waste" shall be as defined in Section 8.18.030G and H. 
C.  For purposes of this section, costs incurred by the city shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of city personnel, including worker's compensation benefits, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead; cost of equipment operation; cost of materials obtained directly by the city; and cost of any contract labor and materials. 
D.  The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department. 
(Ord. 528 § 1, 1985).  
Chapter 8.24 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - General prohibition against possession, sale or use of fireworks. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall possess, sell, use, display or explode any rocket, firecracker, roman candle, squib, torpedo, torpedo cane, fire balloon, wire core sparkler, wooden core sparkler, black cartridge or other combustible device or explosive substance or any kind of fireworks, by whatsoever name known, within the city. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.24.020 - Certain public displays—Exceptions. 
A.  Public displays of fireworks may be given with permission of the fire chief or the chief's designee where such display will take place under the supervision and direction of a state of California licensed operator. The applicant shall apply for such permission at least ten days in advance of the date of the display for which the permit is sought. The application shall be in the form prescribed by the fire chief and shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the date and nature of the event and such other information as the fire chief may reasonably require. 
B.  The fire chief shall grant the permit as applied for, or with conditions, unless the fire chief finds that to do so would be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. The decision of the fire chief shall be in writing and communicated to the applicant either by mail, personal delivery, or electronically by fax or email, within twenty days of receipt of a complete application. 
C.  Every application for permission to conduct a public display of fireworks shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Every applicant shall agree to hold the city, its officers and employees, harmless from any and all claims for damages or other costs arising out of the activity authorized by the permit. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
8.24.030 - Liability insurance. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation applying for a public display permit shall furnish to the fire chief proof of coverage by a policy of public liability and property damage insurance. The policy shall provide limits of bodily injury and property damage liability of not less than five million dollars combined single limits for each occurrence annually as payment for damages to persons or property which may result from or be caused by such public display of fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the licensee or its agents, servants, employees or subcontractors presenting such public display. 
B.  No permit shall be issued until the permittee furnishes the fire chief with a certificate of insurance for each policy required, executed by the company issuing such policy, and approved as to form by the city attorney. Such policies shall contain a provision which includes the city as an additional insured and declaring said insurance to be primary and that no other insurance carried by an insured party shall be called upon for contribution. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the failure of the permittee to carry such policy or policies in force and to properly renew said insurance during the time covered by such permit shall automatically revoke the permit as of the date of expiration of such insurance policy or policies. An additional payment of the full amount of the permit fee required by Section 8.24.020.C shall be made to the city before any such revoked permit may be reinstated. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 1-14-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1001, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, changed the title of § 8.24.030 from "Certain public displays—Exceptions—Liability insurance" to "Liability insurance."  
8.24.040 - Safe and sane fireworks—Exception. 
A.  It shall not be unlawful to possess, sell, use, display, or discharge within the city those fireworks as are defined and classified as "safe and sane fireworks" in the State Fireworks Law (Sections 12500, et seq. of the Health and Safety Code) when all of the provisions of this chapter are observed. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, it shall be unlawful to possess, sell, use, display, or discharge any fireworks, including but not limited to safe and sane fireworks, in any public park or any open space area or parcel owned by the city or as to which the city owns an open space easement. 
(Ord. 887 § 2, 2004: Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.24.050 - Permit to sell safe and sane fireworks required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell "safe and sane fireworks" within the city without having first applied for and received a city permit therefor. 
B.  A maximum of twenty permits shall be issued each calendar year for sale of safe and sane fireworks. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 3, 1-14-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1001, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, changed the title of § 8.24.050 from "Safe and sane fireworks—Exception—Permits required" to "Permit to sell safe and sane fireworks required."  
8.24.055 - Permit selection process to sell safe and sane fireworks required. 
The issuance of permits shall be determined by the fire chief as follows: 
A.  To be eligible for a permit, a preliminary application for a permit must be filed with the fire chief between February 1 to February 28 of each calendar year. A maximum of twenty permits shall be issued. The twenty nonprofit organizations which were granted permits in 2013 will be given a "grandfather provision" and will be given the opportunity to obtain a permit as long as they meet the requirements of Section 8.24.060. If the number of qualified applications from the "grandfather provision" is less than twenty, the fire chief shall conduct a random lottery drawing for the remaining permits no later than March 5. The "grandfather provision" status of the twenty nonprofit organizations will remain in effect as long as there is no lapse in continuous years of participation. If a lapse in continuous years of participation by a "grandfathered" nonprofit organization occurs, the permit will be issued through the random lottery drawing. If an original "grandfathered" nonprofit organization decides to participate again in subsequent years, they shall obtain a permit through the random lottery process. 
B.  After the authorized number of permits has been drawn, one applicant shall be drawn as the first alternate and one applicant shall be drawn as the second alternate. The alternates shall be offered a permit if one of the original permittees cannot meet the requirements of this section or if a permittee voluntarily surrenders the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 4, 1-14-2014)  
8.24.060 - Permit qualifications. 
A.  No permit to sell fireworks shall be issued to any person, except nonprofit organizations or corporations organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or charitable purposes. 
B.  No permit authorizing the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall be issued to any person or group unless the organization satisfies the following criteria: 
1.  It must have its physical address or principal or permanent meeting place within the city. The "principal or permanent meeting place" may include, but is not limited to, a permanent structure, playing field, or geographical area located within the city; 
2.  It has been organized and established in the city for a continuous period of at least one year immediately preceding the application for a permit; 
3.  It has a bona fide membership of at least twenty members who, solely or in combination, are Rocklin residents, owners of Rocklin businesses, or employees of Rocklin-based businesses or other Rocklin-based organizations or enterprises; 
4.  It must provide documentation of the qualifying members to the satisfaction of the fire chief; and 
5.  It must provide direct and regular community service and benefits to the city. 
C.  No organization shall submit more than one application for a permit to sell fireworks within the city. Submittal of more than one application shall be grounds for denial of all applications. 
(Ord. 818 § 1, 1999; Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 5, 1-14-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 1001, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, changed the title of § 8.24.060 from "Safe and sane fireworks—Exception—Permits required—Prerequisite for issuance" to "Permit qualifications."  
8.24.070 - Application for permit to sell safe and sane fireworks. 
A.  Final applications for permits to sell fireworks shall be submitted in writing to the fire chief on forms supplied by the city. Final applications may be filed beginning March 6 through April 1 of each calendar year at which time the filing period for that year will close. Applications shall set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand being applied for, and any other information as may be required by the fire chief. 
B.  Applications shall be accompanied by a license issued by the state fire marshall in accordance with Division XI, Chapter 3 of the California Health and Safety Code, and proof of coverage by one or more policies of public liability, property damage, and product liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars public liability, twenty-five thousand dollars property damage, and three hundred thousand dollars products liability. No policy providing for a deductible shall be acceptable. A certificate of insurance for each policy required complying with the provisions of Section 8.24.030(B) shall be submitted to the fire chief prior to issuance of the permit. 
C.  Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Applicants for such permits shall be notified by April 5 of each calendar year by the fire chief for the final approval or disapproval of the applications for the permits. All organizations whose permits have been approved shall have up to and including May 1 of that year to pick up the permit. 
E.  Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by proof of nonprofit status, a valid business license from the city, and a California Department of Tax and Fee Administration ("CDTFA") temporary seller's permit. If a CDTFA temporary seller's permit is not available at the time of application, proof of a valid CDTFA temporary seller's permit must be provided to the city before the city will issue a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1001, §§ 6—9, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 1111, § 3, 4-9-2019) 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 1001, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, changed the title of § 8.24.070 from "Safe and sane fireworks—Exception—Permits required—Application" to "Application for permit to sell safe and sane fireworks."  
8.24.080 - Operation of stand. 
A.  No person shall sell fireworks to any person under the age of eighteen. This prohibition does not extend to the transfer without consideration of safe and sane fireworks to persons under the age of eighteen years. 
B.  Sale of fireworks shall begin no earlier than twelve noon on June 28th and shall not continue after ten p.m. on July 4th of the same year. Sale of fireworks shall be permitted only from nine a.m. to ten p.m. daily. 
C.  All safe and sane fireworks shall at all times be retained and stored at the approved location of the fireworks stand. No fireworks, other than those which have been sold from the stand at retail, shall be removed from the fireworks stand to any other place within the city, except as provided in Section 8.24.110(I). 
D.  No person other than the permittee organization shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand. 
E.  No person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee organization or the wives, husbands, parents or adult children of such members shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand. 
F.  No person under the age of eighteen shall sell or participate in the sale of fireworks. 
G.  No person shall be paid any consideration by the permittee or any wholesale distributor of "safe and sane fireworks" for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand; provided, however, that compensation may be paid for security personnel during nonsale hours and to the party authorizing location of the stand on its property. 
H.  Each stand must have a supervisor, age twenty-one or over, in attendance and in charge when the stand is being used for the sale and display of fireworks. When the fireworks stand is not being used for the sale and/or display of fireworks, all fireworks shall be stored in a reinforced, heavy metal, fully-enclosed container, similar to a SAWDOC, walk-in type drop box or its equivalent, as approved by the fire chief, or a licensed and bonded private security guard shall be posted and remain on site until relieved by a supervisor responsible for the stand. 
I.  Signs utilized in conjunction with the fireworks booth shall be limited entirely to those placed on the walls of the fireworks booth structure or container. No roof-mounted signs are permitted. 
J.  All signs shall be attached to or hung on the walls of the fireworks booth structure or container in a sightly manner and remain in good condition at all times. Any signs damaged by wind, rain, moisture, or other cause shall be removed or replaced within twenty-four hours of the occurrence of the damage. 
K.  The use of portable signs, feather flags, A-frames, pennants or other similar devices shall comply with the current city of Rocklin Sign Ordinance. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1001, §§ 10, 11, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 1111, § 4, 4-9-2019)  
8.24.090 - Temporary fireworks stand. 
All retail sales of "safe and sane fireworks" shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or structure is hereby prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No fireworks stand shall be located closer than one hundred fifty feet from another stand, nor within twenty-five feet of any other building, nor within fifty feet of any gasoline fuel pump, storage tank or bulk plant. 
B.  Fireworks stands shall be constructed in a manner which will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and patrons. Any electrical installations shall comply with all applicable codes. 
C.  No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty square feet. 
D.  Each stand shall have at least two exits. Each stand in excess of forty feet in length shall have at least three exits spaced approximately equidistant apart; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance between exits exceed twenty feet. Exit doors shall be not less than twenty-four inches wide and six feet in height and shall swing in direction of exit travel. 
E.  Each stand shall be provided with a minimum of two fire extinguishers. They may be either a two and one-half gallon "water type" (minimum rating 2A), or a five pound 2A 10BC multipurpose type. Each fire extinguisher shall bear a current State Fire Marshall's Office Tag and be in good working order. They shall be placed so as to be highly visible and easily accessible. 
F.  Fireworks stands may be located only in nonresidential zones. 
G.  All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand and a distance of at least thirty feet surrounding the stand. 
H.  "NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed on and in the fireworks stand. 
I.  All unsold stock of fireworks in the hands of the retailer after ten p.m. on July 4th shall be returned to the distributor or wholesaler and removed from the city within ten days. Fireworks stands shall be removed from the temporary locations by twelve noon on July 6th and all litter shall be removed from premises by that time and date. 
J.  No fuel-powered generator, electrical extension cords, liquid-fueled lighting or similar equipment shall be allowed within fifty feet of a fireworks stand. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.24.100 - Wholesale storage. 
Wholesale storage of fireworks shall be in a building meeting the requirements of a group H-1 occupancy as defined in the Uniform Building Code and can only be stored in the city from June 1st to July 15th. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.24.110 - Discharging fireworks. 
A.  It is unlawful to discharge or ignite safe and sane fireworks except during that time period beginning at twelve noon on June 28th and ending at 11:59 p.m. on July 4th of that same year. 
B.  It is unlawful to discharge or ignite fireworks of any type, including safe and sane fireworks, or any other combustible article, within any stand or within one hundred fifty feet of any stand. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.24.120 - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
It is unlawful to possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in or about the stand or storage site at any time. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.24.130 - Revocation of permit—Appeal. 
A.  The fire chief may revoke, immediately and without notice or hearing, the permit of any permittee who violates any of the following provisions: Sections 8.24.080(A), (B), (F) and (H). If the revocation occurs between June 22nd and July 5th, the chief shall inform the permittee that the permittee may seek review of the chief's decision by the city manager, or the city manager's designee, on the next business day. At the earliest opportunity on the next business day after the revocation, the chief shall provide the city manager with written notice that a fireworks permit has been revoked, including the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for revocation. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall meet with the permittee and the chief on that day, upon the permittee's request, to review the fire chief's decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. If the revocation occurs before or after the specified period, the appeal procedures of subsection B of this section shall apply. 
B.  The fire chief may revoke the permit of any permittee who violates any provision of this article not specified in subsection A of this section. Such revocation shall not take effect for five days, during which time the permittee may seek review of the chief's decision by submitting a written request for review to the city manager. The chief shall provide the city manager with written notice that a fireworks permit has been revoked, including the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for revocation. The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall meet with the permittee and the chief to review the chief's decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
C.  Any permittee whose permit has been revoked, pursuant to subsections A or B of this section, shall be barred from receiving a permit under this chapter for five years from the date of revocation. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.24.140 - Seizure of fireworks. 
The fire chief, or the chief's designee, shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.24.150 - Suspension of fireworks permits. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the fire chief may suspend any permits and/or the issuance of any permits under this chapter if it finds that the public display or the sale and use of safe and sane fireworks may threaten the public health and safety due to weather or other conditions within the city and/or surrounding area, or the availability of fire suppression equipment or personnel. The fire chief may call for the suspension of permits or the issuance of permits at any time. If permits are suspended after issuance but prior to the opening of a fireworks stand for the sale of safe and sane fireworks, the permittee shall receive a refund of one hundred percent of the fee paid. The suspension shall last for the period of time specified by the fire chief or, if no time is specified, until the fire chief acts to revoke the suspension. 
(Ord. 673 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
Chapter 8.28 - DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING OF EXPLOSIVES 
Sections: 
 
8.28.010 - Explosives defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, explosives are defined as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 12000, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 772 § 1 (part), 1997).  
8.28.020 - Issuing authority. 
The police chief is designated the issuing authority under Section 12007 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 772 § 1 (part), 1997).  
8.28.030 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, store, handle or use any high explosives within the territorial limits of the city without having first applied for and received a city permit from the police chief or designee. 
(Ord. 772 § 1 (part), 1997).  
8.28.040 - Issuance of permit; discretion of police chief to condition or deny. 
The police chief, or designee, shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, deny a permit to any person if it is his or her opinion that the delivery, handling or use of explosives by such person would be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person. The police chief may impose conditions on a permit which he or she finds reasonable to promote safety to property and persons. 
(Ord. 772 § 1 (part), 1997).  
8.28.050 - Security; amount; discretion of police chief. 
A.  All explosives permit applications must include evidence of financial responsibility to cover potential damage claims in the form of a public liability insurance policy or other financial security in a form acceptable to the State Fire Marshall and city attorney. 
B.  The amount of the security shall be a minimum of one million dollars, up to a maximum of five million dollars, as determined by the police chief in his or her sole discretion, based on assessment of potential harm to surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 772 § 1 (part), 1997). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
Chapter 8.30 - STORMWATER RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
8.30.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of Rocklin residents; to protect water resources and to improve water quality; to cause the use of management practices by the city and its citizens that will reduce the adverse effects of polluted runoff discharges on waters of the state; to secure benefits from the use of stormwater as a resource; and to ensure the city is compliant with applicable state and federal law. This chapter seeks to promote these purposes by: 
A.  Prohibiting illicit discharges to the stormwater conveyance system; 
B.  Establishing authority to adopt minimum requirements for stormwater management, including source control requirements, to prevent and reduce pollution; 
C.  Establishing authority to adopt requirements for development project site design, to reduce stormwater pollution and erosion both during construction and after project is complete; 
D.  Establishing authority to adopt requirements for the management of stormwater flows from development projects, both to prevent erosion and to protect and enhance existing water-dependent habitats; 
E.  Establishing authority to adopt standards for the use of off-site facilities for stormwater management to supplement on-site practices at new development sites. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.020 - Definitions. 
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Best management practices (BMPs)" mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
B.  "City" means the city of Rocklin. 
C.  "Development" means any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the preexisting vegetated or man-made cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, pavement removal, exterior construction, substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed, including but not limited to removal by clearing or grubbing, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Development does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to protect public health and safety. 
D.  "Director of public services" or "director" means the director of the city of Rocklin department of public services. 
E.  "Discharge" shall mean the release, addition or deposit of any fluid, liquid, solid, flowing substance, or any other material or substance to the city's stormwater conveyance system. 
F.  "Employee training program" means a documented employee training program which may be required to be implemented by a business pursuant to a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the purpose of educating its employees on methods of reducing discharge of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system. 
G.  "Enforcement agency" means the city of Rocklin public services department. 
H.  "Enforcement official" means the director of public services or his or her designee or any agent of the city authorized to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
I.  "Illicit discharge" means any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer) and discharges resulting from firefighting activities. 
J.  "Illicit connection" means a pipe, facility, or other device, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the stormwater conveyance system regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency. 
K.  "Maximum extent practicable (MEP)" means a technology-based standard established by congress in the Clean Water Act Section 402(p)(3)(iii) for stormwater discharge that municipalities must meet. MEP is generally the result of emphasizing pollution prevention and source control best management practices (BMPs) primarily (as the first line of defense) and in combination with treatment methods serving as backup (additional line of defense). The MEP approach is an ever evolving, flexible and advancing concept, which considers technical and economic feasibility. As knowledge about controlling urban runoff continues to evolve, so does what constitutes MEP. 
L.  "National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)" means a permit issued by the U.S. EPA, State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Clean Water Act (CWA) that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States and requires the reduction of pollutants in the discharge. 
M.  "Noncommercial vehicle washing" means the washing and rinsing of passenger vehicles on private property in which no commercial enterprise is being conducted in the washing of those vehicles. 
N.  "Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system that is not entirely composed of stormwater. 
O.  "Person" means any person, firm, corporation, business entity, or public agency, whether principal, agent, employee or otherwise. 
P.  "Plan standard" means any and/or all applicable requirements of the Water Quality Control Plan (Basin Plan) for the Sacramento River Basin and the San Joaquin River Basin, adopted by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region in 1998, and all subsequent amendments. 
Q.  "Pollutant" means any "pollutant" defined in Section 502(6) of the CWA or incorporated into the California Water Code Section 13373. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Residential, commercial and industrial waste (such as trash, litter, fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash and sludge); 
2.  Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, silver, nickel, chromium, copper and non-metals such as phosphorous and arsenic; 
3.  Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease); 
4.  Excessive eroded soil, sediment, and particulate materials in amounts that may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state; 
5.  Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities); and 
6.  Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six or greater than nine, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus or enterococcus. 
R.  "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved. 
S.  "Receiving waters" mean all waters that are "waters of the state" within the scope of the State Water Code, including but not limited to natural streams, creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, ponds, water in vernal pools, lagoons, estuaries, bays, the Pacific Ocean and groundwater. 
T.  "Stormwater" means surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events, which is free of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. 
U.  "Stormwater conveyance system" means those artificial and natural facilities within the incorporated area of the city of Rocklin, whether publicly or privately owned, by which stormwater may be conveyed to a watercourse or waters of the state, including any roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, natural and artificial channels or storm drains. 
V.  "Stormwater pollution prevention plan" means a document which describes the best management practices to be implemented by the owner or operator of a business or construction site to eliminate illicit discharges and/or reduce to the maximum extent practicable pollutant discharges to the stormwater conveyance system. 
W.  "Watercourse" means any natural stream, whether flowing continuously or not, that is fed from permanent or natural sources, and includes, without limitation, rivers, creeks, runs and rivulets. 
Any term(s) defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not specifically defined in subsection A of this section shall, when used in this chapter, have the same meaning as set forth in said act or regulation. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005). 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.30.030 - Conflicts with other laws. 
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law or regulation, that requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. Nothing in this chapter is intended to duplicate nor shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order or permit. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.040 - Discharge prohibitions. 
A.  Illicit Discharges. Except as provided in Section 8.30.050 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any illicit discharge. Notwithstanding the exemptions provided by Section 8.30.050(A) and (B) of this chapter, if the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the enforcement official determines that any otherwise exempt discharge causes or significantly contributes to violations of any plan standard, or conveys significant quantities of pollutants to surface water(s) or watercourse(s), or is a danger to public health or safety, such discharge shall be prohibited from entering the stormwater conveyance system. 
B.  Illicit Connection. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections is prohibited. This prohibition includes illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
C.  Litter, Dumps and Stockpiles. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an illicit discharge is prohibited. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.050 - Exceptions to discharge prohibition. 
Subject to the authority granted to the enforcement official in this chapter, the following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 8.30.040 of this chapter. 
A.  Any discharge or connection regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the permit and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
B.  Discharges from the following activities, which do not cause or contribute to the violation of any plan standard: 
1.  Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources; 
2.  Incidental Runoff from Landscaped Areas. Incidental runoff is defined as unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to negligence; 
3.  Rising groundwaters or springs; 
4.  Passive foundation and footing drains; 
5.  Water from crawl space pumps and basement pumps; 
6.  Air conditioning condensate; 
7.  Noncommercial vehicle washing; 
8.  Natural flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
9.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
10.  Flows from fire suppression activities, including fire hydrant flows; 
11.  Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(d) and California Health and Safety Code Section 25117; 
12.  Diverted stream flows; 
13.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR Section 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers; 
14.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater. 
C.  Any discharge, which the enforcement official, the local health officer, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board determines in writing, is necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. 
D.  Any discharge caused by flooding or other natural disaster, which could not have been reasonably foreseen or mitigated for in advance by the discharger, as determined by the enforcement official. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005). 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 3-24-2015)  
8.30.060 - Proof of compliance with NPDES permit. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall provide proof of compliance with said permit in a form acceptable to the enforcement official prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.070 - Concealment and abetting. 
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.080 - Reduction of pollutants in stormwater. 
Any person engaged in activities which may result in pollutants entering the stormwater conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, comply with the requirements set forth below to reduce the risk of illicit discharge and/or pollutant discharge. 
A.  Business Related Activities. 
1.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official may require any business in the city that is engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, which shall, without limitation, include an employee training program. Business activities which may require a stormwater pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading or fueling, or cleanup procedures which are carried out partially or wholly out of doors. 
B.  Development. The city council shall by resolution adopt requirements identifying appropriate best management practices to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The city shall incorporate such requirements as conditions in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required by this chapter. 
C.  Compliance with General Permit. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity, NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall provide the city with proof of compliance with said permit in a form acceptable to the enforcement official prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
D.  Compliance with Best Management Practices. Every person undertaking any activity or use of a premises which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, or non-stormwater discharges shall comply with best management practices guidelines or pollution control requirements as may be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.090 - Containment and notification of spills. 
Any person owning or occupying a premises who has knowledge of any release of any pollutant or illicit discharge from or across those premises which might enter the stormwater conveyance system, other than a release or discharge that is permitted by this chapter, shall immediately take all reasonable actions to contain and abate the release of pollutants or illicit discharge, and also shall promptly notify the enforcement agency within twenty-four hours of the release of any pollutant or illicit discharge. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.100 - Inspection authority. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the enforcement official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this chapter. Any request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the enforcement official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. Inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illicit discharge, non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, or similar factors. 
A.  Sampling Authority. During any inspection, the enforcement official may take samples as necessary in order to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. This authority may include the installation of sampling and metering devices on private property, or requiring the person owning or occupying the premises to supply samples. 
B.  Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Authority. The enforcement official may require monitoring, analysis and reporting of discharges from any premises to the stormwater conveyance system. Upon service of written notice by the enforcement official, the burden, including cost, of these activities, analyses and reports, incurred in complying with the requirement shall, to the extent permitted by law, be borne by the property owner or occupant of the facility or activity for which testing and monitoring has been requested. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.110 - Enforcement authority. 
The enforcement official is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to exercise any enforcement powers authorized or provided in this chapter, including without limitation the imposition of administrative requirements, orders and penalties pursuant to this chapter, as may be necessary to effectively implement and enforce this chapter. Without limitation on the enforcement authority set forth above, the enforcement official is authorized to exercise any and all of the following supplemental enforcement powers as he or she determines may be necessary or appropriate in the enforcement official's judgment under the circumstances: 
A.  Notice of Violation (NOV). Whenever the enforcement official determines that any person owning or occupying a premises has violated or is violating this chapter or order issued hereunder, the enforcement official may serve, by personal service, or by registered or certified mail, upon said person a written NOV. Within thirty days of receipt of this notice, or shorter period as may be prescribed in the NOV, the person to whom the NOV has been issued shall provide the enforcement official a written explanation or denial of the violation and, if the person does not deny the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, which shall include without limitation specific actions or mitigations required by the enforcement official in the NOV. Submission of this plan shall in no way relieve the person of liability for any violation before or after receipt of the NOV. 
B.  Cease and Desist Orders. The enforcement official may require any person owning or occupying a premises to cease and desist all activities that may cause or contribute to discharge in violation of this chapter. This order may also require such person to: (i) comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter within a designated period of time, or, (ii) take such other appropriate remedial or preventive action the enforcement official determines to be necessary to prevent the violation from recurring. Unless the facts and circumstances warrant otherwise as determined by the enforcement official, the following minimum time periods apply to abatement and cleanup orders: (1) a discharger shall abate and clean-up their discharge, spill, or pollutant release within seventy-two hours of notification; (2) high risk spills shall be cleaned up and abated immediately; and (3) uncontrolled sources of pollutants that could pose an environmental threat shall be cleaned up and abated within thirty days of notification. 
C.  Notice to Clean and Abate. The enforcement official may require any person owning or occupying a premises to clean up and abate any release of one or more pollutants on those premises, which otherwise would result in a violation of this chapter. The enforcement official may also order abatement of activities or practices, which otherwise reasonably would result in such a violation. 
D.  Mitigation. The enforcement official shall have authority to order the mitigation of any condition, activity or circumstance which otherwise would result in or contribute to illicit discharges. 
E.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official shall have the authority to establish elements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and to require any business or person to adopt and implement such a plan, as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. 
F.  Best Management Practices. The enforcement official may establish and impose the requirements of best management practices for any premises. 
G.  Seasonal and Recurrent Nuisance. If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the enforcement official shall so declare. Thereafter, such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further hearing. 
H.  Emergency Orders and Abatements. The enforcement official may order the abatement of any discharge from any source to the stormwater conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement official, the discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition which presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or the environment. In emergency situations where the property owner or other responsible party is unavailable and time constraints are such that service of a notice and order to abate cannot be effected without presenting an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or the environment or a violation of a NPDES permit, the city may perform or cause to be performed such work as shall be necessary to abate said threat or danger. The costs of any such abatement shall be borne by the owner and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
I.  Contents of Notice. Any NOV, cease and desist order, or other civil notice or civil order issued by the enforcement official pursuant to this chapter shall include a copy of Section 8.30.120 of this chapter outlining appeal rights. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005). 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 3, 3-24-2015)  
8.30.120 - Appeal. 
Any person served with a NOV, who is subject to a cease and desist order, who is subject to an abatement order, who is required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective activities by an authorized enforcement official, or who is otherwise aggrieved by any decision of the enforcement official, may appeal the decision as set forth in Chapter 8.01 of this title. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.30.130 - Violations constituting misdemeanors. 
Any violation of this chapter may be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.140 - Remedies not exclusive. 
Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.150 - Costs and expenses of enforcement—Civil penalties—Authorization for special assessment against subject property—Notice. 
A.  The city shall be entitled to reimbursement from any person violating any requirement or provision of this chapter for all costs and expenses incurred in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. Such reimbursable costs and expenses shall include, but are not limited to, costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of administrative hearings, costs of suit, salaries, attorney fees, expert fees, testing and monitoring expenses, and other expenses recoverable under state law, incurred during any inspection or investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter. In addition to any and all other costs and expenses, any person who or entity that violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable and responsible for, and shall pay to the city, a civil penalty of one thousand dollars for each violation. 
B.  The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized statement of costs and expenses incurred by the city in enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the costs and expenses incurred by the city in causing the owner or responsible person to abate the violation of any provision of this chapter and the civil penalties imposed pursuant to this section. The costs and expenses, including but not limited to the incidental expenses of enforcing this chapter or causing the owner or responsible person to abate the violation of this chapter, and the civil penalties, shall be billed to the owner or responsible person and shall become due and payable thirty days thereafter. The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect, for administration and enforcement including, but not limited to, attorney's fees; costs incurred in inspecting the property; costs incurred in documenting the violation; the expenses and costs of the city in preparation of notices, specifications and contracts and in inspecting the subject premises or property; and the cost of preparing, printing and mailing the notices and documents hereunder. The enforcement officer shall provide a copy of this statement of costs, expenses and civil penalties to the owner of the subject premises or property and to any responsible person(s). The owner of the subject premises or property, as well as any responsible person(s) shall be liable and responsible for, and required to pay, all such costs, expenses and civil penalties. 
C.  The owner and/or responsible person(s) may appeal the statement of costs as set forth in Chapter 8.01 of this title. 
D.  For any appeal satisfying the requirements of this section, the city council shall review the statement of costs, expenses and civil penalties and any evidence presented by the owner or responsible person(s), as well as the enforcement official, and shall affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the enforcement official in imposing the costs, expenses and/or civil penalties. The city council shall consider in making its decision: (i) the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation; (ii) the extent to which the violation was willful and/or intentional; and (iii) whether or to what extent the violation has continued or recurred. The city council's decision shall be in writing, shall state the city council's findings, and shall be mailed to the owner and all responsible persons. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
E.  If the property owner does not pay the costs, expenses and civil penalties in full within thirty days after receipt of the statement of costs pursuant to subsection B of this section or, if requested, after any decision on appeal pursuant to Chapter 8.01 of this title which confirms in whole or in part the costs, expenses and civil penalties, the costs, expenses and civil penalties shall become a special assessment against the real property upon which the violation(s) of this chapter occurred. The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the rate of twelve percent a year computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until payment. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this special assessment. 
F.  The city shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT 
Under the authority of Government Code Section 38773.5 and Chapter 8.30 of the Rocklin Municipal Code, the City did on _______, _______, enforce the provisions of Rocklin Municipal Code 8.30, the violation of which is deemed a public nuisance, upon the real property hereunder described and then on _______, yrrule;, did assess the costs expenses and civil penalties of the enforcement upon the real property and/or the costs and expenses of causing the owner or responsible person to comply with the provisions of Chapter 8.30. The City of Rocklin claims a special assessment on the real property for such costs, expenses and civil penalties in the amount of $_______. This amount is a special assessment against the real property until it is paid, with interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) a year from _______, _______, (insert date of confirmation of statement), and discharged of record. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this special assessment. The real property referred to above, and upon which the special assessment is claimed is that certain parcel of land situated within the City of Rocklin, County of Placer, State of California, more particularly described as follows: _____ , 
Rocklin, California. 
Dated:_______ By:_______ 
G.  Any monies recovered under this section shall be used exclusively for costs and programs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems, implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter and/or creating educational and/or remedial programs relating to stormwater discharge pollution. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.30.160 - Civil actions. 
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city attorney. In any such action, the city attorney shall be authorized to any or all of the following remedies: 
1.  A temporary restraining order and/or preliminary and/or permanent injunction; 
2.  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection; 
3.  Costs incurred or required to remove, correct, or terminate the adverse effects resulting from the violation; 
4.  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life; 
5.  Attorney's fees. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.30.170 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition or as an alternative to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety or welfare and is thus deemed a nuisance. Any such nuisance may be abated and/or restored by the enforcement official and also may be abated pursuant to Section 8.30.150 of this chapter. The city attorney also is authorized to pursue any remedy he or she deems necessary or appropriate to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of the nuisance. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (part), 2005).  
Chapter 8.34 - PROHIBITING MARIJUANA USE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
8.34.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter adopts regulations associated with publicly owned, leased and rented properties in the city of Rocklin. This chapter shall not apply to private property. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
8.34.020 - Findings. 
The city council hereby finds as follows: 
A.  Smoking marijuana is likely to have the same, similar or worse health consequences as use of other smoking products and it is known that smoking tobacco products is one of the largest single preventable causes of death and disability for persons in the United States. On average, compared to people who have never smoked, smokers suffer more health problems and disability due to their smoking and ultimately lose more than a decade of life. 
B.  Exposure to secondhand smoke is a leading cause of preventable death, after smoking and alcohol. It has been found by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to be a Class A Carcinogen, known to cause cancer in humans, and one out of three cancer deaths are reportedly caused by smoking. There is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke. 
C.  The city is aware of findings associated with tobacco smoke and is aware of studies that suggest or state that smoking of marijuana has many harmful effects and other studies, including the National Institute on Drug Abuse show that marijuana use can be hazardous to memory, brain function, pregnant women, juveniles, those with respiratory diseases, cause higher rates of cancer than tobacco and other harmful effects. Hazards known as a result of tobacco smoke which are likely to carry over to marijuana smoke include: 
1.  Secondhand smoke causes numerous health problems in infants and children, including more frequent and severe asthma attacks, respiratory infections, ear infections, and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). 
2.  Smoking is one of the largest single preventable causes of death and disability for persons in the United States. 
3.  Employees subject to prolonged exposure to secondhand smoke in the workplace experience a loss of job productivity and may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of reactions to secondhand smoke. Higher costs to the employer are associated with smoke in the workplace due to increase in absenteeism, accidents, and the cost of medical care, insurance, loss of productivity, and cleaning and maintenance requirements. Smoke-free workplaces are associated with an increase in the success rate of smokers who are attempting to quit. 
D.  Smoking, including marijuana in public places can be a major cause of fires and damage to merchandise and equipment as well as costly maintenance and repairs to furniture and fixtures. 
E.  Many people may be very opposed to being exposed to marijuana smoke due to sobriety, job related drug testing and other personal reasons. People frequenting or using public property in the city may not wish to be exposed to marijuana smoke and should not be otherwise exposed against their free will. 
F.  Proposition 64 on the November 2016 ballot includes a provision (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3) that states that nothing in that law permits a person to smoke or ingest marijuana in a "public place" but no definition of "public place" is provided. The city seeks to make clear that smoking of or ingestion of marijuana on all its city streets, sidewalks, public property, recreation areas and sports arenas is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
8.34.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of restricting, regulating and preventing the smoking and use of marijuana on property owned, leased or rented by the city of Rocklin or other public entities in the city of Rocklin in order to reduce the hazards and nuisance which marijuana use and smoking causes to those who are involuntarily exposed. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
8.34.040 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, those terms identified in this section shall, unless the context indicates otherwise, be ascribed the meaning contained in this section: 
"City" means the city of Rocklin. 
"Entity in control" means any person or entity that is under contract or other agreement to lawfully lease, rent or use public property. 
"Marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L. as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11018. 
"Public property" means any property owned, leased, used, rented or controlled by the city of Rocklin, including but not limited to public streets and sidewalks, parks, city facilities, open space, bike and walking trails, and recreation areas and sports arenas. 
"Recreation area" means any area in the city that is publicly owned or publicly operated for recreational purposes, whether enclosed or unenclosed and open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirements. "Recreation area" includes parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, open space, walking or hiking paths or trails, bike trails, outdoor pavilions, outdoor art spaces, outdoor space for the public to congregate, benches and similar shelters for bus stops or outdoor seating areas and similar areas designed and/or used for outdoor recreational activities. 
"Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted combustible substance containing marijuana in any manner or in any form and use of electronic devices with electrical ignition or vaporization (e-cigarettes/cigars or similar devices) with marijuana or its by products in the device. 
"Sports arena" means public owned or operated sports pavilions, sports facilities, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller rinks, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. 
"Use" means any method of ingestion of marijuana including not limited to edible products, liquids, lotions or other means to use marijuana by a person. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
8.34.050 - Prohibition of smoking or use of marijuana. 
Smoking or the use of marijuana in any form is prohibited in the following places: 
A.  All public property, recreation areas and sports arenas. 
B.  Any special event or activity occurring on public property, recreation areas and sports arenas shall be conditioned consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
8.34.060 - Construing with state law. 
A.  Proposition 64 on the November 2016 ballot includes a provision (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3) that states that nothing in that law permits a person to smoke or ingest Marijuana in a "public place", but no definition of "public place" is provided. Section 11362.4 provides it is an infraction to violate Section 11362.3. The city seeks to make clear that smoking of or ingestion of marijuana on all its city streets, sidewalks, public property, recreation areas and sports arenas is prohibited. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit smoking or ingesting of marijuana in any other "public place" not addressed by this chapter. This chapter is designed and intended to specifically address public property, recreation areas and sports arenas as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
8.34.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  Notice of these regulations shall be given to all applicants for a special event or other permit to use public property, recreation areas and sports arenas. 
B.  In addition to the police department, the following positions are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  The fire marshal or designee of the fire department. 
2.  The city's code enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
8.34.080 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any public property, recreation areas and sports arenas subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with any of its provisions. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to smoke or use marijuana in any area where smoking or use is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
D.  Violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated by appropriate civil action. 
E.  The remedies provided by this section are cumulative, and are in addition to any other remedy existing at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
8.34.090 - Other applicable laws. 
A.  This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking or use of marijuana or other substances where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws or permit conditions, including but not limited to the fire code, OSHA regulations, the California Code of Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 11-8-2016; Ord. No. 1059, § 2, 11-8-2016)  
Chapter 8.35 - SHOPPING CART ABANDONMENT 
 
8.35.010 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Abandoned cart" means any cart that has been removed without written consent of the owner of the cart from the premises of the business establishment which owns the cart, regardless of whether it has been left on either private or public property. This provision shall not apply to carts that are removed for purposes of repair or maintenance. 
"Business day" means Monday through Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
"Cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. 
"Owner" means a person or business establishment owning or using shopping carts in connection with its business. 
"Person" means any person, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, and other entity capable of being sued. 
"Street" means a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, park, parking lot, parking area, and place used by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
8.35.020 - Cart identification required. 
Every person who, in connection with the conduct of a retail business, including but not limited to a food dispensing business, owns or makes any cart available to the public, shall mark or cause the same to be marked and identified conspicuously with the name, address, and telephone number of the owner. Such identification shall be in the form of a metal or plastic tag or plate securely fastened to the cart or standing on the frame of the cart or by etched branding on the side or front of the cart. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
8.35.030 - Posting of notice by owners of retail establishments. 
There shall be posted by the owner of any retail establishment furnishing a parking area and shopping carts or laundry carts for its customers, prominently and conspicuously at all entrances to the retail establishment, a notice in substantially the following form: 
REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS FROM THESE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND WILL SUBJECT THE VIOLATOR TO A FINE. (RMC § 8.35.040) 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
8.35.040 - Removal of carts from premises of business prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person except the owner of the cart or the owner's agent to remove the cart from the premises of the business that owns or rightfully possesses the cart. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
8.35.050 - Abandonment of carts prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or an agent thereof, to leave, or permit to be left, any cart, either owned by him or in his possession, custody or control, upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place, or upon any private property, except that of the owner of such cart. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
8.35.060 - Possession of carts without written consent prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or an agent thereof, to be in possession of any cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of a retail establishment without the express written consent of the owner of the cart. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
8.35.070 - Plan for prevention of cart removal required. 
Every owner who allows or intends to allow the use of carts outside the building of a business shall develop and implement a specific plan to prevent customers from removing carts from the business premises. The plan must include the following elements: 
1.  Notice to Customers. Written notification shall be provided to customers that removal of carts from the premises and parking lots is prohibited and a violation of state and local law. This notice may be provided in the form of flyers, warnings on shopping bags, or any form of written notification that will effectively notify customers of the prohibition; 
2.  Signs. Signs shall be placed in pertinent places as required by Section 8.35.030; 
3.  Physical Measures. Specific physical measures shall be implemented to prevent or minimize the opportunity for cart removal from the business premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to, disabling devices on all carts, posting of a security guard to deter and stop customers who attempt to remove carts from the business premises, allowing no carts outside the building of the business unless in the company of an employee, bollards and chains around business premises to prevent cart removal, security deposits required for use of all carts, or the rental or sale of carts that can be temporarily or permanently used for the transport of purchases; 
4.  Collaboration with Other Businesses. Two or more businesses may collaborate and submit to the city a single plan; 
5.  Evaluation Report. The owner shall prepare an annual report which shall be submitted to the city's director of economic and community development each July 1, evaluating the measures that were used and approved in the prior year. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the inventory of carts owned/used by the business establishment and the number of carts that had to be replaced due to loss, theft, or abandonment; and 
6.  Mandatory Cart Retrieval. In addition to the above provisions, an owner must provide to and have approved by the city, a plan to provide for retrieval of abandoned carts by its employees, or have entered into a contract for cart retrieval services that is approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
8.35.080 - Approval of prevention plan and evaluation report; failure to comply with plan. 
A.  Submission of Plan; Approval Process; Request for Hearing. 
1.  The proposed plan for preventing cart removal shall be submitted to the city's director of economic and community development for compliance with Section 8.35.070 within ninety days after adoption of this article and by July 1 of each year thereafter. The city's director of economic and community development shall approve or reject the plan within thirty days of receipt. If approved, the proposed measures shall be implemented by no later than thirty days after approval. If the proposed plan is the same as the previous year, the prevention measures shall be continued. 
2.  Should the city's director of economic and community development reject the plan, the owner may appeal the decision as set forth in Chapter 8.01 of this title. 
3.  The request for hearing shall be made in writing to the city manager within ten days of notification of the director's determination. After receiving the request for hearing, the city manager, or his designee, shall conduct a hearing. A continuance of the hearing may be granted upon written request to the city manager. 
4.  Written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be served at least ten days prior to the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the owner by first class mail at the address provided by the owner. The hearing shall be set no sooner than twenty days following the request for hearing. 
B.  Evaluation Report. A report evaluating the effectiveness of the plan established pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be furnished to the city by July 1 of each year. The director of economic and community development shall approve or reject the report. If the director of economic and community development rejects the report, the owner shall have the same right to appeal as set forth in subsection A. of this section. 
C.  Failure to Submit Prevention Plan or Implement Prevention Measures. Any owner that fails to submit a plan, implement the proposed plan measures, or implement any required modifications to the plan by the city within the timeframes specified in this article shall be required to keep all carts inside the building of the business. 
D.  Penalty for Failure to Submit Evaluation Report or Keep Carts Inside Building. Any owner that fails to timely submit an evaluation report as required by Section 8.35.070(5) or fails to keep all carts inside the building of the premises, if applicable, shall be subject to administrative penalties, in amounts established pursuant to Chapter 1.14 of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 1100, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
8.35.090 - Retrieval of abandoned carts. 
A.  Notice to Retrieve Carts. The city shall notify the owner of any abandoned carts owned or used by the business establishment that have been located within the city. The owner shall have three days from the date the notification is given to retrieve the carts from the specified location. The city shall keep a record of notifications for retrieval of abandoned carts for purposes of determining the effectiveness of the plans to prevent the removal of carts. 
B.  Administrative Costs and Fines for Failure to Comply with Notice. Any owner that fails to retrieve its abandoned cart(s) after receiving the three-day notice by the city shall pay the city's administrative costs for retrieving and impounding the cart(s) and providing the notification to the owner, in addition to any administrative penalties imposed for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such administrative costs shall be set forth in a resolution establishing fees and charges for various municipal services. 
C.  Impoundment Without Notice. Notwithstanding subsection A. of this section, the city may impound an abandoned cart without providing the three-day notice, provided that the owner is provided with actual notice within twenty-four hours following the impound and the notice informs the owners as to the location where the cart may be claimed. Any cart reclaimed by the owner within three business days following the date of actual notice shall be released to the owner without charge. Any cart not reclaimed by the owner within three business days following actual notice shall be subject to the fees and penalties set forth in subsection B. of this section. 
D.  Disposition of Unclaimed Carts. Any cart not reclaimed from the city within thirty days after notification to the owner shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
8.35.100 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, licenses, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. 
B.  It is unlawful and a public nuisance to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who engages in conduct prohibited by this chapter may be subject to the following penalties: 
1.  The first violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars. 
2.  A second violation of this chapter within one year, or the continued violation of this chapter after being directed to cease and desist the unlawful activity, is a misdemeanor. 
C.  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
D.  In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth in Title 1. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 10-24-2017)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.01 - APPEALS PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
9.01.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Appeals Procedure" for Title 9. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
9.01.020 - Right to appeal and fees. 
A.  Right to Appeal. Except where a procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this title, any person objecting to the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license, permit or entitlement of any nature, the determination or issuance of which is under any of the provisions of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any city official, if the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of such license, permit or entitlement or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised under any of the provisions of this code, may appeal such decision in writing as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Appeals Fees. The city council may establish a schedule for appeals fees by resolution. 
C.  Appeals Regarding Administrative Citations. The regulations set forth in Title 1 of the Rocklin Municipal Code shall govern the appeal of administrative citations, or notices of violation, as such terms are defined in Chapter 1.08, issued for violation of any provision of Title 9. 
D.  These appeals procedures are not applicable to criminal violations of this title. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
9.01.030 - Procedure for filing an appeal. 
A.  Appeal to City Manager. If a party is aggrieved of an administrative decision under this Title 9, they may appeal the decision to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days after the date upon which the written administrative decision was deposited in the U.S. mail. The notice of appeal shall contain a statement of the grounds to be relied upon for reversing the decision being appealed. In the event the last calendar day of the filing period falls on a non-business day, the appeal period shall be extended to include the next business day. In the absence of a timely appeal and the payment of any applicable appeal fee, the original administrative decision shall be final. 
The city manager shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal not later than forty-five calendar days after the notice of appeal is received. At least ten calendar days' notice shall be given to the appellant of the time and place of the hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail to the address provided by appellant in his/her notice of appeal. The city manager may hear the appeal in person and shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the hearing. The city manager's written decision shall include appellant's right to appeal the decision to the city council. 
B.  Informal Resolution. Persons denied a permit or otherwise aggrieved by a determination of a city official under this title may meet and/or confer with the city official who issued the decision or the appropriate department head in an effort to informally resolve the matter. Such efforts to informally resolve the matter do not extend the time for filing a formal appeal under subsection A above. In the event the matter is informally resolved prior to the hearing date set by the city manager, the city will refund any appeals fees paid provided the appellant has withdrawn their formal appeal. 
C.  Appeal to City Council. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council by filing a notice of appeal containing appellant's grounds for appeal with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days after the date upon which the city manager's decision is made. In the absence of a timely appeal and payment of any applicable appeal fee, the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
The city clerk shall fix a time and place for the city council hearing of such appeal not later than forty-five calendar days after the notice of appeal is received. At least ten calendar days' notice shall be given to the appellant of the time and place of the hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail to the address provided by appellant in his/her notice of appeal. 
At such hearing before the city council, the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action appealed from should be reversed. The city council may continue the hearing from time to time; provided, however, that the hearing shall occur and be concluded no later than thirty calendar days after the original date set for hearing. The city council shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing and its decision to affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
Chapter 9.04 - ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Findings—Intent. 
A.  City parks are regularly used for organized athletic events involving minors (i.e., little league, soccer, etc.). 
B.  Such athletic events normally are attended by interested parents and other spectators. 
C.  There have been numerous instances in which persons have disrupted such athletic events while under the influence of alcohol. 
D.  The council determines that it is necessary for the protection of those participating in and viewing organized athletic events involving minors and for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, that there be no sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages at or near such organized athletic events. 
E.  It is not the intent of the council to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in city parks except as herein specified; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be read to permit the possession, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages in violation of any law. 
(Ord. 425 § 1, 1980).  
9.04.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Organized athletic event" means any sporting contest (or practice by a team to compete in such a contest) which contest or practice involves participation by minors who are organized into teams which play on a regular basis against similar teams. 
B.  "Park" means any park, reservation, playground, or other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to recreation use by the public. 
(Ord. 425 § 2, 1980).  
9.04.030 - Restricted near organized athletic events involving minors. 
Whenever an organized athletic event involving minors is in progress within a park, it is unlawful for any person to sell or consume alcoholic beverages within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the playing field upon which the organized athletic event is being conducted except when such sale or consumption takes place within an enclosed building. 
(Ord. 425 § 3, 1980).  
9.04.040 - Drinking in public streets, sidewalks, and alleys. 
It is unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley in the city. 
(Ord. 616 § 1, 1990).  
9.04.050 - Possession of open alcoholic beverage container on posted premises. 
A.  As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
1.  "Posted premises" means premises subject to state licensure as a retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee, any parking lot immediately adjacent to such premises, and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to such premises, and on which premises at least one clearly visible notice indicates to the patrons of the licensee, and the parking lot, and to persons on the public sidewalk, that the provisions of this section are applicable. 
2.  "Retail packaged off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee" means those persons (licensee) granted a retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code. 
B.  It is unlawful for a person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed to enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to such licensed and posted premises. 
C.  Every retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee within the city shall display a clearly visible twelve-inch by six-inch sign which gives notice to the patrons of the licensee, and to persons on or in the parking lot or public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensee's premises, of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 616 § 2, 1990).  
9.04.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. 616 § 3, 1990: Ord. 425 § 4, 1980).  
Chapter 9.08 - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA SALE AND DISPLAY 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to discourage the illegal use of controlled substances that create serious social, medical and law enforcement problems within the city. 
B.  The permitted display of drug paraphernalia in retail stores and the distribution of such paraphernalia symbolizes a public tolerance that intensifies and compounds the problem of the illegal use of controlled substances within our community. 
Therefore, this chapter is directed towards the public display and sales of paraphernalia intended for use with illicit controlled substances. 
(Ord. 436 § 1, 1980).  
9.08.020 - Age-related prohibition impractical. 
A.  A ban only upon the display and distribution of drug paraphernalia to persons under eighteen years of age would not be practical. The person who displays or distributes such matter would have difficulty determining who could lawfully view or receive drug paraphernalia. The police department would be subjected to an intolerable enforcement burden by adding age as an element of a prohibition upon display and distribution. A significant number of high school students are eighteen years of age or older. With an age-related prohibition, it would be lawful to distribute paraphernalia to some students attending the same school in which the distribution to other students would be prohibited. Permitted display and distribution to adults within the community would symbolize a public tolerance of illegal drug use, making it difficult to explain the rationale of programs directed against similar abuse by youth. The problem of illegal consumption of controlled substances by adults within this community is significant and substantial, necessitating a cessation of the encouragement to drug abuse which the display and distribution of drug paraphernalia create. 
This chapter is necessary in order to discourage the illegal use of controlled substances within the city. 
(Ord. 444 § 1, 1981: Ord. 436 § 1A, 1980).  
9.08.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be ascribed the following meanings: 
A.  "Business" means a fixed location, whether indoors or outdoors, at which merchandise is offered for sale at retail. 
B.  "Controlled substance" means those controlled substances set forth in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 and 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, identified as Schedules I through V, inclusive, as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended. 
C.  "Display" means to show to a patron or place in a manner so as to be available for viewing or inspection by a patron. 
D.  "Distribute" means to transfer ownership or a possessory interest to another, whether for consideration or as a gratuity. "Distribute" includes both sales and gifts. 
E.  1.  "Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are intended by a person charged with a violation of this chapter, for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repacking, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state of California. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
a.  Kits intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
b.  Kits intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances; 
c.  Isomerization devices intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
d.  Testing equipment intended for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
e.  Scales and balances intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
f.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, intended for use in cutting controlled substances; 
g.  Separation gins and sifters intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
h.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices intended for use in compounding controlled substances; 
i.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
j.  Containers and other objects intended for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; and 
k.  Objects intended for use in injecting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
2.  Water pipes; 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
5.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
6.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials: 
7.  Chamber pipes; 
8.  Carburetor pipes; 
9.  Air-driven pipes; 
10.  Bongs. 
2.  In determining wither an object is "drug paraphernalia," a court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
b.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
c.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
d.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver to persons whom he knows, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the laws of the state of California relating to controlled substances; 
e.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
f.  Descriptive materials, accompanying the object, which explain or depict its use; 
g.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
h.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
i.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
j.  The existence or scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and 
k.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
F.  "Patron" means a person who enters a business for the purpose of purchasing or viewing as a shopper merchandise offered for sale at the business. 
(Ord. 436 § 2, 1980).  
9.08.040 - Display unlawful. 
A.  Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully maintain or operate any business with knowledge that drug paraphernalia is displayed at such business. 
B.  Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person who is the owner of a business, an employee thereof or who works at such business as an agent of the owner, to wilfully display drug paraphernalia at such business. 
(Ord. 436 § 3, 1980).  
9.08.050 - Distribution unlawful. 
Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully distribute to another person drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state. 
(Ord. 436 § 4, 1980).  
9.08.060 - State law supersedes. 
No provision of this chapter directly or indirectly authorizes any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the state or requires any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the state, nor does any provision of this chapter directly or indirectly prohibit any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the state. 
(Ord. 436 § 5, 1980).  
9.08.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction, is punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
B.  A person who violates the provisions of Section 9.08.040 is guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues. 
C.  A person who violates the provisions of Section 9.08.050 is guilty of a separate offense for each item of drug paraphernalia which is distributed. 
(Ord. 436 § 7, 1980).  
9.08.080 - Violation—Abatement. 
As an additional remedy, a violation of this chapter which threatens to be continuing in nature is a public nuisance and may be abated summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 436 § 8, 1980).  
Chapter 9.12 - FIREARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Discharge of firearms prohibited. 
Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, no person shall discharge within the city any firearm of any kind, character or description without a permit issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 473 § 1, 1982).  
9.12.020 - Exception. 
The provisions of Section 9.12.010 shall not apply to: 
A.  The discharge of firearms with blank cartridges at bona fide funeral ceremonies and athletic events; 
B.  Peace officers in the discharge of their official duties and using reasonable care; and 
C.  Persons using firearms in necessary self-defense and in defense of livestock. 
(Ord. 473 § 2, 1982).  
9.12.030 - Violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 473 § 3, 1982).  
Chapter 9.16 - LOITERING 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, "to loiter" means to enter and remain on any premises, public or private, under such circumstances that a reasonable person would conclude that the person who has entered and remained on such premises: 
A.  Does not have a purpose legitimately connected with the business or activity of the legal occupant of the business; and 
B.  Does not have a bona fide intent to exercise a constitutional right. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 1990).  
9.16.020 - Loitering prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter within the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 1990).  
9.16.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. 617 § 1 (part), 1990).  
Chapter 9.20 - URINATING AND DEFECATING IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Acts prohibited. 
No person shall deposit, by means of urination or defecation, any human waste material in any public place (other than in a public toilet or restroom designed to receive waste material), in any place exposed to public view, or upon the surface of the ground or upon any premises, lot, or public street. 
(Ord. 618 § 1 (part), 1990).  
9.20.020 - Human waste material defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter "human waste material" means human urine or human fecal matter discharged from the body. 
(Ord. 618 § 1 (part), 1990).  
9.20.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. 618 § 1 (part), 1990).  
Chapter 9.24 - CAMPING ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1077, § 3, adopted Aug. 8, 2017, amended Ch. 9.24 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.24, §§ 9.24.010—9.24.070 pertained to camping on public property, and derived from Ord. No. 1074, § 3 adopted July 11, 2017. See the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for a complete derivation. 
 
9.24.010 - Purpose. 
The streets and public property within the city of Rocklin should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to make use of these areas for their proper function. Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard that adversely impacts neighborhoods, commercial property and the general welfare of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public property, and private lands, within the city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping associated with special events can be beneficial to the cultural and educational climate in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 8-8-2017)  
9.24.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Camp" means to do any of the following: 
1.  To sleep any time between the hours of nine p.m. and nine a.m. in any of the following places: 
a.  Outdoors with or without bedding, tent, hammock or other similar protection or equipment. 
b.  In or under any structure not intended for human habitation, whether with or without bedding, tent, hammock, or other similar protection or equipment. 
c.  In, on or under any parked vehicle, including an automobile, bus, truck, travel trailer or other recreational vehicle. 
B.  "Camp facilities" means temporary structures, equipment or vehicles used to camp, including, but not limited to, tents, huts, temporary shelters, trailers or vehicles, if the vehicle or trailer is being used for habitation. 
C.  "Camp paraphernalia" means implements and equipment used while camping including, but not limited to, tents, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, blankets, mattresses, hammocks, stoves, lanterns and operational cooking equipment. 
D.  "Campsite" includes any location used for the purposes of camping. 
E.  "Habitation" means the intentional use of a space as temporary or permanent living quarters. 
F.  "Private property" means all privately-owned property including, but not limited to, privately-owned streets, sidewalks, alleys, ways, creeks, waterways, lots, parcels and other forms of improved or unimproved land or real property. 
G.  "Public property" means property owned or controlled by the city of Rocklin, including but not limited to, parks, trails, streets, sidewalks, and open space areas. 
H.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle or trailer as defined in Rocklin Municipal Code Section 17.08.130(B)(5). 
I.  "Setting up campsite" means to, at any time, establish or maintain outdoors or in, on or under any structure not intended for human habitation, at any time during the day or night, a temporary or permanent place for cooking or sleeping, by setting up any bedding, including, but not limited to, a sleeping bag, blanket, mattress, tent, hammock or other sleeping equipment or by setting up any cooking equipment with the intent to use that location for sleeping or habitation. 
J.  "Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping or to place or leave unattended in a location. 
K.  "Unattended property" means any personal property, including "camp paraphernalia which appears to have been abandoned, discarded, or disregarded by its owner; or property which has been left unattended for an unreasonable amount of time. An "unreasonable" amount of time may be any amount of time, however, any property left unattended for twelve hours or more shall be considered unattended per se. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 8-8-2017)  
9.24.030 - Unlawful camping. 
A.  No person shall camp anywhere in the city of Rocklin on public or private property, except as hereinafter expressly permitted in Sections 9.24.040 and 9.24.050 of this chapter. 
B.  It shall be an affirmative defense under this chapter for any person, without the purpose of habitation, to temporarily occupy and use a vehicle for emergency reasons such as escape from or avoidance of an abusive person(s), avoidance of driving a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, even though the person may sleep during the period of that use. For purposes of this section, "temporarily occupy" means a duration of twelve hours or less. 
C.  Camping, otherwise authorized under this chapter, shall not be permitted when conducted in such a manner as to create noise, inadequate sanitation, involve the use of open flames, or is conducted in a manner that poses a danger to the health, safety and general welfare of the surrounding property or to other persons lawfully using surrounding property. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 8-8-2017)  
9.24.040 - Permitted camping on public property. 
Camping is permitted on public property in the city of Rocklin only under the following circumstances: 
A.  On public property specifically set aside and clearly marked for public camping purposes. 
B.  In conjunction with events authorized and expressly provided for in a special event permit issued by the city of Rocklin. 
C.  In designated areas on public property in conjunction with community or sporting events. Camping in connection with a community or sporting event shall not exceed three consecutive nights and only in areas identified by the city manager or his/her designee. 
D.  Inside a licensed and registered recreational vehicle while on a public residential street and as guests of owners or occupants of a residence within one hundred feet of the location where the recreational vehicle is parked. Power cords, ropes, and/or water hoses shall not be allowed to run from the vehicle across a sidewalk. Use of a generator is prohibited. No recreational vehicle shall be used for camping under this subsection for more than nine days during any thirty-day period. 
E.  In connection with city-sponsored programs. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 8-8-2017)  
9.24.050 - Permitted camping on private property. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, or stay overnight on any private property within the city without first obtaining permission of the owner and making adequate arrangements to assure sanitary conditions and proper waste disposal. This prohibition shall apply whether or not such person is camping or lodging within or without any automobile, van, motor home, trailer coach, tent or other place of shelter. No person shall set up camp facilities or any other temporary or permanent shelter for the purpose of camping, nor shall any person leave upon any private property any camp facilities. 
B.  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to camping, with adequate sanitary conditions and proper waste disposal, in the following situations: 
1.  Persons camping upon their own land, or persons camping with the owner of the land. 
2.  Persons camping with the written consent of the owner of the land, for not more than two consecutive nights, provided that such written consent is in their possession at the time and is shown upon the demand of any peace officer; and 
3.  Persons lawfully camping within campgrounds or trailer parks approved pursuant to city ordinance. 
C.  This section is not intended to modify or amend the provisions Title 17 of the Rocklin Municipal Code, including Section 17.08.130. In the event of a conflict between Title 17 and this section, Title 17 shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 8-8-2017)  
9.24.060 - Storage of personal property. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to store or leave unattended camp facilities or camp paraphernalia on public or private property, unless such storage is expressly authorized and in conjunction with a permitted camping activity under this chapter. 
B.  Unattended personal property on public property shall be handled pursuant to the city's policies and procedures, and in no event shall be destroyed without providing owners with notice and a reasonable opportunity to recover the property. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 8-8-2017)  
9.24.070 - Public nuisance declared. 
Any campsite established in the city in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and city officials are authorized to abate the nuisance and remove camp facilities and camp paraphernalia as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 8-8-2017)  
9.24.080 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, licenses, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. 
B.  It is unlawful and a public nuisance to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who engages in conduct prohibited by this chapter may be subject to the following penalties: 
1.  The first violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars. 
2.  A second violation of this chapter within one year, or the continued violation of this chapter after being directed to cease and desist the unlawful activity, is a misdemeanor. 
C.  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
D.  In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth in Title 1. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 3, 8-8-2017)  
Chapter 9.28 - CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS 
Sections: 
 
9.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and certain provisions shall be construed as herein set out, unless it shall be apparent from their content that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Curfew hours" means eleven p.m. on any day until five a.m. of the following day. 
B.  "Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
C.  "Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
D.  "Guardian" means: 
1.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
2.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
E.  "Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
F.  "Parent" means a person who is: 
1.  A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person; or 
2.  A responsible adult at least eighteen years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
G.  "Public place" means any public street, highway, road or alley; any public park, playground, or other public grounds; and any other outdoor place, including off-street parking areas and vacant lots, whether publicly or privately owned. 
H.  "Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. 777 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 713 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.28.020 - Curfew restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor to be present in or upon any public place, or within or on a parked motor vehicle located in or upon a public place, within the city during curfew hours. 
B.  It is unlawful for any minor to fail to leave any public place within the city when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator or person in control of the public place, during curfew hours. 
C.  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place within the city during curfew hours. 
(Ord. 777 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 713 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.28.030 - Limitations to offenses. 
The offenses listed in section 9.28.020 are limited and shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
A.  When the minor is accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
B.  When the minor is on an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
C.  When the minor is engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
D.  When the minor is involved in an emergency; 
E.  When the minor is attending an official school, religious, community, or other organized and supervised outdoor recreational activity, such as a movie, play, concert or sporting event, or going to or returning home from such activity without any detour or stop. The aforementioned activity shall be supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of Rocklin, the Rocklin unified school district, a civic or religious organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
F.  When the minor is returning home from an establishment or other indoor location without any detour or stop; 
G.  When the minor is or has been emancipated in accordance with California Family Code Section 7000 et seq.; 
H.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate or intrastate travel; 
I.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
J.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. 777 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 713 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.28.040 - Limitations on citations and arrests. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no limitation as described in Section 9.28.030 is present or applicable. 
(Ord. 777 § 2 (part), 1998).  
9.28.050 - Penalties. 
Violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. 777 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 713 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.28.060 - Enforcement. 
In addition to the provisions of state law and this code relating to the enforcement of city ordinances, this chapter may be enforced under the provisions of the city of Rocklin resolution implementing the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code § 625.5. 
(Ord. 777 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 713 § 1 (part), 1995).  
Chapter 9.32 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
9.32.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds that graffiti on public or private property is a cause of blight which depreciates not only the value of the property defaced, but also the value of adjacent and surrounding properties, creating a negative impact upon the entire city. 
Graffiti is also a means of identification utilized by gangs. Graffiti encourages further gang-related activities. Graffiti creates fear within the community and blight upon the urban landscape. It devalues property and detracts from the sense of community enjoyed by the residents of Rocklin. Graffiti is both a crime against property and a social crime against the quality of life and freedom from intimidation citizens desire in their neighborhoods. Graffiti is vandalism and is prohibited by Penal Code Section 594, et seq., and Section 640.6. 
California Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes the city, under certain circumstances, to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed materials from private as well as public property. The council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and unless the city causes it to be removed from public and private property, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including the application of graffiti on privately and publicly owned walls and structures. It is the further intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to advise all of those who disregard the property rights of others, that the law enforcement agencies of the city, county and the district attorney's office will strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute those persons engaging in the defacement of public and private properties. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.020 - Definitions. 
"Adhesive label" means any sheet of paper, fabric or plastic, or other substance with an adhesive backing. 
"Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint, or other substance capable of defacing property. 
"Permanent felt tip marker" means any marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth of an inch, containing permanent ink or other permanent pigmented liquid. 
"Graffiti" means any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted on, or otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material, without the prior written authorization given by the owner thereof. 
"Graffiti implement" means an aerosol paint container, a permanent felt tip marker, paint stick, etching tool, adhesive label, or any other device capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width upon any surface of any material. 
"Paint stick" means a device containing a solid form of paint, wax, epoxy or similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width. 
"Etching tool" means masonry or glass drill bit, a carbide drill bit, a glass cutter, a grinding stone, an awl, a chisel, a carbide scribe, or other similar device that may be used to etch, scratch or mark a surface. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.030 - Leaving graffiti on property prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any real property within the city, including fixtures and improvements, which bears graffiti to allow the graffiti to remain on the property. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.040 - Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon public property, or upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner of such property. This section shall not apply to the possession of any graffiti implement under the circumstances and in the manner prohibited by Penal Code Sections 594.1 and 594.2. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.050 - Possession of graffiti implements in designated public places prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or within twenty-five feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, sound wall or similar types of infrastructure not normally used by the public, except as may be authorized by the city. This section shall not apply to the possession of any graffiti implement under the circumstances and in the manner prohibited by Penal Code Sections 594.1 and 594.2. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.060 - Selling or furnishing graffiti implements to minors prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or permit to be sold, exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any person who is in fact under the age of eighteen years unless such person is in the presence of his or her parent or guardian. 
B.  This section shall not apply to the selling, giving or otherwise furnishing to any person who is in fact under the age of eighteen any aerosol container of paint under the circumstances and in the manner prohibited by Penal Code Section 594.1. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.070 - Purchase of graffiti implements by minors prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who is under the age of eighteen years to purchase or otherwise obtain a graffiti implement unless such person is in the presence of his or her parent or guardian. 
B.  This section shall not apply to the purchase of any aerosol container of paint by any person who is under the age of eighteen under the circumstances and in the manner prohibited by Penal Code Section 594.1. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.080 - Accessibility to graffiti implements. 
Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a commercial establishment that sells graffiti implements shall prominently display in the proximity of the implements a sign not smaller than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches which shall read as follows: 
GRAFFITI IS A CRIME. ANY PERSON DEFACING REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY NOT HIS/HER OWN WITH GRAFFITI IS GUILTY OF A CRIME PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT OF UP TO ONE YEAR AND/OR A FINE OF UP TO $50,000. PENAL CODE § 594. 
SELLING OR OTHERWISE CONVEYING AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT, PERMANENT WIDE-TIPPED MARKERS ( 1/8 ?), PAINT STICKS, ETCHING, TOOLS, OR ADHESIVE LABELS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IN THE CITY OF ROCKLIN IS A MISDEMEANOR, PUNISHABLE BY A FINE AND/OR IMPRISONMENT. 
Where the sign specified in Penal Code Section 594.1 is required, the signs required by this section shall be in addition to that required by the Penal Code. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.090 - Penalties for violations. 
A.  Violation of any section of this chapter may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the city attorney. 
B.  The parent(s) or legal guardian of a minor who violates this chapter shall be liable for the payment of civil damages pursuant to Civil Code Section 1714.1(b). 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.100 - Declaration of nuisance. 
The presence of graffiti on private or public property is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated or enjoined as such in accordance with provisions of this chapter, Chapter 8.04, or any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
9.32.120 - Authority to remove. 
Code enforcement officers shall cause the abatement and removal of graffiti in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter, Chapter 8.04, and any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995). 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
9.32.130 - Notice and order to remove—Form. 
Upon discovering graffiti on public or private property, a code enforcement officer shall cause a notice and order to abate and remove graffiti to be mailed to, or personally served upon, the owners of the property, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll, and any individuals known to have applied the graffiti to the property. The notice and order shall advise as follows: 
A.  If the graffiti is not removed within the time frame set forth in the notice and order, the city shall remove the graffiti and assess the costs to the property owner and/or the individuals responsible. 
B.  If a responsible individual is a minor, costs shall be assessed to the parents or guardians of that minor. 
C.  If consent to remove the graffiti is provided to the city by the owner, or any person so authorized by the owner, within the time given to remove the graffiti, the city shall remove the graffiti at no cost to the owner. 
D.  The owner or individual may appeal the order to abate and remove graffiti as set forth in Chapter 9.01 of this Title 9. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995). 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
9.32.140 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1101, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, repealed former § 9.32.140 which pertained to appeal, and derived from Ord. No. 728, § 1(part), adopted in 1995.  
9.32.150 - City abatement—Cost assessment. 
The city may recover the cost of abatement, including its administrative costs, under this chapter in the same manner as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995). 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
9.32.160 - Treble damages. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period which ordered abatement of graffiti as a public nuisance, a fine in the amount of three times the cost of abatement shall be paid by the violator(s). 
(Ord. 728 § 1 (part), 1995).  
Chapter 9.36 - CRUISING 
Sections: 
 
9.36.010 - Cruising defined. 
"Cruising" means the driving of a motor vehicle three or more times within a four-hour period, in a particular direction, past a traffic control point in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic control point. Traffic control points shall be established under Section 9.36.040. 
(Ord. 737 § 2 (part), 1996).  
9.36.020 - Cruising prohibited. 
No person, having driven a motor vehicle, or having been a passenger in a motor vehicle driven past a traffic control point established and posted pursuant to Sections 9.36.030 and 9.36.040, and having received written notice as provided by Section 9.36.050, shall drive past that control point again within the time period while cruising controls are in effect. Each successive trip past the traffic control point shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and no additional written notice shall be required for such separate violation. 
(Ord. 737 § 2 (part), 1996).  
9.36.030 - Cruising—Signs. 
The chief of police, or his or her designee, shall cause signs to be posted at the beginning and end of the portion of any street he or she determines is subject to cruising and is in need of cruising controls. The signs shall briefly and clearly state the appropriate provisions of this chapter and Vehicle Code Section 21100(d) on cruising. 
(Ord. 737 § 2 (part), 1996). 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
9.36.040 - Cruising—Traffic control point. 
The ranking peace officer on duty within an area posted as subject to cruising controls may establish one or more traffic control points at or near the area of traffic congestion. 
(Ord. 737 § 2 (part), 1996).  
9.36.050 - Cruising—Written notice. 
Any person who, as the operator of, or passenger in, a motor vehicle driven in a particular direction past a traffic control point established pursuant to Section 9.36.040 at least two times within a four-hour period, may be given written warning notice that further driving past the control point will be a violation of Section 9.36.020. 
(Ord. 737 § 2 (part), 1996).  
9.36.060 - Penalty for violations. 
Violation of this chapter is an infraction. The minimum penalty for a first conviction is a one hundred dollar fine. For a second conviction within one year, the minimum penalty is a two hundred dollar fine. For a third or subsequent conviction within one year, the minimum penalty is a two hundred fifty dollar fine. 
(Ord. 737 § 2 (part), 1996).  
Chapter 9.40 - DISTURBANCE CALL BACK COST RECOVERY 
Sections: 
 
9.40.010 - Citation of chapter. 
This chapter may be cited as the city of Rocklin Disturbance Call Back Cost Recovery Ordinance. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.40.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The city of Rocklin finds and determines police officers, in response to complaints, are often required to make several return trips to a location of a disturbance causing loud and unreasonable noise in order to disperse uncooperative participants. The return of police officers to a location constitutes a drain of personnel and resources often leaving other areas of the city without minimal levels of police protection. This creates a significant hazard to the safety of the police officers and to the public in general. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.40.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Disturbance" shall include parties, gatherings, and any other activities causing loud and unreasonable noise so as to constitute a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
B.  "Cost of police services" include the salaries of the responding police officers, at the salary then in effect for each classification of each individual officer, for the amount of time actually spent in responding to or remaining at the disturbance; appropriate overhead; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers; and the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property. 
C.  "Person responsible for the disturbance" or "responsible person" is the person causing the disturbance, the person who owns or is in charge of the property where the disturbance takes place, and the person who organized the event or activity causing the disturbance. If the person responsible for the disturbance is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for police services. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.40.040 - Liability for cost of police services at disturbances requiring more than one response. 
When police personnel respond to any location due to a disturbance, the responding officers may issue a written warning to the responsible person. The notice shall state that if police department personnel are required to return to the same location within the following twelve hour period because of similar or continuing disturbances, such further response shall constitute special security services. Further, this warning shall state that the responsible person may be charged for the cost of providing such special security services. The warning shall be offered for signature to the responsible person. The warning shall be signed by the responsible person, or, if the responsible person refuses to sign, the words "refused to sign" shall be entered on the warning acknowledging receipt of the warning. A copy of the warning shall be left with the responsible person. If a second or subsequent response is required, police department personnel shall have the responsible person sign a second response voucher. If the responsible person refuses to sign, the words "refused to sign" shall be entered on the voucher acknowledging the occurrence of the second response. A copy of the voucher shall be left with the responsible person. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.40.050 - Cost of police services. 
The cost of police services charged to persons responsible for a disturbance under this chapter shall be calculated using the cost reasonably borne to provide the service determined under Chapter 3.32 and actual cost of medical treatment and damages to equipment. The amount charged shall be deemed a debt to the city of the person(s) responsible for the disturbance and, if minors, their parents or guardians. Any person owing money shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.40.060 - Effect on criminal prosecution. 
Nothing in the adoption or administration of this chapter shall be construed as affecting the ability to initiate or continue concurrent or subsequent criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this code or any state law arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this chapter. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2002).  
Chapter 9.42 - SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY 
 
9.42.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of people and premises in the city, including the quiet enjoyment of property, by enhancing the ability of law enforcement to deter the consumption of alcohol, marijuana or other controlled substances by minors and to hold adult hosts accountable for ensuring minors are not consuming alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or other controlled substances. 
Instances of large parties and disturbances both at rental facilities and private homes often disturb the public peace, safety, and welfare of members of the community. These incidents can also jeopardize the welfare and safety of those in attendance due to assaultive and/or destructive behavior. 
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
9.42.020 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases used in this chapter have the meanings set forth in this section. 
A.  "Alcohol" shall have the same meaning as in California Business and Professions Code section 23003 or any successor section. 
B.  "Alcoholic beverage" shall have the same meaning as in California Business and Professions Code section 23004 or any successor section. 
C.  "Controlled substance" means a drug or substance whose possession and use are regulated under the California Controlled Substances Act (Health and Safety Code section 11000 et seq.). Such term does not include any drug or substance for which the individual found to have consumed or possessed such substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical practitioner authorized to issue such a prescription. 
D.  "Gathering" is a party, or event, where a group of three or more underage persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. 
E.  "Juvenile" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
F.  "Legal guardian" means: (i) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or (ii) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
G.  "Minor" means any person less than twenty-one years of age as defined by California Business and Professions Code section 25662. 
H.  "Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or step-parent of a minor. 
I.  "Premises" means any non-publicly owned place, land or building used for habitation or social events. 
J.  "Social host" means any person having ownership or control of a premises, or is responsible for organizing a gathering, who knowingly permits or allows, tacitly or otherwise, a gathering or unruly gathering, as those terms are defined in this section, to occur on private property. 
K.  "Unruly gathering" shall mean a party, event or gathering where three or more underage persons are present at a residence or other private property in which alcoholic beverages are being consumed or possessed by any minor and upon which unruly conduct occurs. Illustrative of such unruly conduct is excessive noise, excessive traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, public drunkenness or unlawful public consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages, assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of peace, vandalism, litter, and any other conduct which constitutes a threat to public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
9.42.030 - Hosting, permitting, allowing a gathering where minors consume alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances prohibited. 
A.  Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person having ownership or control of any premises, or who is responsible for a gathering or unruly gathering, to host, knowingly permit, or allow, tacitly or otherwise, a gathering to take place at said premises, where at least one minor possesses or consumes an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance whenever the person having ownership or control of the premises either knew, or reasonably should have known, that a minor possessed or consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or other controlled substance. 
B.  Except as provided in Section 9.42.040(G) below, whenever a person having ownership or control of a premises is on the premises and allows a minor to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, marijuana or controlled substance thereon, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person had the requisite knowledge specified in subsection (A). 
C.  A social host shall be deemed to have constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic beverages, marijuana or controlled substances if the social host did not take reasonable steps to prevent the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, marijuana and controlled substances by minors. 
D.  A social host shall not be in violation of this section if he or she seeks immediate assistance from any law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the social hosts' performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, or to terminate the gathering because the social host has been unable to prevent minors from consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages, marijuana or other controlled substances despite having taken reasonable steps to do so. A social host shall not be in violation of this section if he or she seeks medical assistance to provide care for a person in immediate danger due to the accidental or intentional overdose of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
E.  When law enforcement or other emergency response providers respond to a gathering at which a minor has consumed or is consuming alcoholic beverages or a controlled substance, all social hosts shall be jointly and severally liable. 
F.  This section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
G.  This section shall not apply to a parent or legal guardian who provides an alcoholic beverage at a family gathering to a minor under the parent or legal guardian's care or to any person who provides an alcoholic beverage to a minor as part of a legally protected religious activity. 
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
9.42.040 - Unruly gatherings—Public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance to host, permit, or allow, tacitly or otherwise, an unruly gathering on any private property. 
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
9.42.050 - Civil enforcement and penalties for violations. 
A.  Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative citation as set forth in Chapter 1.14 of this code. The enforcement officers for this chapter shall be city of Rocklin police officers and code enforcement officers. 
B.  The civil penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be a fine of one thousand dollars per occurrence. 
C.  The civil fine prescribed does not preclude liability for public safety response costs assessed pursuant to Rocklin Municipal Code Chapter 9.40. 
D.  If the Social Host is a juvenile, the parents or legal guardians of the juvenile shall be responsible for the civil penalty imposed under this section or the costs imposed under Rocklin Municipal Code Chapter 9.40. 
E.  The responsible person may perform twenty-four hours of community service and pay city administrative fees, if any, as an alternative to paying the civil penalty with the prior written consent and approval of the city of Rocklin police chief or designee. 
F.  The parents or guardians of a juvenile found to have hosted a gathering in violation of this chapter may also request to have that juvenile serve the required hours of community service as described in subsection (E), above, and pay city administrative fees, if any, as an alternative penalty to paying the applicable civil penalty. 
G.  The city police chief or designee shall retain the discretion to approve the community service requested by the responsible person. Upon approval of city police chief or designee to perform community service, the responsible person shall complete the required hours within one year of approval, and shall submit proof of completion to city police chief or designee. Failure to receive approval to perform community service or failure to complete the required hours of service shall result in imposition of the applicable civil penalty, which is immediately payable. No reduction in the penalty is authorized for completion of less than the required hours of community service as set forth in subsection (E) unless approved by the city manager or his designee. 
H.  Community service will only be approved for the first citation issued within a one-year period. Subsequent violations within one year from the first violation, will be subject to civil penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-2015; Ord. No. 1090, § 13, 3-13-2018)  
9.42.060 - Administrative rules and regulations. 
The chief of police may adopt administrative rules and regulations which are consistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of implementing the same. 
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
9.42.070 - Effect on criminal prosecution. 
Nothing in the adoption or administration of this chapter shall be construed as affecting the ability to initiate or continue concurrent or subsequent criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this code or any state law arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
Chapter 9.44 - ALARM SYSTEMS AND EXCESSIVE ALARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the proper and effective use of alarm systems by setting forth regulations governing burglary and holdup alarm systems within the city. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.020 - Definitions. 
The following terms, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Alarm company" means a person in the business of selling, providing, monitoring, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in an alarm site. Such companies shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.04, Business License, of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
B.  "Alarm dispatch request" means a notification to a law enforcement agency that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
C.  "Alarm site" means a single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
D.  "Alarm system" means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon law enforcement response. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site. 
E.  "Applicant" means a person who files an application for a new or renewal permit as provided in this chapter. 
F.  "Arming station" means a device from which the alarm system is turned on (armed) and off (disarmed). 
G.  "Audible alarm" means an alarm system that generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated. 
H.  "Automatic shutoff device" means a mechanism that will cause the alarm system to shutoff and reset within fifteen minutes. 
I.  "Burglar alarm" means an alarm system designed or used to detect and report an unauthorized entry or attempted unauthorized entry upon the premises, building, or structure protected by the system. 
J.  "Canceled alarm" means a police response to an alarm signal, where the response is canceled by the alarm company or an authorized person at the alarm site prior to the arrival of any responding police unit. Canceled alarms are not considered false alarms. Duress or hold-up alarms may not be canceled. 
K.  "City" means the city of Rocklin. 
L.  "Direct dial telephone alarm" means a device which automatically telephones the Rocklin police department and delivers a prerecorded message upon the alarm activation of an alarm system. 
M.  "Duress alarm" means a silent or audible alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into the arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system or is in immediate danger and requires law enforcement response. 
N.  "Excessive false alarms" means two or more false alarms within a rolling twelve-month period, whether the type was a burglar alarm or a duress/holdup alarm. The rolling twelve-month period will consist of the twelve months preceding an alarm event. A twelve-month period will not consider any alarm event prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
O.  "False alarm" means an alarm dispatch request to a law enforcement agency, when the responding law enforcement officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site. Alarms caused by power outage, severe storms, earthquakes, or other violent acts of nature are not false alarms and shall not be included in determining an excessive false alarm, provided, however, that it shall be the permittee's burden to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the alarm is not a false alarm. 
P.  "Holdup alarm" means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress or immediately after it has occurred. 
Q.  "Notice" means written notice served either by personal service or by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at the last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service or forty-eight hours after the placing of the notice in the custody of United States Postal Service. 
R.  "Permittee" means any person granted a permit as provided herein, and his or its agents and representatives. 
S.  "Siren" means any audible noise similar to that which must be sounded by an authorized emergency vehicle under the conditions set forth in Section 21055 of the California Vehicle Code. 
T.  "Verified alarm" means an alarm or signal resulting from the actual detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure, or facility alerting the Rocklin police department and/or others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building and consistent with the type of alarm signal transmitted. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.030 - Standards and regulations prescribed. 
The chief of police may prescribe or amend standards and regulations for the construction and maintenance of alarm systems installed within the city. All devices are required to meet or exceed such standards and regulations before permits may be issued pursuant to this chapter. The chief of police may require inspection of an alarm systems installed within the city during the permitting process. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.040 - Permits—Required. 
A.  Individual Users. It is unlawful to activate, operate or maintain an alarm system upon any premises within the city without first obtaining an alarm system permit to do so. 
B.  Alarm Company/Installers. It is unlawful to connect, activate, or install an alarm system upon any property within the city without first obtaining an alarm system permit. 
C.  Penalty. Violations of this section are subject to civil penalty of one hundred dollars per occurrence. Any violation of this section shall be in addition to any excessive alarm penalties. 
D.  Waiver. The chief of police or designee may waive any penalty associated with the administration of this chapter upon presentation of substantial evidence showing extenuating, mitigating, or extraordinary facts and circumstances, and proof that an application for an alarm system permit has been submitted to the city. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.050 - Permits—Applications—Form. 
A.  Any person desiring an alarm system permit shall file an application with the police department on a form provided by the police department manually or electronically which includes, but is not limited to the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  If different than above, the address at which the alarm system is to be installed and used; 
3.  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers; 
4.  If the applicant is a partnership, association, or other business entity, the names and addresses of the partners or persons comprising the same; 
5.  A description of the alarm system proposed to be installed, including the manufacturer's name and model number, if any; 
6.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of one or more persons who will be available to secure the premises during any hour of the day or night; 
7.  Any such additional information that the police chief may deem necessary in order to fully and properly administer this chapter. 
B.  In the interest of public safety, and as per California Government Code 6254(f), all information contained in and gathered through the alarm permit applications, records relating to alarm dispatch requests, and applications for appeals shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city and by any third-party administrator or employees of a third-party administrator with access to such information. 
C.  Whenever any change occurs relating to the information required by this section, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the Rocklin police department within ten days after such change. 
D.  An alarm system permit may be denied if the application is not in the form and does not contain all information or fees required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.060 - Permit—Term. 
Alarm system permits are issued for the period of two years and will expire seven hundred thirty days after the date of issuance or renewal, unless otherwise suspended or revoked at an earlier time. Upon expiration of an alarm system permit, a new permit shall be secured in the manner specified in Sections 9.44.050 and 9.44.080 before an alarm system may continue in use. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.070 - Transfer of permit prohibited. 
Alarm permits may not be transferred to another person or alarm site. Permits are valid only for the permittee and address listed on the permit. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.080 - Permit—Fees—Receipt. 
Every initial application and subsequent renewal for an alarm system permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit fee. The fee is established to defray costs of processing applications and permits, and shall be in addition to any other permit fee imposed by the city of Rocklin Municipal Code. The alarm system permit fee imposed shall be stated in the schedule of fees that shall be adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.090 - Applicability of existing alarm systems. 
The provision of this chapter shall apply to all alarm systems which were installed, connected, operated or maintained on or prior to the date on which this chapter becomes effective. However, such systems shall be given a grace period, ending September 1, 2008, to obtain an alarm system permit and bring the alarm system into compliance with city alarm system standards. The rolling twelve-month period as defined in Section 9.44.110 shall begin on the date this chapter is adopted. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.100 - Outside audible alarm requirements. 
A.  Every business maintaining an outside audible alarm shall post a notice containing the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified in order to render repairs and service or secure the premises during any hour of the day or night in the event that the alarm is activated. Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building where the alarm is located. The wording "Police Alarm—Call City of Rocklin Police Department" shall be placed on the alarm or immediately below the alarm device. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to install or use an alarm system which upon activation emits a sound similar to sirens in use on public emergency vehicles or for public disaster warning purposes. 
C.  All local exterior bell, gongs, noisemaking devices or pulsating lights shall have a timing device that will silence or turn off such devices or lights within fifteen minutes following initial activation. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.110 - Penalty for excessive false alarms. 
A.  Whenever the police department responds to an excessive false alarm, the permittee shall be assessed a civil penalty as described within this section. 
B.  The amount of the penalty assessed shall be determined by the combined number of both burglary and duress/holdup false alarms during a rolling twelve-month period. 
Alarm Within Prior 12 Months 	Penalty (General) 	Penalty Holdup or Duress 
Second 	$ 50 	$100 
Third and subsequent 	100 	150 
 
C.  Failure to pay the penalty when due shall, in addition to any other available remedy, may lead to suspension and/or revocation of the alarm permit and additional fees associated with collection. 
D.  Penalties may be waived by the chief of police or designee for false alarms upon presentation of substantial evidence showing extenuating, mitigating, or extraordinary facts and circumstances, and where the permittee has undertaken action to correct alarm system deficiencies. 
E.  Canceled alarms are not counted in the above schedule unless officers have arrived on scene before cancellation. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.120 - Grounds for suspension, denial and/or revocation. 
Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the chief of police may reduce the priority or refuse police response to an alarm site after the denial, suspension or revocation of an alarm permit. The following shall constitute grounds for denial, suspension and/or revocation of the alarm permit: 
A.  Failure to pay fines and/or charges imposed as a result of excessive false alarms at any alarm site; or 
B.  Failure to comply with standards or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter; or 
C.  Where the applicant, permittee, or the employee or agent of the applicant or permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record required to be filed with any city agency. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.130 - Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
A.  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a permit, suspends or revokes a permit issued under this chapter, the chief of police shall serve the permittee with a written order stating the reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. The order shall be effective immediately upon service and, unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the chief of police may refuse police response to the alarm site after the suspension or revocation of an alarm permit. 
B.  It is unlawful to operate or use any alarm system after service of a notice of denial, suspension, or revocation of an alarm permit. 
C.  The chief of police may reconsider the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit or reinstate a suspended permit, provided that within forty-five days of the denial or suspension, the applicant or permittee has established to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the alarm system will be operated in compliance with this chapter, by complying with the following: 
1.  Provide a letter from an alarm company licensed by the state of California indicating that the alarm has been completely checked and any mechanical malfunctions have been repaired; 
2.  Agree that an agent of the business, or, if the alarm is residential, a responsible party, shall respond to the alarm site within thirty minutes of notification, each time the alarm is activated; 
3.  Review correct alarm setting procedures with every resident, agent, employee or other person who may be responsible for user error alarm activations; 
4.  Pay in full all outstanding excessive false alarm fines or charges; and 
5.  Other reasonable procedures, conditions, or requirements as may be established by the chief of police. 
D.  The decision of the chief of police to suspend a permit or the refusal of the chief of police to reinstate a permit may be appealed as set forth in Chapter 9.01 of this title. 
E.  Any denial to issue a permit which has not been appealed pursuant to Chapter 9.01 shall be final. Any suspended permit which is not reinstated within forty-five days shall automatically be deemed revoked. No revoked permit shall be reissued until six months after the revocation, at which time a new application may be filed pursuant to Section 9.44.050. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008). 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 3, 8-14-2018)  
9.44.140 - Fee exemptions. 
The United States, the state of California, counties, municipal corporations, departments thereof and other governmental entities are exempt from application fees required in Section 9.44.080. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.150 - Public nuisance. 
Any alarm system is a public nuisance: 
A.  When the alarm system generates an audible sound on the premises for a period longer than fifteen minutes; 
B.  When the alarm system generates excessive false alarms. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
9.44.160 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 928 § 1 (part), 2008).  
Chapter 9.46 - ABUSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
9.46.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to impose reasonable place and manner limitations on solicitation, as defined herein, in order to protect the safety of the general public against abusive solicitation while respecting the constitutional right of free speech. 
(Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-11-2017)  
9.46.020 - Definitions. 
The following words or phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Solicitation" means any request made in person seeking an immediate donation of money or other item of value. 
B.  "Donation" means a gift of money or other item of value and shall also include the purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a gift. 
C.  "Abusive solicitation" means to do one or more of the following while engaging in solicitation or immediately thereafter: 
1.  Coming closer than three feet to the person solicited unless and until the person solicited indicates that he or she wishes to make a donation; 
2.  Blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of the person solicited or vehicle occupied by the person solicited by any means, including unreasonably causing the person or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
3.  Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or alongside of him or her after the person solicited declines to make a donation; 
4.  Acting in a manner that is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
5.  Threatening the person solicited with physical harm by word or gesture; 
6.  Abusing the person solicited with words which are offensive and inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction; 
7.  Touching the solicited person or a vehicle occupied by the solicited person without the solicited person's consent; or 
8.  Engaging in solicitation activity in any of the prohibited places specified in Section 9.46.030. 
(Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-11-2017)  
9.46.030 - Locations where solicitation is prohibited. 
Solicitation shall be prohibited when the person solicited is in any of the following locations: 
A.  Within thirty feet of a posted bus stop; 
B.  Within a public bus; 
C.  Within a vehicle on public streets or alleyways; 
D.  In a public parking lot, except in designated locations; 
E.  Within an outdoor dining area of a restaurant or other dining establishment serving food for immediate consumption; 
F.  Within thirty feet of an automated teller machine; or 
G.  On private property, including private parking lots, if the owner or tenant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign stating that solicitations are not allowed on the property. 
(Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-11-2017)  
9.46.040 - Soliciting prohibited. 
Abusive solicitation shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-11-2017)  
9.46.050 - Violation and penalties. 
A.  Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, licenses, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. 
B.  It is unlawful and a public nuisance to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who engages in solicitation at a prohibited location or engages in abusive solicitation shall be subject to the following penalties: 
1.  The first violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars. 
2.  A second violation of this chapter within one year, or the continued violation of this chapter after being directed to cease and desist the unlawful activity, is a misdemeanor. 
C.  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
D.  In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth in this Title 1 of the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1076, § 3, 7-11-2017)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Applicability of definitions. 
Except as provided in this title, all words and phrases in this title shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, unless the context clearly requires a contrary meaning. In addition, the words and phrases set out in this chapter shall have the meanings set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101 (part), 1978).  
10.04.020 - Bicycle lane. 
"Bicycle lane" means that portion of the roadway set aside for the use of bicycles and so designated as a bicycle lane by official signs and/or markings. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(a), 1978).  
10.04.030 - Bicycle path. 
"Bicycle path" means a pathway for bicycles and pedestrians located within public right-of-way and designated as a bicycle path by official signs and/or markings. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(b), 1978).  
10.04.040 - Director of public works. 
"Director of public works" means the director of public works of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(c), 1978).  
10.04.050 - Fire chief. 
"Fire chief" means the fire chief of the city or his authorized representatives. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(d), 1978).  
10.04.060 - Fire department. 
"Fire department" means the fire department of the city or its authorized representative. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(e), 1978).  
10.04.070 - Holidays. 
"Holidays," within the meaning of this title, are: January 1st, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(f), 1978).  
10.04.080 - Horse trail. 
"Horse trail" means a pathway for horses and pedestrians located within public right-of-way and designated as a horse trail by official signs and/or markings. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(g), 1978).  
10.04.090 - Loading zone. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(h), 1978).  
10.04.100 - Official time. 
Official time is standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the state. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(i), 1978).  
10.04.110 - Parking time. 
"Parking time" means the length of time a vehicle may remain parked in a given location. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(j), 1978).  
10.04.120 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or sidewalk. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(k), 1978).  
10.04.130 - Passenger loading zone. 
"Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(l), 1978).  
10.04.140 - Police chief. 
"Police chief" means the police chief of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(m), 1978).  
10.04.150 - Police department. 
"Police department" means the police department of the city. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(n), 1978).  
10.04.160 - Police officer. 
"Police officer" means any officer of the police department of the city. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(o), 1978).  
10.04.170 - Public transit vehicle. 
"Public transit vehicle" means any bus or other vehicle used for the public conveyance of passengers, operated by a public entity or under the control of the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(p), 1978).  
10.04.180 - Traffic engineer. 
"Traffic engineer" means the city engineer of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.101(r), 1978).  
Chapter 10.08 - ADMINISTRATION AND RULEMAKING 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Traffic engineer duties. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to: 
A.  Determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals; 
B.  Conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures; 
C.  Conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions; 
D.  Cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and 
E.  Carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances and resolutions of the city or directives of the council. 
(Ord. 385 § 2.101, 1978).  
10.08.020 - Traffic committee—Established. 
There is established a traffic committee, consisting of the traffic engineer, the police chief, the fire chief, and the director of public works. The police chief shall be the chairman of the committee. 
(Ord. 385 § 2.102, 1978).  
10.08.030 - Traffic committee—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic committee to determine the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of the city having authority with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic regulations, and to recommend to the legislative body of the city ways and means for improving traffic conditions and enforcing traffic regulations. 
(Ord. 385 § 2.103, 1978).  
10.08.040 - Regulations—Council establishment. 
Whenever after a report thereon by the traffic committee, the council finds and determines that the public convenience and safety requires that vehicular traffic upon any street, alley, public way or parking facility, or any portion of either, be controlled or regulated by the creation and establishment of one or more of the types of controls or zones provided for in this title or otherwise permitted by law, the council shall create and establish such controls or zones by resolution, unless provisions of the Vehicle Code require that action be taken by ordinance. Such resolution shall: 
A.  Describe the street, alley, public way or parking facility, or portion thereof to be affected, by its official name or such other description or designation as will, in the opinion of the traffic engineer, properly describe and give notice thereof; 
B.  Describe the regulation or control; 
C.  Describe the manner in which the vehicular traffic will be controlled; describe the type of signs, notices, markings, or other devices to be erected or installed; 
D.  Designate the locations of such installations; and 
E.  Shall contain such other pertinent information as will properly give notice of the purpose and intent to be accomplished by the regulations. 
F.  Designate that vehicles may be removed if vehicles are in violation of the regulations. 
(Ord. 385 § 2.104, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
10.08.050 - Regulations—Scope. 
The regulations or installations for the regulation and control of traffic shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  One-way Streets. Providing that traffic shall move in only one direction thereon and providing for the erection of proper signs; 
B.  Through Streets. Providing that traffic shall stop before entering such streets at intersections and providing for the erection of proper signs; 
C.  Stop Intersections. Providing that all vehicles stop at certain intersecting streets before entering intersections thereof and providing for the erection of proper signs. 
D.  Railroad Stops. Providing that traffic shall stop before crossing the railroad tracks at certain street grade crossings and providing for the erection of proper signs; 
E.  Angle Parking. Providing that vehicles be parked at an angle to the street and providing for signs or markings to indicate that vehicles should be so parked; 
F.  Limiting Parking Time. Providing a time limit for parking vehicles upon certain streets between designated hours of any day, including holidays, and providing for the erection of appropriate signs; 
G.  Prohibited Parking at Times. Providing that no vehicle may be parked at certain times upon certain streets and providing for the erection of signs giving notice thereof; 
H.  Truck Routes. Providing that certain routes over certain streets in the city be declared truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a gross maximum weight of thirteen tons and providing for erection of appropriate signs; 
I.  Commercial Vehicles Prohibited. Providing that no commercial vehicle shall be permitted to use certain streets; 
J.  Yield Right-of-way Intersections. Providing that at certain intersections of certain streets, drivers entering such intersections shall yield the right-of-way to traffic entering the intersection from one or more different directions. 
(Ord. 907 § 1, 2006; Ord. 385 § 2.105, 1978).  
10.08.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1106, § 5, adopted Oct. 23, 2018, repealed § 10.08.060 which pertained to speed regulation by signal timing, and derived from Ord. No. 385, § 2.106, adopted in 1978. See § 10.10.030 for similar provisions.  
Chapter 10.10 - SPEED REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.10.010 - Applicability of state laws. 
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city except where the city council, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, determines that another speed limit shall be applicable on specified streets or in certain areas, other than a state highway, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3, 10-23-2018)  
10.10.020 - Changes in speed limits. 
A.  Speed Limit Increases. Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that a speed greater than twenty-five miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon any street other than a state highway otherwise subject to a prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour, the city council may, by ordinance, declare a prima facie maximum speed limit of thirty, thirty-five, forty, forty-five, fifty, fifty-five, sixty or a maximum of sixty-five miles per hour, whichever is found the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and is reasonable and safe. 
B.  Speed Limit Decreases. 
1.  Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that the limit of sixty-five miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of any street other than a state highway where the limit of sixty-five miles per hour is applicable, the city council may, by ordinance, declare a prima facie speed limit of sixty, fifty-five, fifty, forty-five, forty, thirty-five, thirty or twenty-five miles per hour, whichever is found the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and is reasonable and safe. 
2.  Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that the limit of sixty-five miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of a highway other than a state highway for a distance of not exceeding two thousand feet in length between districts, either business or residence, the city council may declare a reasonable and safe prima facie speed limit thereon lower than sixty-five miles per hour, but not less than twenty-five miles per hour. 
3.  Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that the speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour in a business or residence district or in a public park on any street having a roadway not exceeding twenty-five feet in width, other than a state highway, is more than is reasonable or safe, the city council may, by ordinance or resolution, determine and declare a prima facie speed limit of fifteen or twenty miles per hour, whichever is found most appropriate and is reasonable and safe. 
4.  Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that the speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour when passing school buildings or grounds as established by Vehicle Code section 22352 is more than is reasonable or safe, the city council may, by ordinance or resolution, determine and declare a prima facie speed limit of fifteen or twenty miles per hour, whichever is justified as the appropriate speed limit by such survey. 
C.  Speed limits established pursuant to this section shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice there are erected upon said street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3, 10-23-2018)  
10.10.030 - Speed regulation by signal timing. 
The traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3, 10-23-2018)  
10.10.040 - Speed limits on specified city streets. 
The city clerk shall maintain a listing of the speed limits, street name and location for each speed limit changed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3, 10-23-2018)  
Chapter 10.11 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.11.010 - Findings. 
A.  Pursuant to Chapter 10.10 of the Rocklin Municipal Code, on October 9, 2018, the city council of the city of Rocklin reviewed and considered the engineering and traffic survey, and related information, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
B.  Based upon the review of the survey and related information, the city council finds that the following streets shall have the following posted speed limits: 
1.  3rd Street: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Farron Street, 30 MPH. 
2.  5th Street: 
a.  Between Midas Avenue and Third Street, 25 MPH. 
3.  Aguilar Road: 
a.  Between Rocklin Road and Greenbrae Drive, 25 MPH. 
4.  Americana Way: 
a.  Between Pacific Street and Delmar Avenue, 25 MPH. 
5.  Argonaut Avenue: 
a.  Between Whitney Boulevard and Midas Avenue, 30 MPH, 
b.  Between Midas Avenue and End, 30 MPH. 
6.  Atherton Road: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Lonetree Boulevard, 25 MPH. 
7.  Blue Oaks Boulevard: 
a.  Between Roseville Border and Sunset Boulevard, 45 MPH. 
8.  Bridlewood Drive: 
a.  Between Wildcat Boulevard and Whitney Ranch Parkway, 35 MPH. 
9.  Casa Grande Avenue: 
a.  Between Fairway Drive and Lincoln Avenue, 25 MPH. 
10.  China Garden Road: 
a.  Between Aguilar Road and End, 45 MPH. 
11.  Clover Valley Road: 
a.  Between Midas Avenue and Rawhide Road, 30 MPH. 
12.  Crest Drive: 
a.  Between Stanford Ranch Road and Crest Drive, 35 MPH. 
13.  Delmar Avenue: 
a.  Between Pacific Street and Loomis city limit, 35 MPH. 
14.  Dominguez Road: 
a.  Between Pacific Street and Granite Drive, 35 MPH. 
15.  El Don Drive: 
a.  Between Rocklin Road and Sierra College Boulevard, 25 MPH. 
16.  Fairway Drive: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Stanford Ranch Road, 35 MPH. 
17.  Farrier Road: 
a.  Between Park Drive and Darby Road, 35 MPH. 
18.  Farron Street: 
a.  Between Pacific Street and 3rd Street, 30 MPH. 
19.  Five Star Boulevard: 
a.  Between Stanford Ranch Road and End, 30 MPH. 
20.  Granite Drive: 
a.  Between Rocklin Road and Sierra Meadows Drive, 30 MPH, 
b.  Between Sierra Meadows Drive and Dominguez Road, 40 MPH, 
c.  Between Dominguez Road and Sierra College Boulevard, 40 MPH. 
21.  Lonetree Boulevard: 
a.  Between Blue Oaks Boulevard and West Oaks Boulevard, 40 MPH, 
b.  Between West Oaks Boulevard and Sunset Boulevard, 45 MPH. 
22.  Midas Avenue: 
a.  Between Pacific Street and Argonaut Avenue, 30 MPH, 
b.  Between Argonaut Avenue and Whitney Boulevard, 30 MPH, 
c.  Between Whitney Boulevard and End, 30 MPH. 
23.  Nightwatch Drive: 
a.  Between Sierra College Boulevard and Echo Ridge Road, 25 MPH. 
24.  Old Ranch House Road: 
a.  Between Whitney Ranch Parkway to Creek Hollow Drive, 35 MPH. 
25.  Pacific Street: 
a.  Between Roseville city limit and Sunset Boulevard, 45 MPH, 
b.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Americana Way, 40 MPH, 
c.  Between Americana Way and Loomis city limit, 40 MPH. 
26.  Painted Pony Lane: 
a.  Between Whitney Ranch Parkway and West Oaks Boulevard, 35 MPH. 
27.  Park Drive: 
a.  Between Roseville city limit and Sunset Boulevard, 45 MPH, 
b.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Stanford Ranch Road, 45 MPH, 
c.  Between Stanford Ranch Road and Crest Drive, 45 MPH, 
d.  Between Crest Drive and the intersection of Whitney Ranch Parkway and Whitney Oaks Drive, 45 MPH. 
28.  Ranch View Drive: 
a.  Between Spring Creek Drive and Wildcat Boulevard, 35 MPH. 
29.  Rawhide Road: 
a.  Between Midas Avenue and End, 30 MPH. 
30.  Rocklin Road: 
a.  Between 5th Street and Pacific Street, 30 MPH, 
b.  Between Pacific Street and Granite Drive, 35 MPH, 
c.  Between Granite Drive and El Don Drive, 40 MPH, 
d.  Between El Don Drive and Loomis city limit, 40 MPH. 
31.  Scarborough Drive: 
a.  Between Sierra College Boulevard and Roseville city limit, 35 MPH. 
32.  Schriber Way: 
a.  Between Sierra College Boulevard and Lakepointe Drive, 30 MPH. 
33.  Sierra College Boulevard: 
a.  Between Placer County limit and Loomis town limit, 55 MPH, 
b.  Between Granite Drive and Bass Pro Drive/Dominguez Road, 40 MPH, 
c.  Between Bass Pro Drive/Dominguez Road and Rocklin Road, 50 MPH, 
d.  Between Rocklin Road and Roseville city limit, 50 MPH. 
34.  Sierra Meadows Drive: 
a.  Between Granite Drive and Pacific Street, 35 MPH. 
35.  South Whitney Boulevard: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Five Star Boulevard, 30 MPH. 
36.  Spring Creek Drive: 
a.  Between Whitney Ranch Parkway and Ranch View Drive, 35 MPH. 
37.  Springview Drive: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Springview Meadows, 35 MPH, 
b.  Between Springview Meadows and South Whitney Boulevard, 30 MPH. 
38.  Stanford Ranch Road: 
a.  Between Roseville city limit to Park Drive, 40 MPH, 
b.  Between Park Drive and West Oaks Boulevard, 45 MPH. 
39.  Sunset Boulevard: 
a.  Between Highway 65 and Blue Oaks Boulevard, 45 MPH, 
b.  Between Blue Oaks Boulevard and Park Drive, 45 MPH, 
c.  Between Park Drive and Stanford Ranch Road, 45 MPH, 
d.  Between Stanford Ranch Road and Whitney Boulevard, 40 MPH, 
e.  Between Whitney Boulevard and Pacific Street, 40 MPH, 
f.  Between Pacific Street and Woodside Drive, 30 MPH. 
40.  Topaz Avenue: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Whitney Boulevard, 25 MPH. 
41.  University Avenue: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Whitney Ranch Parkway, 40 MPH, 
b.  Between Whitney Ranch Parkway and West Ranchview Drive, 40 MPH. 
42.  West Oaks Boulevard: 
a.  Between Lonetree Boulevard and Sunset Boulevard, 45 MPH, 
b.  Between Sunset Boulevard and West Stanford Ranch Road, 45 MPH, 
c.  Between West Stanford Ranch Road and Hunter Drive, 40 MPH, 
d.  Between Hunter Drive and Painted Pony Lane, 35 MPH. 
43.  West Stanford Ranch Road: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Wildcat Boulevard, 45 MPH. 
44.  Whitney Boulevard: 
a.  Between Sunset Boulevard and Crest Drive, 35 MPH. 
45.  Whitney Oaks Drive: 
a.  Between Park Drive and Whitney Ranch Parkway, 35 MPH. 
46.  Whitney Ranch Parkway: 
a.  Between Highway 65 and Wildcat Boulevard, 45 MPH, 
b.  Between Wildcat Boulevard and Painted Pony Lane/Old Ranch House Road, 45 MPH. 
47.  Wildcat Boulevard: 
a.  Between West Stanford Ranch Road and Lincoln city limit, 45 MPH. 
48.  Woodside Drive: 
a.  Between Pacific Street and Lost Avenue, 30 MPH. 
49.  Wyckford Boulevard: 
a.  Between Park Drive and Stratton Court, 35 MPH. 
50.  West Ranchview Drive: 
a.  Between Wildcat Boulevard and End, 35 MPH. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 3, 10-23-2018)  
Chapter 10.12 - CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Authority to install and maintain. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to install and maintain, or to cause to be installed and maintained, official traffic control devices or signals when: 
A.  The same are required to be installed under any ordinance or resolution of the city; 
B.  The same are required to be installed under any provisions of the Vehicle Code; 
C.  In his opinion, the installation of such traffic control devices or signals is required to properly regulate, guide or warn traffic upon the streets of the city, or to prevent or relieve congestion or traffic upon the streets, or to protect life or property. 
(Ord. 385 § 4.101, 1978).  
10.12.020 - Necessity study and determination. 
Except when the installation of a traffic control device or signal is made mandatory by ordinance or state law, the traffic engineer shall only install or cause to be installed, traffic control devices or signals at a given location after making a full study and determination of the necessity of such installation, which study and determination shall be based upon field observation, traffic counts and other available traffic information, in accordance with the generally acceptable traffic control methods, including those adopted by appropriate departments of the state. 
(Ord. 385 § 4.102, 1978).  
10.12.030 - Removal, relocation or discontinuance. 
The traffic engineer may remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device or signal not otherwise specifically required by state or local law when, after study made in the manner provided in this title, he determines that conditions no longer warrant or require the maintenance of such installation. 
(Ord. 385 § 4.103, 1978).  
10.12.040 - Hours of operation. 
When not otherwise specified, the traffic engineer shall determine and fix the hours or days during which any traffic control device is in operation. 
(Ord. 385 § 4.104, 1978).  
10.12.050 - Centerlines—Lanes. 
The traffic engineer may mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used, by the traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. 
(Ord. 385 § 4.105, 1978).  
10.12.060 - State markings use authority. 
Whenever any appropriate department of the state designates a distinctive roadway marking which indicates no driving over such marking, the traffic engineer may designate by such marking those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking. Such markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state. 
(Ord. 385 § 4.106, 1978).  
Chapter 10.16 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Course-of-travel controls—Authority. 
The traffic engineer may place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The traffic engineer is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right-hand or left-hand turns and the course to be traveled. 
(Ord. 385 § 5.101, 1978).  
10.16.020 - Course-of-travel controls—Compliance. 
When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Ord. 385 § 5.102, 1978).  
10.16.030 - Direction restrictions—Authority. 
The traffic engineer may determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or "U" turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event, the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or the sign may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 385 § 5.103, 1978).  
10.16.040 - Direction restrictions—Compliance. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or "U" turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 385 § 5.104, 1978).  
10.16.050 - Right turn on red prohibited—Authority. 
The traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections within any business or residential district at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn against a red or stop signal, and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. 
(Ord. 385 § 5.105, 1978).  
10.16.060 - Right turn on red prohibited—Compliance. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn may be made against a red or stop signal, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 385 § 5.106, 1978).  
Chapter 10.20 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Signs—Placement. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 385 § 6.101, 1978).  
10.20.020 - Signs—Compliance. 
When signs are erected on any one-way street or alley, giving notice thereof, no person shall drive any vehicle in a direction contrary thereto. 
(Ord. 385 § 6.102, 1978).  
Chapter 10.24 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Applicability—Time limits not exclusive. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code, or the ordinances of the city, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.101, 1978).  
10.24.020 - Curb markings. 
A.  The traffic engineer may, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, place, and when required in this chapter shall place, the following curb markings in color, with paint, to indicate parking or standing regulations. The curb markings shall have the meaning as set forth in this section: 
1.  Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes. 
3.  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose, other than loading or unloading of passengers, or the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes. Such restrictions shall apply between eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
a.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or church, when such restrictions shall apply at all times; 
b.  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
4.  Green means no standing or parking for a longer period than designated by the appropriate signs, between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays. 
5.  Blue means that parking is limited exclusively to the vehicles of handicapped persons. 
B.  When the traffic engineer, as authorized under this chapter, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.114, 1978).  
10.24.030 - Parking space markings. 
The traffic engineer may install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted, and no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.115, 1978).  
10.24.040 - Parkways, bicycle paths or horse trails. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any parkway, bicycle path or horse trail. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.102, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 10-8-2013) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 999, adopted Oct. 8, 2013, changed the title of § 10.24.040 from "Parkways, bicycle ways or horse trails" to "Parkways, bicycle paths or horse trails."  
10.24.050 - Parking beyond seventy-two hours—Prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle or trailer shall park such vehicle or trailer upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. A vehicle or trailer shall be considered to have been parked for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours if it has not been moved one thousand feet or more within the specified seventy-two-hour period. 
(Ord. 687 § 1, 1993: Ord. 385 § 8.103, 1978).  
10.24.060 - Parking beyond seventy-two hours—Removal by police. 
In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two hours, any member of the police department may remove the vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.104, 1978).  
10.24.070 - Time limits on signs. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than that specified by the signs. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.170, 1978).  
10.24.080 - Prohibited street signs. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any street so designated and such vehicles may be removed by the city. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.171, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 2, 8-25-2015)  
10.24.090 - Aguilar Road parking—Prohibited where. 
Vehicular parking on both sides of Aguilar Road from the intersection of Rocklin Road and Aguilar Road to the western city limits on Aguilar Road is prohibited. 
(Ord. 242 § 1, 1971).  
10.24.100 - Aguilar Road parking—Posting. 
The street superintendent is directed to cause the proper legal signs to be erected at the locations set out in Section 10.24.090 and, after the same have been erected it is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person operating a vehicle to park in violation of this section and Sections 10.24.090 and 10.24.110. 
(Ord. 242 § 2, 1971).  
10.24.110 - Aguilar Road parking—Penalty. 
It is a misdemeanor, punishment provided in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, for any person operating a motor vehicle to park as prohibited in Sections 10.24.090 and 10.24.100. 
(Ord. 242 § 3, 1971).  
10.24.120 - Parking on left-hand side. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this title, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street, unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
B.  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
C.  The traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.106, 1978).  
10.24.130 - Angle parking. 
A.  Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking is permitted, the traffic engineer shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. 
B.  When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as provided in this section, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.107, 1978).  
10.24.140 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  The traffic engineer may erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.108, 1978).  
10.24.150 - Narrow streets. 
A.  The traffic engineer may place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet. 
B.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.109, 1978).  
10.24.160 - Steep grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means and setting the safety brake. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.110, 1978).  
10.24.170 - Prohibited places. 
The traffic engineer shall appropriately sign or mark any place where he determines that it is necessary to prohibit parking in order to eliminate a dangerous traffic hazard, and when so signed or marked, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such place. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.111, 1978).  
10.24.180 - Temporary parking restrictions—Signs. 
A.  Whenever the traffic engineer determines that traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, he or she may order temporary signs to be posted providing that standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited on such streets or alleys during the time such temporary signs indicate, and that any vehicles operated, parked or standing in violation of the prohibition may be removed. 
B.  Whenever the traffic engineer determines that the use of a highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the highway, or for the installation of underground utilities, or for the temporary movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, or for other reasons, he or she may order signs to be posted providing that standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited on such streets or alleys during the time such signs indicate, and that any vehicles operated, parked or standing in violation of the prohibition may be removed. 
C.  Signs required by this section shall be placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the event or activity creating the need for the signs, shall remain in place during the event or activity, and shall be removed promptly thereafter. 
D.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. Pursuant to Vehicle Code section 22651, vehicles violating the provisions of this section may be removed. 
(Ord. 679 § 1, 1993: Ord. 385 § 8.112, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 3, 8-25-2015)  
10.24.190 - Commercial vehicles. 
A.  Commercial vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of thirteen tons or more shall not be parked or left standing on any street within the city between the hours of six p.m. to six a.m. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any commercial vehicle exceeding the gross weight from parking or leaving standing the commercial vehicle for the purpose of: 
1.  Making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on a restricted street; or 
2.  Delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon a restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, residential streets means those streets in districts zoned R-1, RE or PD as defined in the zoning code of the city in addition to any other residential streets as determined by the traffic engineer. 
C.  The traffic engineer shall appropriately signs on the streets, roads or highways, as the traffic engineer may determine will best serve to give notice of this section, indicating the affected residential street, road or highway where commercial vehicle parking is prohibited. 
(Ord. 907 § 2, 2006; Ord. 809 § 1, 1999; Ord. 438 § 1, 1980: Ord. 385 § 8.113, 1978).  
10.24.200 - Repair. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of servicing or repairing such vehicle, except when necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. 907 § 3, 2006; Ord. 385 § 8.105, 1978).  
10.24.210 - City property. 
A.  Whenever the traffic engineer determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, he may erect signs indicating that the parking of vehicles is so prohibited, limited or restricted. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. 
C.  Vehicles may be removed by the city if such vehicles are parking or standing in violation of signs prohibiting, limiting or restricting such. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.117, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 4, 8-25-2015)  
10.24.220 - Private property consent. 
No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.116, 1978).  
10.24.230 - Vehicles used for storage or habitation—Prohibited—Exception. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B, the parking of buses, trucks, street cars, railway cars and other types of motor vehicles on private property and the using of the same for habitation, storage or otherwise, is prohibited within the city limits. 
B.  The parking or use of a railway car on private property for habitation, storage or other purpose shall be allowed if the location and use of the railway care are expressly permitted by a conditional use permit issued under Title 17 of this code and if the railway car complies with all building standards applicable to the use to which the railway car is to be put. 
(Ord. 518 § 1, 1984: Ord. 155 § 1, 1959).  
10.24.240 - Buses for storage or habitation—Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of Section 10.24.230 is a misdemeanor and punishable by a five hundred dollar fine or confinement in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months. 
(Ord. 155 § 2, 1959).  
10.24.250 - Stop signs—Through streets—Rail crossings. 
A.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or at any intersection at which vehicles are required to yield right-of-way or at any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs. 
B.  A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required, and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.118, 1978).  
10.24.260 - Loading and passenger loading zones—Designation. 
The traffic engineer may designate and mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
A.  At any place in any business district; 
B.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.150, 1978).  
10.24.270 - Loading and passenger loading zones—Length limited. 
Not more than one-fourth of the total curb length in any block shall be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.151, 1978).  
10.24.280 - Public transit zones. 
A.  Authority to Establish. The traffic engineer may establish public transit zones opposite curbs spaced for the loading and unloading of public transit vehicles and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth in this section. 
B.  Length. No public transit zone shall exceed forty feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the traffic engineer showing the necessity therefor, the traffic engineer may extend such zones to accommodate the parking of public transit vehicles. 
C.  Location. Public transit zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
D.  Curb Markings. The traffic engineer shall paint the words "Public Transit" upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a public transit zone or shall install appropriate signs. 
E.  Use by Others Prohibited. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a public transit vehicle in a public transit zone. 
(Ord. 385 § 8.152, 1978).  
Chapter 10.26 - RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
10.26.010 - Residential permit parking program. 
The city does hereby create a residential permit parking program in areas as designated by resolution of the city council to provide preferential parking to residents of those specified areas which exempts them from time limits established for parking of vehicles in such areas. 
(Ord. No. 964, § 1, 7-27-2010)  
10.26.020 - Permits to be issued. 
The city shall create residential parking permits in accordance with the authority of this section, and shall issue such permits in a quantity to be specified by resolution of the city council, to residents residing in the designated area, pursuant to a permit system developed by the Rocklin Police Department. When such permit is appropriately displayed, that permitted vehicle shall be exempt from any parking time limit in effect at that location. Permits shall not exempt residents from all other provisions of the Vehicle Code or Municipal Code in force and effect within such area notwithstanding the permit program. 
(Ord. No. 964, § 1, 7-27-2010)  
10.26.030 - Exemption for official duties. 
The following vehicles shall be exempt from the permit parking requirements while used in the performance of their official duties: 
A.  City, county, state, federal government vehicles. 
B.  Emergency vehicles. 
C.  Public/private ambulances. 
D.  Utility company vehicles (gas, electrical, telephone, internet, CATV). 
E.  Federal and private mail and package delivery vehicles. 
F.  Any private commercial business vehicle performing a service (landscaping, construction, pest control, housekeeping, etc.) 
G.  Vehicles displaying a valid California disabled person placard or plate. 
(Ord. No. 964, § 1, 7-27-2010)  
Chapter 10.28 - DRIVING AND ROADWAY USE GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Vehicle emerging across sidewalk. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any such alley, driveway or building entrance. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.102, 1978).  
10.28.020 - Driving through funeral processions. 
No person operating a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such processions are conspicuously so designated. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.103, 1978).  
10.28.030 - New pavement or wet paint. 
No person shall operate any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier, sign or other device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a device is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof, is closed. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.106, 1978).  
10.28.040 - Roller skates—Toy vehicles—Skateboards. 
No person shall ride in or operate any roller skates, scooters, skateboards, toy vehicles or any other similar devices upon any roadway, except within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.107, 1978).  
10.28.050 - Excessive acceleration—Burning rubber. 
Except when reasonably necessary to avoid a collision, no person in operating a motor vehicle within the city limits shall so accelerate the same as to cause audible noise by tire friction on any paved surface or to cause the vehicle's tire to leave skid marks upon any paved surface. 
(Ord. § 385 § 1.108, 1978).  
10.28.060 - Crossing bicycle ways or horse trail. 
No person shall drive a vehicle upon or across a bicycle path, bicycle lane or horse trail except to enter or leave a driveway, to lawfully park such a vehicle, or make a turn onto another roadway. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.109, 1978).  
10.28.070 - Commercial vehicles on certain streets. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes any street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets which will best serve to give notice of the prohibited commercial vehicle use. It is intended that the term "best serve to give notice" shall not be interpreted to require individual signage on each and every street, road or highway for which the use by commercial vehicles is prohibited. 
(Ord. 809 § 2, 1999: Ord. 385 § 1.110, 1978).  
10.28.080 - Damaging pavement—Cleated tires. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive, or cause or permit to be driven, along or upon any paved street, alley or public place in the city, any vehicle having any tire or wheel, to any part of which there is attached a sharp or uneven surface, or to any tire, wheel or part of which there is attached cleats or spikes or uneven surface or any device that will cause, or will have a tendency to cause, damage or injury to the pavement of such street; provided, however, that the traffic engineer may issue permits to move such vehicles over the streets of the city upon ascertaining that such vehicles, in his opinion, may be moved without causing damage or injury to the streets, provided the owner and/or operator of the vehicle remains liable for any damage or injury. Nothing in this section prohibits the use of any skid chains on rubber tires attached to the wheels of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.112, 1978).  
10.28.090 - Public transit vehicles—Passenger-safety zones. 
The traffic engineer may establish safety zones of such kind and character consistent with the Vehicle Code as he deems advisable or necessary for the protection of pedestrians at places where public transit vehicles stop; provided, that the space between the safety zone and the curb is wide enough to allow the clear passage of one line of traffic. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.113, 1978).  
10.28.100 - Public transit vehicles—Boarding or alighting from. 
No person shall board or alight from any public transit vehicle while such public transit vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.114, 1978).  
10.28.110 - Public transit vehicles—Hanging on—Unlawful riding. 
No person shall ride on any public transit vehicle or upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers, except for a person employed to operate such vehicle. 
(Ord. 385 § 1.115, 1978).  
Chapter 10.32 - TRUCK ROUTES 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Findings. 
The council makes the following legislative findings: 
A.  Sections 21101 and 35700 of the state Vehicle Code authorize cities to establish truck routes and to regulate or prohibit truck traffic on city streets. 
B.  Through truck traffic on many city streets is excessive and constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  Through truck traffic should be restricted to those city streets which are most suitable for such traffic and which minimize the hazards to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 419 § 1, 1980).  
10.32.020 - Designated—Truck routes. 
In accordance with Section 10.32.010 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following streets or portions of streets are declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a gross vehicle weight rating of thirteen tons, or as specified in Section 15210(b) of the California Vehicle Code: 
Pacific Street from the southerly city limits to the northerly city limits; 
Granite Drive from Dominguez Road to Sierra College Boulevard; 
Dominguez Road from Pacific Street to Granite Drive; 
Sierra College Boulevard from the northerly city limits to the southerly city limits; 
Stanford Ranch Road from the westerly city limits to Sunset Boulevard; 
Sunset Boulevard from State Route 65 to West Oaks Boulevard; 
West Stanford Ranch Road to the intersection of Stanford Ranch Road and Park Drive; 
All of Lonetree Boulevard; 
Blue Oaks Boulevard from State Route 65 to Lonetree Boulevard. 
(Ord. 907 § 5, 2006: Ord. 809 § 3, 1999; Ord. 419 § 3, 1980).  
10.32.025 - Designated—Terminal access routes. 
In accordance with Section 10.32.010 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following streets or portions of streets are declared to be terminal access routes as defined by the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). Such routes are designed for federally legal (STAA) commercial vehicles, or any vehicle specified in Section 15210(b) of the California Vehicle Code, for the purposes of providing a single designated route for the termination or origination of freight at commercial terminals. 
A.  From Interstate 80 to Sierra College Boulevard; Sierra College Boulevard to Pacific Street (Taylor Road); from Pacific Street to Sunset Boulevard; Sunset Boulevard from Pacific Street in a southerly direction for four hundred feet. 
B.  Sunset Boulevard from State Route 65 to West Oaks Boulevard; West Oaks Boulevard from Sunset Boulevard in a northerly direction for one thousand feet. 
(Ord. 907 § 6, 2006). 
(Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 5-27-2014)  
10.32.030 - Use required when. 
A.  Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a gross vehicle weight rating of thirteen tons, the director of public works is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "Truck Route" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a gross vehicle weight rating of thirteen tons. 
B.  When any such truck route is established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a gross vehicle weight rating of thirteen tons shall drive on such route and none other. The driver of the described vehicle shall travel as far as possible toward the destination on a designated route and only then may leave that route by the shortest route available when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets. The driver shall return to, by the shortest route possible, a designated truck route for the purposes of egress from the city. Nothing in this section shall imply the use of residential streets as the shortest route to access a truck route. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; 
2.  Any vehicle owned by a public agency or public utility while necessarily in use in construction, installation or repair. 
(Ord. 907 § 7, 2006: Ord. 419 § 2, 1980).  
10.32.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Each violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by fine as authorized by the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 419 § 4, 1980).  
Chapter 10.36 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Crosswalk establishment. 
A.  The traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway. 
B.  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length. Elsewhere, not more than one additional crosswalk shall be established in any one block and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. 
(Ord. 385 § 7.101, 1978).  
Chapter 10.40 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.40.010 - Duty. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the police chief to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Ord. 385 § 3.101(a), 1978).  
10.40.020 - Traffic direction authority—Police. 
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the police chief, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal, in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. 385 § 3.101(b), 1978).  
10.40.030 - Traffic direction authority—Firemen. 
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, shall have authority to direct traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity, subject to police control or supervision. 
(Ord. 385 § 3.101(e), 1978).  
10.40.040 - Traffic direction authority—Required—Emergencies. 
Except in cases of emergency, no person, other than an officer of the police department or a person deputized by the police chief or other person authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal. 
(Ord. 385 § 3.102, 1978).  
10.40.050 - Damage report for public or utility property. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle or the person in charge of an animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street shall, within twenty-four hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the police department. 
B.  Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person driving or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damaged in such accident. 
C.  A driver involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirement of this section, if during the time prescribed such driver is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event, the driver shall make a report as required in subsection A within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. 
(Ord. 385 § 3.103, 1978).  
10.40.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided by the Vehicle Code of the state of California, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, punishable by fine as authorized by the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 429 § 1, 1980: Ord. 385 § 9.101, 1978). 
TITLE 10 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For provisions on the timing of traffic signals, see Section 10.08.060 of this code. 
2.  For provisions on boarding and alighting from vehicles, see Ch. 10.28 of this code.  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.01 - APPEALS PROCEDURE 
 
12.01.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Appeals Procedure" for Title 12. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.01.020 - Right to appeal and fees. 
A.  Right to Appeal. Except where a procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this title, any person objecting to the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license, permit or entitlement of any nature, the determination or issuance of which is under any of the provisions of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any city official, if the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of such license, permit or entitlement or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised under any of the provisions of this code, may appeal such decision in writing as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Appeals Fees. The city council may establish a schedule for appeals fees by resolution. 
C.  Appeals regarding Administrative Citations. The regulations set forth in Title 1 of the Rocklin Municipal Code shall govern the appeal of administrative citations, or notices of violation, as such terms are defined in Chapter 1.08, issued for the violation of any provision of Title 12. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.01.030 - Procedure for filing an appeal. 
A.  Appeal to City Manager. If a party is aggrieved by an administrative decision under this Title 12, they may appeal the decision to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days after the date upon which the written administrative decision was deposited in the U.S. mail. The notice of appeal shall contain a statement of the grounds to be relied upon for reversing the decision being appealed. In the event the last calendar day of the filing period falls on a non-business day, the appeal period shall be extended to include the next business day. In the absence of a timely appeal and the payment of any applicable appeal fee, the original administrative decision shall be final. 
The city manager shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal not later than forty-five calendar days after the notice of appeal is received. At least ten calendar days' notice shall be given to the appellant of the time and place of the hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail to the address provided by appellant in his/her notice of appeal. The city manager may hear the appeal in person and shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the hearing. The city manager's written decision shall include appellant's right to appeal the decision to the city council. 
B.  Informal Resolution. Persons denied a permit or otherwise aggrieved by a determination of a city official under this title may meet and/or confer with the city official who issued the decision or the appropriate department head in an effort to informally resolve the matter. Such efforts to informally resolve the matter do not extend the time for filing a formal appeal under subsection A above. In the event the matter is informally resolved prior to the hearing date set by the city manager, the city will refund any appeals fees paid provided the appellant has withdrawn their formal appeal. 
C.  Appeal to City Council. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council by filing a notice of appeal containing appellant's grounds for appeal with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days after the date upon which the city manager's decision is made. In the absence of a timely appeal and payment of any applicable appeal fee, the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
The city clerk shall fix a time and place for the city council hearing of such appeal not later than forty-five calendar days after the notice of appeal is received. At least ten calendar days' notice shall be given to the appellant of the time and place of the hearing by serving the notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail to the address provided by appellant in his/her notice of appeal. 
At such hearing before the city council, the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action appealed from should be reversed. The city council may continue the hearing from time to time; provided, however, that the hearing shall occur and be concluded no later than thirty calendar days after the original date set for hearing. The city council shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing and its decision to affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
Chapter 12.04 - ENCROACHMENTS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Definitions 
 
12.04.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given: 
A.  "Applicant" means both the person applying for an encroachment or excavation permit and the person owning the facility or installation for which the encroachment or excavation will be made. 
B.  "Director" means the director of public works for the city or his or her designee. 
C.  "Encroach" or "encroachment" means going over, upon, or under, or using a right-of-way in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with its normal use as a vehicular and pedestrian way, or to impair safe sight distances for the operation of motor vehicles. "Encroachment" includes any excavation within a right-of-way. 
D.  "Excavation" means any cutting or trenching in or under the surface of any public right-of-way for the installation, repair, replacement or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole, or any other facility or installation, or for any other reason. 
E.  "Excusable delay" means delay caused by circumstances beyond the control of the applicant or permittee and which could not have been avoided by the exercise of reasonable care, prudence, foresight, and diligence, such as acts of God, war, insurrection, civil disorder, fire, floods, epidemics, or strike. 
F.  "Permittee" means both the person receiving an encroachment or excavation permit and the person owning the facility or installation for which the encroachment or excavation will be made. 
G.  "Public right-of-way" or "right-of-way" means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility, storm drainage, water, sanitary sewer or pedestrian walkway purposes. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
Article II. - Encroachment Permits 
 
12.04.020 - Encroachment permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to encroach or cause to be made any encroachment, of any nature whatever within, upon, over, or under the surface of any right-of-way without having first obtained from the director a written encroachment permit in full compliance with this chapter. Actions which comprise an encroachment include making any alteration of any nature; constructing, maintaining, or leaving any obstruction or impediment of any nature; removing, cutting, or trimming trees; setting a fire; excavating; placing any pipeline, conduit, or other fixture; moving over or causing to be moved over the surface of any right-of-way or over any bridge, viaduct or other structure maintained by the city any vehicle or combination of vehicles or other object of dimension or weight prohibited by law or having other characteristics capable of damaging the right-of-way; and placing any structure, wall, culvert, or embankment. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.030 - Encroachment permit—Exception. 
The prohibitions contained in this article shall not apply to the following: 
A.  To any person encroaching or causing an encroachment on a public right-of-way as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity arises. The person making an emergency encroachment on a public right-of-way shall immediately notify the director or the police department and apply for and obtain an encroachment permit as soon as practicable; 
B.  To officers or employees of the city acting in the discharge of their official duties; 
C.  To any persons acting in a manner expressly authorized by a street closure permit issued under Chapter 12.24; and 
D.  To solid waste collection containers presented for collection as required by and in conformance with Chapter 13.08. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.040 - Encroachment permit—Application. 
A.  Application for an encroachment permit shall be made on a form provided by the director. The application shall state the name and residence or business address of the applicant; the location, type, and purpose of the proposed encroachment; and, if requested, a drawing and other information showing the location and extent of the encroachment. 
B.  If the encroachment includes an excavation, the application shall also provide the following information: 
1.  The location and approximate area of the excavation, including its approximate length and width; 
2.  If the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse to the direction of the travel lanes; 
3.  The purpose of the excavation; and 
4.  A plan showing the location of the proposed excavation, its dimensions, and any other details the director may require. 
C.  The director may establish different requirements for blanket permits issued under Section 12.04.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.050 - Encroachment permit—Fees. 
A.  At the time the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable inspection fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to process the application, provide requisite inspections and back-fill material testing services, and to maintain an inventory or database of facilities that are installed, repaired or removed during the work for which the permit is issued. The director is authorized to reduce or waive the inspection fee if the director determines the fee to be inappropriate based on the nature of the work. 
B.  No fee or requirement authorized or imposed by this chapter shall be construed to affect or alter in any way the obligation of utility service providers with facilities installed in the public right-of-way to relocate the facilities at no cost to the city when that relocation is required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.060 - Encroachment permit—Security. 
A.  Before the encroachment permit is issued, the applicant shall post with the director security approved as to type and form by the city attorney and in the amount stated below, to guarantee the faithful and proper performance of the work: 
1.  One hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed conditioned upon the faithful performance of the work or act; 
2.  One hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed securing payment to the contractor, the subcontractor, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act, if appropriate; and 
3.  The amount determined to be necessary to guarantee or warrant the work for a period of one year following completion or acceptance against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished. 
An additional amount may be included as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees, which any be incurred by the city in enforcing the obligation secured. The security shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work to the extent that such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement. 
B.  The director may waive or reduce the amount of the required security if the applicant provides satisfactory evidence of financial ability in proportion to the nature and scope of the work to be performed. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.070 - Encroachment permit—Insurance. 
A.  Before the encroachment permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the city a certificate of insurance, properly executed and showing that the applicant has in effect general liability, automobile, and worker's compensation insurance, as well as the necessary endorsements specified by the city, in the amounts as determined by the director to be appropriate for the work to be performed. 
B.  The director may waive, reduce, or modify the type or amount of insurance required or the endorsements required, if the applicant shows satisfactory evidence of self-insurance or as otherwise appropriate for the nature and scope of the work to be performed. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.080 - Encroachment permit—Issuance. 
A.  Upon receipt of a complete application, payment of the fee, and required security and insurance documents in compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter, the director shall issue the encroachment permit, subject to whatever conditions the director, in his or her professional judgment, determines to be necessary or convenient to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and for the protection of the city, during the term of the work authorized by the permit. 
B.  The director shall deny a permit to any person who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter in connection with the encroachment permit. 
C.  An encroachment permit shall be void unless the proposed work is commenced within ten days from the date of issuance of the permit and the work is diligently completed, unless the work was subject to excusable delay or prior arrangements are made with the director. 
D.  The permittee shall notify the director not less than forty-eight hours prior to commencement of work under the permit. 
E.  Encroachment work shall be confined to the locations and work described in the permit and shown on the plans filed with the director. If circumstances appearing after the encroachment is commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the director may grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account. 
F.  No encroachment permit shall be transferable. 
G.  Except in the case of an emergency, no work shall be done at any time other than between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. from Monday through Friday, unless specified otherwise on the permit. 
H.  The director may issue blanket permits to any person to make excavations for underground service connections, for the location and repair of breaks or malfunctions in underground conduits or pipes, or for emergency purposes. Blanket permits shall be issued on a yearly basis only, and shall authorize only excavations referred to in this subsection. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, excavations authorized by this subsection shall be subject to all fees, limitations, and other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 933 § 2, 2008; Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.090 - Encroachment permit—Revocation. 
The director may revoke any encroachment permit issued under this chapter for noncompliance with any of the provisions of this chapter or any conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.100 - Appeals. 
The denial or revocation of an encroachment permit by the director may be appealed by the applicant or permit holder as set forth in Chapter 12.01 of this title. 
(Ord. 933 § 3, 2008). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
Article III. - Standards and Requirements 
 
12.04.110 - Compliance with laws and regulations. 
A.  The permittee shall perform all work in compliance with all current federal, state, and local safety regulations and requirements applicable to the work being performed under the permit. 
B.  The permittee shall perform all work in compliance with the encroachment and excavation standards and requirements established and published from time to time by the director, including standards and requirements for repaving, compacting, back-filling and pavement restoration. The standards and requirements may impose different requirements for different excavations, taking into consideration relevant factors, such as (i) the location, type and extent of excavation performed, (ii) the condition of the surface being excavated, (iii) the period of time elapsed since the construction or most recent resurfacing of the surface being excavated, and (iv) street classifications. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.120 - Opening, back-filling, and paving trenches. 
A.  No trench shall be opened in any right-of-way for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more than three hundred feet, or lesser distance as specified in the permit, in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, without the prior written consent of the director. 
B.  Whenever any caving occurs in the side walls of any excavations, the pavements above such caving shall be cut away and fully restored and repaved at the expense of the permittee. In no case shall any void under any paved or improved surface be filled by side or lateral tamping. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.130 - Repair of sunken pavement over excavation. 
If the pavement or the surface of the public right-of-way over any excavation should become depressed or broken at any time within one year after the excavation has been completed and before resurfacing of the right-of-way by the city, natural wear of the surface excepted, the permittee who performed the excavation work shall, upon written notice from the director, immediately inspect the depressed or broken area over the excavation to ascertain the cause of the failure. The permittee shall make repairs to the installation or back-fill and have the pavement restored as specified by the director, within such time period as may be specified by the director. Additional inspection permit fees may be imposed as appropriate. If, after giving the permittee twenty-four hours notice, the pavement is not satisfactorily restored within the time as specified by the director, excusable delay excepted, the director may cause the work to be done. The cost of the work done by or at the direction of the city, including any inspection costs and administrative overhead incurred by city, shall be charged to the permittee. After the cost is paid to city, the city shall be responsible for any future repairs of that portion of pavement over the excavation. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.140 - Failure to complete work within specified time. 
If any part of the work authorized by an encroachment or excavation permit is not completed within the time required, excusable delay excepted, the director may notify in writing the permittee performing the work to complete the work within forty-eight hours, legal holidays excepted. If the work is not completed within this time period, the director shall have the authority to perform all or a portion of the work, including restoration of the work area to a safe and passable condition. The cost of the work, including any inspection costs and administrative overhead, incurred by city shall be charged to the permittee. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.150 - Location and relocation of facilities. 
A.  Except for requirements subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of another regulatory agency, the location, depth and other physical characteristics of any facilities for which an excavation permit is issued shall be subject to approval of the director. 
B.  All facilities installed under a permit issued under this chapter shall, upon demand of the director, be relocated or lowered if required by the city to avoid potential conflicts with a proper governmental use of a public right-of-way. All expenses incurred in relocating, lowering lines, pot-holing or marking of facilities to determine their exact location after the original installation shall be borne by the permittee. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.160 - "As-built" plans. 
Upon completion of underground or surface work permitted under this chapter and at the discretion of the director, permittee shall furnish "as-built" plans of the installation if there have been changes from the original submittal, showing a correct plan view to scale, details, and a profile showing the locations of all elements of the installation based on data obtained in the field during construction. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.170 - Liability of city. 
Neither the city nor any of its officers, employees, agents or volunteers shall be responsible for any damage caused by any encroachments or excavations in any public right-of-way made by any person under the authority of a permit issued under this chapter. As a condition of application for and issuance of an encroachment or excavation permit, a permittee voluntarily releases, discharges, waives, and relinquishes any and all actions and causes of action for personal injury (including death) or property damage occurring to himself/herself arising out of or as a result of performing the work under the permit; agrees that under no circumstances will he/she, or his/her heirs, executors, administrators and assigns prosecute or present any claim against the city or any of its officers, employees, agents, or volunteers for personal injury (including death) or property damage, including those which arise by the negligence of the city or any of said persons, whether passive or active; and further agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents, and volunteers, from any claims, demands, damages, costs, expenses or liability for personal injury (including death) or property damage, arising out of or connected with his/her work under the permit or issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.180 - Prohibited interpretations. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be read as imposing upon the city, the director, or any employee or agent thereof, any liability for any damage or any injury to any person or property resulting from any act or acts of the permittee, its agents, or its employees. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.190 - Severability. 
Should any part of this chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003).  
12.04.200 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
B.  If charged as an infraction, the minimum penalty for a first conviction is a fifty dollar fine. For a second conviction within one year, the minimum penalty is a seventy-five dollar fine. For a third or subsequent conviction within one year, the minimum penalty is a one hundred dollar fine. 
C.  A person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues. 
D.  A violation of this chapter which threatens to be continuing in nature is a public nuisance which may be abated or enjoined as such in accordance with Chapter 8.04 or any other provision of law. 
E.  A violation of this chapter is subject to administrative citation and fine under Chapter 1.14. 
(Ord. 875 § 1 (part), 2003). 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 14, 3-13-2018)  
Chapter 12.08 - TREES 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Street tree policy—Administration. 
A.  The public health, safety and welfare require that the city maintain a program for the installation and preservation of trees on all public property in the city as a municipal affair and in order to beautify the city, purify its air, and provide for shade for its inhabitants. It is in the public interest that a program for the planting and maintenance of trees along the streets within the city should be established and followed. This chapter provides for such a program by establishing regulations governing the planting and maintenance of street trees and for the selection of appropriate species to achieve as much uniformity as possible for beauty and economy. 
B.  It is the duty of the city manager or his or her designee ("administrator") to enforce, implement, and carry out this chapter. 
(Ord. 676 § 1, 1993; Ord. 392 § 3, 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Administrator" means the city manager or any employee designated by him to administer this chapter. 
B.  "Maintain" or "maintenance" means the entire care of trees in planting strips, and includes the preparation of ground, fertilizing, mulching, planting, spraying, trimming, pruning, topping, and root control. It does not include watering, unless specifically so stated. 
C.  "Planting" means planting and replacement in planting strips. 
D.  "Planting strip" is the area available for planting between the street curb, or place where the curb should be, and the property line. 
E.  "Street tree" means a tree, shrub or plant planted in a planting strip within a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 676 § 2, 1993: Ord. 392 § 2, 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.030 - Official tree planting list. 
A.  The administrator shall evaluate types and varieties of trees for planting along the streets of the city. Such an evaluation program shall be a continuing program. Whenever the administrator evaluates a tree and determines that in his opinion it is a proper tree to be planted on the streets of the city to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, he shall add it to the official tree planting list. 
B.  The official tree planting list of the city, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated in this chapter by reference, together with additions by the administrator, shall remain in effect until supplanted by subsequent approved and adopted amendments or lists. 
C.  All new and replacement plantings on the streets of the city shall be confined to trees from the latest official tree planting list. 
(Ord. 392 § 4, 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.040 - Specific location and variety determinations. 
A.  The administrator shall evaluate types and varieties of trees on the tree planting list and the nature of the particular areas to be planted and shall determine the best trees for such areas. 
B.  In making his or her determinations under this chapter the administrator shall be guided by and apply the following standards: 
1.  Trees shall be selected from the official tree planting list, except that other trees may be planted on an experimental basis in selected areas. The purpose of the experimental planting is to determine the suitability of the trees for use on the streets of the city. A successful experimental planting may remain in place and shall be deemed approved as a street tree as planted; 
2.  The prime purpose of beauty or shade shall always be observed; 
3.  The location of specific trees shall be determined with consideration given to avoiding or minimizing interference by the trees with existing or planned utilities, driveway approaches, street intersections and building exposures; 
4.  Selection of a particular species of tree for a specific block, street, or section of the city shall be based upon the nature of the species and the width of the planting strip, soil conditions, zoning regulations, street patterns, building setbacks, utilities, and the availability of the particular species. 
(Ord. 392 § 5, 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.050 - Maintenance by city—Death—Dangerous—Infestation. 
A.  The city shall provide proper maintenance according to good municipal forestry practices for all trees growing along the city streets. 
B.  All street trees throughout the city shall be removed by the city if dead, dying, or in a dangerous condition likely to cause damage. The city, at its own cost and expense and in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 12.08.040, in the area of such removal, will replace all trees so removed. 
C.  Upon discovering that a tree is infected or infested with insects, pests, or disease, the administrator shall cause the condition to be treated or, if a tree is so infected or infested to such a degree that the condition cannot be eradicated by treatment, the administrator may order the removal and replacement of the tree. 
(Ord. 392 § 6(a, b, c), 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.060 - Maintenance procedures. 
Each street tree shall be maintained as follows: 
A.  Surface roots of a young tree in process of development shall be removed to prevent future sidewalk, curb, and gutter damage; 
B.  Overhead limbs shall be pruned proportionately to compensate for root loss; 
C.  Large trees along the streets shall, upon reaching maturity, be pruned or trimmed; 
D.  A tree during the process of development shall be properly shaped and trimmed to provide adequate sidewalk and street clearance. 
(Ord. 392 § 6(d), 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.070 - Private property trees, shrubs and plants. 
If a street tree or a tree, shrub or plant standing on private property and overhanging or projecting into a public right-of-way appears to be dead, liable to fall, dangerous, an obstruction to public travel or is not pruned or trimmed, the administrator may have it, or such part of it as is dead, liable to fall, dangerous or an obstruction to public travel, or not trimmed, cut down. Except in case of public danger and immediate necessity, no such tree, shrub or plant standing on private property may be completely cut down or removed unless the city gives ten days' notice in writing to the owner or occupant of the property. 
(Ord. 676 § 3, 1993: Ord. 392 § 6(e), 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.080 - Hazard or noncomplying removal authority. 
When determined by the administrator that private plantings or installations in planting strips are a hazard to the public or conflict with the approved tree planting plan, the administrator has authority to cause the hazard or detriment to be removed or eliminated. 
(Ord. 392 § 7(a), 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.090 - Permit to work on planting strip trees. 
No person may, without a written permit from the administrator, plant, remove, trim, prune, or cut any tree upon the street, planting easement, or between the property line and the curb. When permission is granted for the purpose of planting, trimming, pruning, cutting or removing a tree, such planting, trimming, pruning, cutting or removal shall be done under the general supervision of the administrator. The stump of a tree including underground portions to a depth specified by the city manager shall be removed. 
(Ord. 392 § 7(b), 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.100 - Interference with city employees. 
No person shall interfere, or cause or permit a person to interfere, with employees of the city engaged in the planting or maintaining, treating, or removing of any tree or plant. 
(Ord. 392 § 7(c), 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.130 - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall: 
A.  Construct a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk or otherwise fill up the ground area around any street tree so as to shut off air, light or water from the roots except under written authority from the city manager; 
B.  Pile building material, equipment or other substance around any tree so as to cause injury to it; 
C.  Pour deleterious matter on or around any street tree, or on the ground around it or on any planting strip, lawn or sidewalk; 
D.  Post a sign on the street tree, tree stake or guard, or fasten a guy wire, cable or rope to a street tree, tree stake or guard. An official notice of the city may, under the supervision of the administrator, be installed on a tree trunk which is suitably located; 
E.  Plant a tree within a city right-of-way, the planting of which is contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 676 § 6, 1993: Ord. 392 § 7(e) (1—4, 6), 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.140 - Nonliability of city—Owner and occupant duty. 
This chapter does not impose liability upon the city, or its officers or employees, and does not relieve the owner and occupant of a private property from the duty to keep trees and shrubs upon private property or under his control, or upon sidewalks and parking strips in front of his private property, in safe condition, or from the duty to notify the city of any hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions on adjacent public property. 
(Ord. 392 § 8, 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.150 - Appeals. 
A decision of the administrator relating to the official tree planting list or requiring any action by a private property owner, or the denial of any necessary permits to a private property owner, may be appealed as set forth in Chapter 12.01 of this title. 
(Ord. 392 § 9, 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.08.160 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter or any part of it is a misdemeanor as defined by the applicable provisions of the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 392 § 10, 1979). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
Chapter 12.16 - MAIL BOXES 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Findings. 
The council finds: 
A.  There is no door-to-door mail delivery in the city; 
B.  Certain persons within the city are required, in order to obtain mail delivery from the U.S. Postal Service, to maintain a freestanding mail box in front of their residences or places of business; 
C.  It is unsafe to have mail boxes erected and maintained in any public right-of-way, including any sidewalk. 
(Ord. 354 § 1, 1978).  
12.16.020 - Location on traveled part of right-of-way. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to construct, erect or maintain any depository for the delivery of mail to any residential dwelling or business establishment (including any public facility) in or on any traveled portion of a public right-of-way, including any sidewalk. 
(Ord. 354 § 2, 1978).  
Chapter 12.20 - PUBLIC PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1005, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, amended Ch. 12.20, in effect repealing §§ 12.20.010—12.20.090 and enacting new provisions in lieu thereof as §§ 12.20.010—12.20.095. Formerly, such provisions pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 474, §§ 1—7, adopted 1982; Ord. No. 593, § 1, adopted 1988; and Ord. 910, § 1, adopted 2006. 
 
12.20.010 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  This chapter sets forth standards for park utilization and maintenance to maintain and protect the city's parks and recreation facilities and to ensure their availability as a shared resource to all members of the public. 
B.  Section 50402 of the Government Code of the state of California provides that a city may charge for use or services provided in city parks so long as the charges do not exceed the cost of service. By resolution duly adopted, the city may charge fees for park use and use of various facilities or services at one or more of the city parks or recreation facilities, and add to, subtract from, increase or decrease such charges in amounts reasonably necessary to recover the cost of operating the parks and providing the various services and facilities therein. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.015 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
"Alcoholic beverages" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, beer, wine or other liquid which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
"Commercial activity" means selling, offering for sale, or vending any goods, wares, merchandise, service, performance, or other thing of value, for immediate or future delivery, or requesting monetary donations, pledges, or other things of value for a charitable, religious, cultural, or any other cause. 
"Department" means the city department directed by the city manager to oversee parks and recreation facilities in the city. 
"Designated area" means an area specially equipped or posted with appropriate signs for camping, picnicking, parking of motor vehicles or other authorized activity. 
"Director" means the director or his or her authorized representative of the department which oversees parks and recreation facilities in the city. 
"Facility" or "park facility" means any body of water, land, campsite, recreation area, building, structure, system, equipment, machinery or other appurtenance owned, managed, controlled or operated by the city of Rocklin. 
"Overnight" means the hours between 11:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
"Permit" means written authorization to make use of any park, recreation area or portion thereof, and includes any conditions set forth herein. 
"Picnicking" means the consumption of food or beverages. 
"Recreation area" means all parks, places, greenbelts, gardens, and any other property owned by the city, including structures thereon, used, operated or maintained for recreational purposes, whether active or passive. The term "owned" shall mean any property interest under which the city operates, maintains or controls such property. The term shall also include any property owned and maintained as open space. 
"Trash" means garbage, solid waste, refuse, litter, paper, animal and vegetable matter, and rubbish. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn, including bicycles. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 1075, § 3, 7-11-2017)  
12.20.020 - Permit required; application contents. 
Whenever a permit is required by provisions in this chapter, an application shall be filed with the director stating: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  The name and address of the person, group, organization or corporation sponsoring the activity; 
C.  The nature of the proposed activity; 
D.  The dates, hours, and park facility for which the permit is desired; 
E.  An estimate of attendance; and 
F.  Any other information which the director, regarding public health, safety and welfare, finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.025 - Permit—Standards for issuance. 
The director shall issue a permit hereunder when he or she finds: 
A.  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park; 
B.  That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety, and recreation; 
C.  That all conditions including, where applicable, any further approvals by regulatory agencies or the city council, the payment of fees, and insurance coverage are met; 
D.  That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct; 
E.  That the proposed activity or use will not entail unusual, extraordinary, or burdensome expense or security operation by the department; and 
F.  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.030 - Failure to obtain required permit. 
No person shall use, occupy, or otherwise remain in any park facility or portion thereof for which a permit is required without first having obtained such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.035 - Priority of use. 
Any person using a park facility or portion thereof which may be reserved by obtaining a permit, but who has not obtained such a permit, shall vacate said area when holders of a valid permit present themselves. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.040 - Exhibiting permit. 
No person shall fail to produce and exhibit a permit he claims to have upon request of any department employee or any peace officer who desires to inspect said permit for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.045 - Restrictions in all recreation areas. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to: 
A.  Enter or remain on the premises after the established closing hours. 
B.  Operate or park a vehicle in other than designated areas or over established roads. 
C.  Operate a vehicle in excess of fifteen miles per hour on park roads. 
D.  Park or allow any vehicle to remain in excess of eight consecutive hours. 
E.  Start or maintain fires in parks, except for barbecuing food, using established barbecue facilities or personal portable barbecues within designated picnic areas. No person shall fail to fully extinguish live coals, embers, or fires before leaving the barbecue facilities or picnic area. 
F.  Allow or permit any person under the age of six under their custody, jurisdiction or control, to enter or remain without providing adequate supervision. 
G.  Leave, drop, place or deposit any trash; except in receptacles provided for trash. 
H.  Conduct or carry on an assembly of more than twenty-five people in a park, which assembly is intended or can reasonably be expected to last more than thirty minutes or which does in fact last more than thirty minutes, without first obtaining a permit from the director. 
I.  Remain at an assembly or public demonstration after having been requested to leave by a peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 1075, § 3, 7-11-2017)  
12.20.050 - Prohibited hours. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B, and subsection C of this section regarding neighborhood parks, no person or persons shall remain in any city park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day without having received a permit to do so from the director or his authorized representative. 
B.  The permit requirement established in subsection A above shall not apply to: 
1.  Any person or persons going to, attending, or participating in any activity or event which is regularly scheduled and coordinated by the Rocklin recreation department or any activity or event conducted under a lease or permit from the city; or 
2.  Any person or persons exiting the park immediately after the conclusion of such an activity or event; or 
3.  Any police officer or employee of the city while engaged in the performance of his or her duties. 
C.  No person or persons shall remain in any city neighborhood park between one hour after sunset and sunrise of the following day. For purposes of this subsection C, a city neighborhood park shall be as defined in the open space for outdoor recreation element of the Rocklin general plan. 
D.  For all park facilities other than community and neighborhood parks, the director shall determine the hours of operation of Rocklin park and recreation facilities based on the following criteria: 
1.  Weather conditions; 
2.  Seasonal recreation activities scheduled or expected to occur at the park facilities; 
3.  Nature or extent of public use of the park facilities; 
4.  Cost effectiveness of operation of the park facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.055 - Regulations authorized. 
The director may establish and post regulations governing the use of park facilities which are not inconsistent with regulations contained in this chapter and which promote public health and safety and the preservation of property. A violation of the posted rules or regulations may be charged as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.060 - Regulation of commercial activity. 
A.  No person shall engage in any commercial activity in any city park unless the commercial activity is authorized under the terms of a lease, operating agreement, or permit issued by the director. 
B.  The director may authorize commercial activities within any city park in connection with special programs or events sponsored or co-sponsored by the city, if he or she determines that the commercial activity complements and enhances the special program or event and does not detract from the use of the city park for ordinary park purposes. 
C.  In determining the type and extent of commercial activities to be authorized, the director shall consider their potential impact on the city park and surrounding neighborhood. The director shall establish guidelines for selection of authorized commercial activities. The selection decisions made by the director shall be final. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the sale or distribution of newspapers, books, pamphlets, or other activity constituting protected speech under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or comparable protections under the California Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.065 - Real property—Use; appropriation or encumbrance. 
No person shall: 
A.  Deposit any earth, sand, rock, stone, or other substance within any park facility, nor shall he dig or remove any such material from within any park facility, nor shall he erect or attempt to erect any building, wharf, or structure of any kind by driving or setting up posts or piles, or in any manner appropriate or encumber any portion of the real property owned, operated, controlled, or managed by the department, without a permit from the director; 
B.  Dig up, pick, remove, mutilate, injure, cut, or destroy any turf, tree, plant, shrub, bloom, flower, artifact, or archeological site, or any portion thereof; 
C.  Cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any building, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property, or any portion thereof; or 
D.  Without a permit from the director, make or place on any tree, plant, shrub, bloom, flower, building, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property, or on any portion thereof, any rope, wire, mark, writing, printing, sign, card, display, or similar inscription or device. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.070 - Glass containers prohibited. 
No person shall possess any cup, tumbler, bottle, jar or other container made of glass and used for carrying or containing any liquid for drinking purposes within any park or park facility, except in locations where such containers are permitted under the terms of a lease, operating agreement or permit. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.075 - Fireworks. 
No person shall possess or ignite in any manner any firecracker or fireworks, including any article for the making of a pyrotechnic display. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall prohibit any discharge or display of fireworks at any public gathering or patriotic celebration provided a permit for such discharge or display has been obtained from the director. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.080 - Firearms, air guns, and other weapons. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B, no person or persons shall use, maintain, possess, fire, or discharge any firearm, air gun, spring gun, paintball gun, bow and arrow, slingshot, or any other weapon potentially dangerous to wildlife or human safety, in any park facility. A violation of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor. 
B.  Subsection A shall not apply to: 
1.  A duly appointed peace officer as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the California Penal Code; or 
2.  A retired police officer with authorization to carry concealed weapons as described in Article 2 (commencing with Section 25450) of Chapter 2 of Division 5 of Title 4 of Part 6 of the California Penal Code; or 
3.  A full-time paid peace officer of another state or the federal government who is carrying out official duties while in California; or 
4.  A person holding a valid license to carry the firearm pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 26150) of Division 5 of Title 4 of Part 6 of the California Penal Code; or 
5.  A person who has permission to possess that weapon granted in writing by the director or the chief of police specifying the area, times and conditions designated for such use. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 1-13-2015)  
12.20.085 - Smoking prohibited in recreation areas and on city-owned property. 
A.  "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah pipe, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form and use of electronic devices with electrical ignition or vaporization (e-cigarettes/cigars or similar devices). 
B.  Smoking is prohibited in all recreational areas, as defined in this chapter and on city-owned property, except the city or the private entity controlling the recreational area or city property may designate certain specified area where smoking is permitted if all the following criteria are met: 
1.  The designated area must be clearly designated and marked with smoking permitted signs. 
2.  The area must be at least fifty feet from any picnic areas, sports fields or improvements used for recreational activity, food vendors, lines for recreational activities in the recreational area and heating and air conditioning intakes or vents. 
3.  The area must be completely unenclosed. 
4.  The agreement or special event permit between the city and a private entity permit the designation of a smoking area. 
5.  The city manager, parks and recreation director or their designee may designate locations where smoking is permitted pursuant to this section. No city official is required to designate a smoking area and may consider the uses in the recreation area, fire hazards, proximity to fields, elderly, children and employees and other factors in her/her discretion. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 6-13-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1070, § 2, adopted June 13, 2017, changed the title of § 12.20.085 from "Smoking" to read as herein set out.  
12.20.090 - Locks and keys. 
No person other than one acting under the direction of the director shall duplicate or cause to be duplicated a key used by the department for a padlock or door lock of any type or description, nor shall any person divulge the combination of any lock so equipped to any unauthorized person. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.095 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
A.  No person shall possess any can, bottle or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which has been partially removed, within any park or park facility which has been posted with signs prohibiting such possession. The city may, by resolution, designate, or authorize the director to designate, the park or park facilities to be posted. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one years of age to be in possession of an alcoholic beverage while such person is in or upon any park facility. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute an infraction, and shall be punishable pursuant to the provisions of Section 36900 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
12.20.100 - Appeals. 
The denial or revocation of a permit by the director may be appealed by the applicant or permit holder as set forth in Chapter 12.01 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
Chapter 12.22 - POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION, OR USE OF ALCOHOL 
Sections: 
 
12.22.010 - Prohibition or limitations on possession, consumption, or use of alcohol and/or possession of animals. 
The city council may by resolution: 
A.  Prohibit the possession, consumption, and use of alcohol and/or possession of animals, as defined in Section 6.04.020, in a public park or place for a temporary period as specified in the resolution; or 
B.  Limit for a temporary period as specified in the resolution, the possession, consumption, and use of alcohol and/or the possession of animals, as defined in Section 6.04.020, to a defined area within a public park or place during an authorized event occurring within a public park or place. 
(Ord. 908 § 1, 2006: Ord. 887 § 1 (part), 2004).  
12.22.020 - Posting of public park or place subject to a prohibition or limitation. 
A.  When the city council adopts a resolution pursuant to Section 12.22.010, the property that is subject to the prohibition or limitation shall be posted with signs stating the dates of the prohibition or limitation and the nature of the prohibited or limited activity. 
B.  Signs shall be posted in prominent locations on or about the property that is subject to the prohibition or limitation at least twelve hours prior to the time such prohibition or limitation shall be enforced. 
(Ord. 887 § 1 (part), 2004).  
12.22.030 - Restrictions on alcohol and animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or use any alcoholic beverage or to have in his or her possession any container of beer, wine, or any alcoholic beverage, or intoxicating liquor and/or possess any animal, as defined in Section 6.04.020, in any public park or place where the possession, consumption, or use would violate a prohibition or limitation adopted by the city council pursuant to Section 12.22.010. The prohibition or restrictions on animals shall not include service animals defined as any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability. 
(Ord. 908 § 2, 2006: Ord. 887 § 1 (part), 2004).  
12.22.040 - Violation. 
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 887 § 1 (part), 2004).  
Chapter 12.24 - TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Purpose. 
Pursuant to the authority of Vehicle Code Section 21101, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to and control the closing of any street within the city for the purpose of holding a celebration, block party, street dance, local special event or other purposes when in the opinion of local authorities such closing is necessary for the safety and protection of persons who are to use that portion of the street during the temporary closing. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.020 - Permit for temporary street closure. 
No person shall close any portion of a public street or alley to vehicular or pedestrian traffic for the purpose of conducting a celebration, block party, street dance, local special event or for other purposes, without first obtaining a permit from the director of public services as provided in this chapter. This section shall not apply to those governmental agencies which are otherwise authorized to close streets. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit for temporary street closure, nor in any manner interfere with the progress or orderly conduct of a temporary street closure. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.030 - Application for permit. 
An application for a permit for temporary street closure shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name, residence and business address, and phone number of each person and organization sponsoring a temporary street closure. If an organization, the application shall contain the names, residence and business addresses, and phone numbers of the president or chairman thereof, and all other persons: 
1.  Having an interest or position of management or control in such organization; or 
2.  Who are or will be engaged in organizing, promoting, controlling, managing or soliciting participation in such temporary street closure; 
B.  The date(s) of such temporary street closure; 
C.  The block(s) or intersection(s) at which such closure is requested; 
D.  The estimated number of persons who will participate; 
E.  The purpose of the temporary street closure; 
F.  Whether parking is requested to be restricted or prohibited during such closure; 
G.  Whether any sound amplification equipment is proposed to be used, and if so, information describing such sound amplification equipment; 
H.  Whether or not charity, gratuity or offerings will be solicited or accepted, or sales of food, beverages or other merchandise will occur; 
I.  Whether such temporary street closure will occupy all or only a portion of the street or intersection involved; and 
J.  Such other information as the city manager deems reasonably necessary in order to carry out this chapter. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.040 - Time of filing. 
The application shall be filed not less than twenty days prior to the scheduled date of such temporary closing. The director of public services shall act on an application within seven days of its receipt. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.050 - Standards of issuance. 
The issuance of a permit by the director of public services shall be a determination by the director that the temporary street closing is necessary for the safety and protection of persons who are to use that portion of the street during such temporary closing. A permit may be denied or revoked by the director when, from a consideration of the application or from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the director finds that one or more of the following circumstances exist: 
A.  The applicant has knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any other document required pursuant to this chapter; 
B.  The application has failed to meet the standards in this chapter, has failed to pay in advance any fee required or refuses to agree to such conditions as are imposed in the permit; 
C.  The time, duration, size and location of the temporary street closure will substantially disrupt the orderly and safe movement of other traffic; 
D.  The temporary street closure is of a size or nature that will require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the closed or contiguous areas, that it will adversely affect normal police protection to the remainder of the city; 
E.  The concentration of persons will unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such street closure; 
F.  The temporary street closure may unduly interfere with the movement of emergency police and fire equipment; 
G.  The temporary street closure will unduly interfere with the orderly operation of parks, hospitals, churches, schools or other public and quasi-public institutions in the city; 
H.  The temporary street closure will conflict with or interfere with another temporary street closure for which a permit has been granted. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.060 - Permit subject to conditions. 
The director of public services may issue the permit subject to such conditions as the director deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.070 - Notice of issuance or denial. 
Written notice of the issuance or denial of a permit shall be provided by the director of public services to the applicant within seven days of receipt of an application, or as soon as practicable if the request for the permit is received less than twenty days in advance of the proposed date of the temporary street closure. If a permit is denied, the written notice shall state the reasons for denial. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.080 - Appeal procedure. 
Upon the denial or revocation of a permit by the director of public services, the applicant may appeal as set forth in Chapter 12.01 of this Title 12. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.090 - Waiver of time limitations. 
The director of public services may waive the time limitation for filing an application for a permit and the city manager may waive the time limitation for filing an appeal if it is found that unusual circumstances or good cause exists and no unreasonable burden upon the city or its citizens will be created thereby. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.100 - Officials to be notified. 
Immediately upon granting or revoking a permit, the director of public services or city manager shall send a copy of such permit (including any conditions or restrictions) or revocation to the chief of police, the fire chief and the traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.110 - Barricades and litter collection. 
Permit recipients shall provide and remove such barricades and warning devices as are deemed necessary by and are acceptable to the director of public services. Such persons shall also provide for the collection and removal of all trash, garbage and litter caused by or arising out of such temporary street closure. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.120 - Hold harmless. 
Applicants shall agree to assume the defense of and indemnify and save harmless the city, its council members, boards, commissions, officers, employees and agents, from all suits, actions, damages or claims to which the city may be subjected of any kind or nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as a consequence of such temporary street closure and the activities permitted in connection therewith. The director of public services may require, as a condition to issuance of a permit, that the applicant obtain insurance to serve this end, in such an amount and with such terms as the director determines to be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.130 - Costs. 
A.  The applicant(s) shall assume and reimburse the city for any and all costs and expenses determined by the director of public services to be unusual or extraordinary, and related to the closing of the street for which the permit is sought, including but not limited to: 
1.  The cost of providing, erecting and moving barricades and/or signs; 
2.  The cost of providing and moving garbage or waste receptacles; 
3.  The cost of city personnel who are required by the city to work overtime hours or other than a regular shift, or to perform duties as a result of such temporary street closure. 
B.  The director of public services may require, as a condition to issuance of a permit, that a sum be deposited with the city to meet such costs. The required deposit shall not exceed one thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
12.24.140 - Temporary closure by city. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the director, city manager or city council may, on their own initiative, order the temporary closure of a street for the purposes and reasons stated in Vehicle Code Section 21101(e). 
(Ord. 683 § 1 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
Chapter 12.28 - TEMPORARY STREET CLOSING—LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES 
Sections: 
 
12.28.010 - Purpose. 
Pursuant to the authority of Vehicle Code Section 21101.4, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to and control the temporary closing of a street to through traffic. 
(Ord. 684 § 1 (part), 1993).  
12.28.020 - Public hearing and findings required. 
The city council may temporarily close a street to through traffic when, after a public hearing, all of the following conditions are found to exist: 
A.  The city council finds and determines that there is serious and continual crime activity in the portion of the street recommended for temporary closure. This finding and determination shall be based upon the recommendation of the police department; 
B.  The street is under the city of Rocklin's jurisdiction and has not been designed as a through highway or arterial street; 
C.  Vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the street contributes to the criminal activity; 
D.  The closure will not substantially adversely affect the operation of emergency vehicles, the performance of municipal or public utility services, or the delivery of freight by commercial vehicles in the area of the street proposed to be temporarily closed. 
(Ord. 684 § 1 (part), 1993).  
12.28.030 - Definitions applicable to this chapter. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated: 
"Street" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Street includes highway, as that term is defined in the California vehicle code. 
"Temporary" means no longer than eighteen months, except that period may, pursuant to Section 12.28.020, be extended for an additional period not to exceed eighteen months. 
(Ord. 684 § 1 (part), 1993).  
12.28.040 - Procedures adopted by resolution. 
The city council shall adopt by resolution procedures for implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 684 § 1 (part), 1993).  
Chapter 12.30 - SKATING APPARATUS IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
12.30.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Pedestrian walk/mall" means those common areas of a shopping center which are opened to the general public exclusively for persons who are walking or otherwise afoot or in wheelchairs. "Pedestrian walk/mall" shall not include parking areas within a shopping center, or areas within individual shops or tenant spaces in the center all of which may open to the general public. 
B.  "Shopping center" means the privately owned real property upon which a business-commercial development is situated, which development is open to the general public and primarily devoted to retail sales and services from shops and stores situated therein, although it may also contain some offices and eating places, as well as other accessory uses compatible with a retail-sales shopping area. 
C.  "Skater" means any person using or operating skating apparatus. 
D.  "Skating apparatus" means roller blades, roller skates, scooters, skateboards, toy vehicles, or any other similar device. Skating apparatus does not include bicycles and other wheeled devices regulated by the California Vehicle Code, or wheelchairs. 
(Ord. 755 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.30.020 - Skating apparatus on city property. 
A.  The following regulations shall apply to the use or operation of skating apparatus on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other property owned by the city. 
B.  No person shall use or operate any type of skating apparatus in a manner which endangers the safety of any other person or property. 
C.  No person using or operating skating apparatuses shall pass a pedestrian at a distance closer than three feet. If the street, alley, sidewalk or other public property is not sufficiently wide to allow the skater to pass the pedestrian while maintaining a three-foot distance, the skater shall cease to use or operate the skating apparatus until such time as the skater can maintain a three-foot distance. 
D.  No person shall use or operate skating apparatus within twenty feet of the entrance to any shop, store or commercial building while such shop, store or commercial building is open for business. 
E.  The use of ramps, jumps, or any other portable device used to force the skating apparatus off the pavement is prohibited, except within a facility designated for the use of skating apparatus where the device and the manner of its use is approved by the facility operator. 
F.  No person shall be towed on a skating apparatus by the use of any mechanical device. 
G.  No person shall use or operate skating apparatus more than one-half hour before sunset or one-half hour after sunrise without the use of an arm-mounted light or reflective arm band or reflective clothing. 
(Ord. 755 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.30.030 - Skating apparatus on private rights-of-way and pedestrian walks/malls. 
A.  No person shall use or operate skating apparatus on, along or over any private street, alley, sidewalk or other right-of-way, or pedestrian walk/mall situated within a shopping center. 
B.  This section shall not apply to private streets, alleys, sidewalks or other rights-of-way, or pedestrian walks/malls situated within a shopping center unless and until the owner, manager or other person in charge of the property shall have accomplished each of the following: 
1.  Posted signs, as described below, on the property, including along each exterior entrance of a shopping center and in plain view of pedestrians entering the center along such entrances. Additional signs, as described below, may be posted within the interior of the property. The required signs shall be continually maintained by the owner or the management of the property; 
2.  Each such sign shall state, "SKATEBOARDING AND OTHER SKATING ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED"; and underneath, "City of Rocklin Municipal Code Section 12.03.030." The letters of the prohibition shall be two inches in height and shall be printed in black with a white background. The citation of the city of Rocklin code shall be printed in black in letters one inch in height at the bottom and right side of the sign. The sign shall not exceed two hundred eighty square inches in area; 
3.  Delivered a written notification to the chief of police, not less than twenty-four hours prior to posting the signs, that the owner, manager or other person in charge of the property desires to invoke the provisions of this section as of a certain date which shall be specified in the notice. 
C.  The owner, manager or other person in charge of the property may withdraw the property from the provisions of this section by removing the signs and by notifying the chief of police in writing of such withdrawal. 
(Ord. 755 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.30.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter is an infraction. 
(Ord. 755 § 1 (part), 1997).  
Chapter 12.32 - FILMING ACTIVITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.32.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide rules governing the issuance of permits for filming activities on or using public property of the city. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that still photographers and motion picture, television, commercial and non-theatrical filming companies will be encouraged to use locations within the city for filming activities so long as those activities are consistent with public safety and the protection of property. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Applicant" means the person, organization, corporation, association or other entity applying for a permit to film in the city. 
B.  "Filming activity" means the staging, shooting, filming, videotaping, photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of still photographs, motion pictures, television programs, commercial and nontheatrical film productions. 
C.  "Film permit coordinator" means the person designated by the city manager to issue film permits in the city. 
D.  "Film permit" means written authorization from the film permit coordinator to conduct the filming activity described in the permit. 
E.  "Fee schedule" means those fees and reimbursements for costs as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
F.  "News purposes" means a filming activity conducted for the purpose of reporting on persons, events or scenes which are in the news for newspapers, television news, and other news media. 
G.  "Permittee" means the person, organization, corporation, association or other entity issued a film permit under this chapter. 
H.  "Public property" means any street, right-of-way, public trail or bikeway owned and maintained by the city, or any public park, building or other real property owned or leased by the city. 
I.  "Still photography" means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial still photographs. 
J.  "Student filming activity" means filming activity conducted to fulfill a course requirement by a student enrolled at a public or private school. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.030 - Private property. 
An applicant shall obtain the private property owner's permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city, and shall comply with and be subject to all other provisions of state law and this code, including but not limited to any regulations or restrictions governing the use of the private property as may be applicable to the filming activity. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.040 - Permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful to conduct a filming activity on public property within the city without first obtaining a film permit from the film permit coordinator. 
B.  The film permit must be in the possession of the permittee at all times while on location in the city. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.050 - Permit exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following activities, provided that the activity will not require the closure of a city street or substantially impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon: 
A.  Filming activities conducted for news purposes; 
B.  Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil or criminal court proceeding; 
C.  Noncommercial filming activities conducted solely for private or family use; 
D.  Commercial still photography or staging thereof, when conducted to the exclusion of any other filming activity when the following conditions apply: 
1.  The still photography, or staging thereof, will not require the parking of more than two motor vehicles on any public street within the city; 
E.  Filming activities conducted by or for the city or for any public access or governmental programming channel; 
F.  Student filming activities conducted to fulfill a course requirement by a student enrolled at a public or private school. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.060 - Application. 
A.  Applications for a film permit shall be submitted to the film permit coordinator in accordance with the following minimum time frames: 
1.  A minimum of two business days in advance of the day the film activity is to begin; or 
2.  A minimum of four business days in advance of the day any traffic controls exceeding three minutes are proposed in association with the film activity; or 
3.  A minimum of ten business days in advance of any of the following activities proposed in association with the film activity: street closures, stunts, pyrotechnics, and/or special effects. 
B.  Applicants shall submit applications at the earliest advance date possible in order to facilitate coordination between city departments. 
C.  Upon showing of good cause, the film permit coordinator shall consider applications which are filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time for city staff to process and review the application and to prepare for the filming activity. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.070 - Application form. 
The permit application shall be on a form furnished by the city and signed by the applicant or agent thereof. Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant; 
B.  Name, address and twenty-four hour telephone number(s) of person in charge of filming on location; 
C.  Filming location(s), dates and approximate daily call times of the filming activity; 
D.  Description of scenes to be filmed and/or diagrams of the site of filming, including details of any hazardous filming activity employing firearms, explosives, the use of open flame, other pyrotechnical effects, animals, use of amplified noise, stunts, filming of moving motor vehicles, watercraft and aircraft; 
E.  Description of the types and number of motor vehicles which will be parked on public streets, and description of any equipment to be placed on public property; 
F.  Evidence of adequate insurance certification as required by the city pursuant to Section 12.32.120; 
G.  Such other information, descriptions, diagrams and technical information as the film permit coordinator may require. The film permit coordinator may impose reasonable restrictions as may be necessary to ensure the filming activity does not adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.080 - Permit review. 
The application shall be promptly reviewed by the film permit coordinator. The film permit shall be denied if the film permit coordinator finds that any of the following will occur: 
A.  The filming activity will substantially disrupt the use of a public right-of-way or street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles. 
B.  The location of the filming activity will substantially interfere with a right-of-way or street maintenance work, or a previously authorized excavation permit. 
C.  The filming activity will substantially interfere with other previously authorized activities or contracts, or the safety of the public or employees on public property. 
D.  The filming activity will substantially interfere with ordinary municipal functions, or the scheduled maintenance of city buildings or grounds. 
E.  The filming activity will create a substantial risk of injury to persons or damage to property. 
F.  The filming activity will substantially disrupt the privacy and/or disturb the peace of individuals residing in the vicinity. 
G.  The applicant has failed to complete the application after being requested to do so, or the information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
H.  The particular filming activity would violate federal or state law, or other applicable city ordinances, including licensing or permit requirements. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.090 - Permit conditions. 
The film permit coordinator may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance of a film permit relating to the time, place, manner and duration of filming activities. The conditions shall be attached to the film permit and may include, but are not limited to, any of the following conditions: 
A.  Requirements for the presence of employees of the city or use of city property at the applicant's expense, when required for the particular filming activity; 
B.  Requirements concerning posting of no parking signs, placement of traffic control devices, and employment of traffic and crowd control monitors at the applicant's expense; 
C.  Requirements concerning posting of the outer boundaries of the filming activity, and providing advance notice to affected and/or adjacent property owners, residents and businesses; 
D.  Requirements concerning the cleanup and restoration of the public property used in the filming activity; 
E.  Restrictions concerning the use of city or other public agency employee services, vehicles and other equipment in the filming activity; 
F.  Requirements that the applicant pay all fees, and obtain all permits and licenses required for the filming activity under local, state and federal laws, including an encroachment permit, if necessary; 
G.  Restrictions on the use of firearms, explosions and noise-creating or hazardous devices; 
H.  Restrictions on the use of stunts involving pyrotechnics, open flame, vehicle crashes or other hazardous materials; 
I.  Requirements concerning cover-up of police, fire and other official uniforms worn by actors, when the actors are not on camera; 
J.  Restrictions concerning the use of city and other public agency logos, insignias, badges or decals for filming purposes; 
K.  Restrictions on the locations and/or daily hours the filming activity may be conducted within the city; 
L.  Requirements concerning the city's or other public agency's receipt of proper acknowledgment for any assistance provided in making feature, television or commercial productions; 
M.  Any other condition which the film permit coordinator deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, or which may be necessary to protect public and/or private property. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.100 - Fees. 
A.  The applicant shall pay all applicable city permit fees including a film permit fee in the amount set by resolution of the council. 
B.  In addition to the above the applicant shall pay actual costs incurred by the city for providing employees (including overtime pay if applicable); equipment rental; facilities rental, utilities, and any similar type costs including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The cost of providing, erecting and moving barricades and/or signs; 
2.  The cost of providing and moving garbage or waste receptacles; 
3.  The cost of providing street sweeping and related cleanup activities; 
4.  The cost of providing personnel/equipment for security purposes; 
5.  Reimbursement to the city for facilities and/or utility charges shall be at rates established by the respective agency. 
C.  The city may require that a sum be deposited with the city to meet any or all of the above costs prior to the commencement of filming activities. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.110 - Change of filming activity. 
Upon reasonable written notice by the permittee in advance of the filming activity, the film permit coordinator is authorized to make changes, such as change the date for which the film permit has been issued and similar types of changes, without requiring a new application. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.120 - Insurance required. 
The applicant for a film permit shall procure and maintain for the duration of the filming activity such insurance in the forms, types and amount as may be prescribed by the city. The applicant shall request from the film permit coordinator limits of liability and all required forms prior to submitting the application, and shall submit all required and completed forms concurrent with the application. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.130 - Indemnification. 
The applicant shall agree in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of the film permit, which shall include an agreement to indemnify the city in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.140 - Street closures. 
If the applicant requests that the city authorize a street closure on the application, an encroachment permit or street closure permit may be required by the city in addition to the film permit, as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.150 - Pyrotechnics. 
During the filming of any special effect or stunt requiring the use of pyrotechnics or any material deemed hazardous, including but not limited to fireworks, open flames or explosives, the applicant shall obtain any required permits from the city fire and police departments. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.160 - Permit revocation or suspension. 
A.  Permit Revocation. The film coordinator may revoke the film permit if the permittee, or any agents, employees or contractors of the permittee fail to comply with the terms and conditions of the film permit, or any information contained in the permit application was false in any material detail. 
1.  Notice of the grounds for revocation of the film permit shall be provided in writing to the applicant or person in charge at the location of the filming activity. 
2.  Appeals of the permit revocation shall be conducted in the manner specified in Section 12.32.170. 
B.  Permit Suspension. A Rocklin police department officer or Rocklin fire department firefighter may suspend the film permit when the filming activity poses an immediate hazard to persons or property and the location manager will not, or cannot, prevent the hazard after being instructed to do so by a city official. 
1.  The grounds for the permit suspension shall be provided in writing to the permittee within one business day of the suspension. 
2.  Appeals of the permit suspension shall be conducted in the manner specified in Section 12.32.170. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997).  
12.32.170 - Appeals. 
The permit applicant or permittee may appeal a film permit denial, revocation, suspension, permit condition, insurance/fees requirement or the film permit coordinator's decision not to waive a deadline pursuant to the appeals procedures set forth in Chapter 12.01 of this title. 
(Ord. 761 § 1 (part), 1997). 
(Ord. No. 1096, § 3, 5-22-2018)  
Chapter 12.34 - SKATEBOARD PARK SAFETY 
Sections: 
 
12.34.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the safe use of skateboard parks. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 115800. 
(Ord. 806 § 1 (part), 1999).  
12.34.020 - Safety equipment required. 
Any person using a city skateboard park for skateboarding, in-line skating, rollerblading, rollerskating, or in any other manner, shall wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads. 
(Ord. 806 § 1 (part), 1999).  
12.34.030 - Type and adequacy of the safety equipment. 
The helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads shall be of the type routinely sold in commercial outlets for use as skateboard, in-line skate, rollerblade, or bicycle safety equipment. The adequacy of the safety equipment used shall be in the sole discretion of the director of community services, or his or her designee, whose decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 806 § 1 (part), 1999).  
12.34.040 - Violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 806 § 1 (part), 1999).  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words and phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
B.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
C.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.04.030. 
D.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 224 § 1, 1968).  
13.04.020 - Designation—Public hearing. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 224 § 2, 1968).  
13.04.030 - Designation—Resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 224 § 3, 1968).  
13.04.040 - Overhead facilities unlawful when. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.04.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.04.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 224 § 4, 1968).  
13.04.050 - Emergency installations—Special permission. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council, in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council deems appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
B.  "Council," for the purposes of this section includes the director of public works or some other appropriate city official. 
(Ord. 224 § 5, 1968).  
13.04.060 - Exceptions. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030 hereof, shall unless otherwise provided in such resolutions, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 224 § 6, 1968).  
13.04.070 - Notice to change facilities. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
B.  Notification by the clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 224 § 7, 1968).  
13.04.080 - Utility responsibility. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(Ord. 224 § 8, 1968).  
13.04.090 - Property owner responsibility—Notice to comply. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.04.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
B.  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Rocklin. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty- eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
C.  The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
(Ord. 224 § 9(a, b, c), 1968).  
13.04.100 - Noncompliance—Work and assessment by city. 
A.  If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period provided for in Section 13.04.090, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, that if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
B.  The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this chapter for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
C.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
D.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent annually. 
(Ord. 224 § 9(d, e, f, g), 1968).  
13.04.110 - City responsibility. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.04.030. 
(Ord. 224 § 10, 1968).  
13.04.120 - Extension for uncontrollable circumstances. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 224 § 11, 1968).  
13.04.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 224 § 12, 1968).  
Chapter 13.08 - SOLID WASTE AND CONSTRUCTION REFUSE COLLECTION 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Findings. 
The council finds and declares: 
A.  The accumulation of solid waste and construction refuse within the city is unhealthy, unsanitary and unsightly; 
B.  The voluntary removal of solid waste has not been satisfactory; 
C.  A continuing program of mandatory solid waste and construction refuse collection is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare; 
D.  The benefit derived by each residence and business establishment from routine solid waste collection requires that each such person and establishment pay a minimum monthly service charge for solid waste collection whether or not the service is actually used. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Business establishment" means a commercial or industrial enterprise, including any multiple-family dwelling unit, where refuse is gathered collectively for all residents. 
B.  "Collection" means the accumulation and disposal of solid waste. 
C.  "Construction refuse" means refuse produced by a person engaged in the building or demolition of buildings or structures. 
D.  "Food establishment" means any restaurant, cafe, food store, food stand, food processor or other business establishment which sells, processes, manufactures or prepares food and food products. 
E.  "Garden refuse" means grass, tree or shrub trimmings and other plant material accumulated as a result of noncommercial gardening, and fireplace ashes. 
F.  "Multiple-family dwelling" means a residential building designed for and approved for occupancy by two or more families. 
G.  "Person" includes any person, firm, corporation, association, public agency or other legal entity. 
H.  "Residence" means any single-family or any multiple-family dwelling. 
I.  "Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semi-solid and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes. 
Solid waste includes recyclable materials, and mixed recyclables, which have been discarded by the generator thereof. 
Solid waste does not include: 
1.  Hazardous wastes or low-level radioactive waste regulated under Sections 25800 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code; 
2.  Medical waste which is regulated under Sections 25015 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code; 
3.  Abandoned vehicles and parts thereof; and 
4.  Recyclable materials, and mixed recyclables, which have not been discarded by the generator thereof. 
J.  "Toter" means a wheeled ninety-gallon watertight container capable of being hydraulically lifted and dumped and complying with the city's specifications therefor. 
(Ord. 689 § 1, 1993; Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.030 - Franchise. 
The council may provide for solid waste collection and construction refuse collection by the granting of an exclusive franchise for such purpose, subject to such terms and conditions as the council deems appropriate. The franchisee shall, during the term of franchise, be the sole person permitted to perform solid waste collection and construction refuse collection within the city. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.040 - Compliance with chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, store or maintain solid waste or construction refuse within the city except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.050 - Solid waste—Charge mandatory—Private disposal—Vacant premises—Exceptions. 
A.  There is imposed a mandatory scheme of solid waste collection within the city. The owner of a single-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling or business establishment is liable for the minimum collection service charge applicable to the collection of one container per week of the type specified in Section 13.04.060, whether or not the collection service is used. If a person does not use the service, he must maintain his property in the same manner as though he subscribed to the service, by disposing of all solid waste not less often than if the waste were collected. 
B.  No minimum charge shall be made where the premises are vacant for a period in excess of fourteen days. 
C.  A person whose residence is located such a distance from a public or private street that a substantial hardship results to that person from the requirement that solid waste be presented for collection on a mandatory basis may apply to the council for an exemption from the mandatory provisions hereof. An exemption shall be granted only upon a finding by the council that the hardship to the person outweighs the public need for routine solid waste collection at the residence in question. The granting of an exemption shall not relieve the person receiving the exemption from the disposing of solid waste not less often than if it were collected. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.055 - Construction refuse—Mandatory containerization and collection. 
There is imposed a mandatory scheme of construction refuse collection within the city. Any person engaged in the building or demolition of a building or structure and who produces construction refuse shall provide for the containerization and collection of the refuse in accordance with this chapter either by subscribing to the collection service provided by the city or by personally disposing of the construction refuse himself not less often than if the construction refuse were collected. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.060 - Containers. 
A.  All solid waste reasonably capable of being placed therein shall be kept and presented for disposal in watertight containers, as follows; 
1.  Residences: 
a.  For all service in effect on or prior to March 15, 1989, and continuing uninterrupted thereafter, in metal or plastic containers not greater than thirty-two gallons in capacity, with a filled weight not exceeding sixty pounds, or in toters, 
b.  For all new service beginning on or after March 15, 1989, including service to an existing customer at a new residence address and continuing service to a residence address but with a new customer, in toters; 
2.  Business establishments: In metal or plastic containers or toters of the type specified and as required for residential use in a number not to exceed six, or in metal bins or roll-off containers (debris boxes) of a type approved by the city. The city may require that a bin or roll-off container be used even though the number of cans which would otherwise be used does not exceed six when necessary to prevent an unhealthy or unsightly condition. 
B.  All construction refuse shall be kept and presented for disposal in roll-off containers of a type approved by the city. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.070 - Solid waste—Noncontainerized waste—Prohibited items. 
A.  Solid waste not reasonably capable of being containerized may be kept and presented for collection in any reasonable condition; provided the waste is readily capable of being handled for collection without the potential for spillage or breakage and provided it is properly covered where necessary to prevent the escape of odor or the attraction of flies or vermin. 
B.  Noncontainerized waste shall be limited to that which may be reasonably handled by the equipment and manpower provided for ordinary collection. Items of extraordinary size, shape, weight or bulk shall be disposed of by the person accumulating them; provided, that appliances shall not be considered of extraordinary size, shape, weight or bulk and shall be presented for collection by the franchisee. 
(Ord. 689 § 2, 1993; Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.080 - Solid waste—Collection schedule. 
A.  Except as provided in this section, all solid waste shall be presented for collection not less than once weekly. 
B.  Where a business establishment has a bin or roll-off container which, because of the amount of solid waste generated, does not require weekly service, the bin or roll-off container may be presented for collection on any reasonable periodic basis approved by the city; provided the same does not contain putrescible waste. 
C.  All food establishments shall present solid waste for collection not less than twice weekly. 
D.  Where necessary to prevent an unsanitary or unsightly condition, the city may require that a residence or business establishment present solid waste for collection more often than once per week. 
E.  The schedule for collection of solid waste shall be as determined by the city, and solid waste shall be presented for collection on the day or days specified. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.085 - Construction refuse—Collection schedule—Prohibited waste. 
A.  Construction refuse shall be presented for collection on a periodic basis, as approved by the city, as necessary to prevent the unsightly accumulation of uncontainerized construction refuse on the site. 
B.  Roll-off containers provided for construction refuse shall not contain putrescible waste. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.090 - Location of waste. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, all containers except bins and roll-off containers shall be placed within five feet of the curb or, if there is no curb, then within five feet of the edge of pavement or, if there is no pavement, then within five feet of the edge of the public or private right-of-way. No container shall be placed for collection more than twenty-four hours prior to the time of collection or allowed to remain at the place of collection for more than twenty-four hours after collection. 
B.  A person who demonstrates to the city that he has a physical impairment or disability which makes it difficult or impossible to place containers for collection in the location required by subsection A of this section, and that no one occupying the premises is capable of so doing, may place such containers at a location not more than fifty feet from the curb, edge of pavement or right-of-way. 
C.  All bins and roll-off containers shall be placed in a convenient location, accessible to the loading apparatus used to empty them. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.100 - Fees. 
A.  The fees charged for collection, including fees charged for rental of toters and rental and delivery of bins and roll-off containers, shall be set from time to time by resolution of the council. 
B.  Solid waste minimum mandatory rates shall be established for residences and business establishments. Such minimum rates may vary according to the type of residence or business. 
C.  The owner of the premises for which solid waste collection service is provided is liable for the collection fee. If an owner requires a tenant to pay the fee, and the tenant fails to do so, such failure shall not discharge the obligation of the owner. 
D.  The person engaged in the building or demolition activity that produces construction refuse shall be liable for the collection fee. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989).  
13.08.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violations of the provisions of this chapter constitute: 
A.  In the case of any person allowing the accumulation or maintenance of solid waste in violation of this chapter and/or in any manner which creates a condition inimical to the public health, safety and welfare, a public nuisance; and 
B.  In all instances, including those specified in subsection A of this section, a misdemeanor, as the same is now or may hereafter be defined by the laws of the state. 
C.  Delinquent fees or charges for solid waste collection or construction refuse collection unpaid for a period of sixty or more days after the date upon which they are due may be collected in the manner authorized by Sections 25831 and 38790.1 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 599 § 1 (part), 1989). 
TITLE 13 FOOTNOTES 
1.  Prior ordinance history: Ords. 393 and 479.  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1110, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 2019, repealed Ch. 15.04 in its entirety, and § 2, of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.080, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 966, § 2, adopted Oct. 12, 2010; and Ord. No. 1090, § 15, adopted March 13, 2018. 
 
15.04.010 - Building Code—Adopted. 
A.  The 2016 Edition of the California Building Code, known as California Code of Regulations Title-24, Part 2, including Appendix H, Signs; Appendix I, Patio Covers; Appendix J, Grading, and the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
B.  The 2016 Edition of the California Residential Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 2.5, including Appendix H, Patio Covers, and the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
C.  The 2016 Edition of the California Energy Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 6, including the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
D.  The 2016 Edition of the California Historical Building Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 8, including the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
E.  The 2016 Edition of the California Existing Building Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 10, including the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
F.  The 2016 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 11, including the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
G.  The 2016 Edition of the California Reference Standards Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 12, including the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
H.  The 2016 Edition of the California Administrative Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 1, is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 2-12-2019)  
15.04.020 - Plumbing Code—Adopted. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Plumbing Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 5, including Appendix A, Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System, and the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said Code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 2-12-2019)  
15.04.030 - Mechanical Code—Adopted. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Mechanical Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 4, including the administrative regulations, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 2-12-2019)  
15.04.040 - Electrical Code—Adopted. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Electrical Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 3, including Annex H, Administration and Enforcement, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 2-12-2019)  
15.04.050 - Fire Code—Adopted. 
The 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title-24, Part 9, including Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings; Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution; and Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, are hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the fire chief for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 2-12-2019)  
15.04.060 - Fire Code—Amended. 
The Fire Code adopted by section 15.04.050 is amended as follows: 
A. Chapter 3, Section 307 of the Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
307 Open Burning. No person shall conduct open burning within the City of Rocklin. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 2-12-2019)  
15.04.070 - Property Maintenance Code—Adopted. 
The 2015 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code published by the International Code Council, applicable to non-residential occupancies only, is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of said code on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 2-12-2019)  
15.04.080 - Penalty and enforcement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of any code adopted herein, any person who violates any provision of any code, or modification thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor, as the same is now, or may hereafter be defined, by the laws of the state of California. For purposes of Chapters 1.08 and 1.14 of this code, the official or officials designated as the enforcing authority under each code adopted hereby, and/or the city manager, shall be the enforcing authority. 
The fire chief is hereby designated the enforcing authority for all standards promulgated by the office of the state fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 2-12-2019)  
Chapter 15.16 - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 967, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 15.16, §§ 15.16.010—15.16.160, and enacted a new Ch. 15.16 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.16 pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
 
15.16.010 - Statutory authority. 
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the accumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damaged uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to flood losses. 
C.  Regulations of "area of special flood hazard" is necessary because of the compelling need to insure safety and availability of flood insurance to the residents of the city, in that the government of the United States, through the Federal Emergency Management Agency, required these regulations to be adopted before flood insurance can be obtained by residents. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone or flood related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"A zone" - see "Special flood hazard area". 
"Accessory structure" means a structure that is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars in value. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the city engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of special flood hazard" - See "Special flood hazard area". 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one hundred-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Base flood elevation" (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade - i.e., below ground level - on all sides. 
"Building" - see "Structure". 
"City engineer" means a registered civil engineer (California) employed by the city to perform statutory functions of city engineer. 
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this chapter. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, flooding, or floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source - see "Flood, flooding, or floodwater". 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-08, TB 2-08, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot; also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway". 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory Floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Section 15.16.250 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Hardship" as related to Section 15.16.250 of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood openings standard in Section 15.16.170.C.3; 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.16.170.A; 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.16.170.B; and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.16.180. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Market value" is defined in the city substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 15.16.140.B.1. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
"New construction", for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One-hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood" - see "Base flood." 
"Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Section 15.16.250 of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sheet flow area" - see "Area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the June 8, 1998 "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for city of Rocklin", with accompanying June 8, 1998 Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM's) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM's) and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended by the city engineer. The study, FIRM's and FBFM's are on file at the engineering division of the community development in the city. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.110 - Warnings and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.120 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.130 - Designation of the city engineer. 
The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.140 - Duties and responsibilities of the city engineer. 
The duties and responsibilities of the city engineer shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all flood zone development permits to determine: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city; and 
5.  All letters of map revision (LOMR's) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
B.  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
1.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "market value." 
2.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
C.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.16.070, the city engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 15.16.170. 
NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995. 
D.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
1.  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
2.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
a.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the city engineer shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMR's for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
E.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Section 15.16.170.C.1 and Section 15.16.200 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.16.170.C.2 (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 15.16.170.C.3 (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.16.190.A.3 (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.16.240.B (floodway encroachments); and 
6.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
F.  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.16.160. 
G.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.16.080. 
H.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
I.  Planning. Assure community's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.150 - Flood zone development permit. 
A flood zone development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.16.070. Application for a flood zone development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
A.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
1.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
3.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
4.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
5.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.16.070 or Section 15.16.140.C; 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.16.170.C.2 of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
B.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.16.170.C.2. 
C.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.16.170.C.3 of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-08 and 7-93. 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.16.140.E of this chapter. 
F.  A development permit processing fee based on the actual cost of the flood zone development permit review. The amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. The city engineer shall not issue the permit until the fee is paid. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.160 - Appeals. 
The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.170 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.  Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  Residential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.  In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated to at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
c.  In an A zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 15.16.140.C. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the city engineer. 
2.  Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.16.170.C.1 or: 
a.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under Section 15.16.170.C.1, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Section 15.16.170.C.2.a are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the city engineer. 
3.  Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  For non-engineered openings: 
1.  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
4.  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured homes. 
a.  See Section 15.16.200. 
5.  Garages and low cost accessory structures. 
a.  Attached garages. 
1.  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See Section 15.16.170.C.3. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See Section 15.16.170.B. 
2.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
b.  Detached garages and accessory structures. 
1.  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.16.050, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
a)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
b)  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
c)  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
d)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
e)  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.16.240; and 
f)  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Section 15.16.170.C.3. 
2.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 15.16.170. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.180 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.190 - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
A.  All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
1.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE). 
2.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans. 
3.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the city engineer: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation. 
b.  Pad elevation. 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
B.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.200 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
1.  Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15.16.200.A will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two feet above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.210 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.16.150 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.16.200.A.1. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.220 - Easements. 
A.  No final map or parcel map shall be approved and no building permit shall be issued for any property abutting any flood zone until the owner thereof conveys to the city for recordation on the official records of Placer County, an easement on, over and across that portion of the property as shown to be within the flood zone. The easement shall expressly waive reimbursement or compensation for any improvements within such flood zone destroyed or damaged by the city, its agent or employees in the course of carrying out any of such purposes. Such purposes shall be: 
1.  Inspection; 
2.  Maintenance for flood prevention; and 
3.  Flood abatement. 
B.  Legal Description. The legal description contained in the easement shall be reviewed by the city engineer to determine whether or not the conveyance meets the requirements of this chapter. Any controversy between the city engineer and the property owner concerning the proper area to be covered by the easement may be resolved by an appeal by either the property owner or the city engineer, to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.230 - Protection of waterways. 
A.  Every person, firm, corporation or public agency through whose property an area of special flood hazard exists, shall keep the same free from obstructions which will prevent, change or retard the flow of the water unless a permit to alter such area of special flood hazard has been obtained pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
B.  No person, except authorized city personnel performing those functions specified in this chapter, shall do any of the following within the flood zone without first obtaining a flood zone development permit from the city: 
1.  Make any excavation; 
2.  Construct or alter any embankment; 
3.  Construct, place, plant or maintain any structure, obstruction, trees, plants, debris or fill which will retard or change the flow of surface waters or floodwaters; or 
4.  Construct or place any outlet for discharging drainage waters. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.240 - Floodways. 
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
B.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  If Sections 15.16.200.A and B are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.16.170. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.250 - Nature of variances. 
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood chapter are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.260 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.16.130 through 15.16.240 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.16.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local chapter. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon a finding by the council of the following: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance or conflict with existing local laws or chapters; and 
3.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; or inconvenience, aesthetic considerations or personal preferences; or problems which can be resolved through alternative means, even though the alternative is more expensive or requires the parcel to be put to a use different than originally intended, do not constitute "exceptional hardship." 
F.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage, and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the city engineer in the Office of the Placer County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
F.  The city clerk will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.270 - Appeal board. 
A.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals. 
B.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the city engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  In passing upon requests for variances, the city shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters. 
E.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 15.16.270.A through 15.16.270.D are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
F.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.16.260.A and the purposes of this chapter, the city may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
G.  The city clerk shall maintain the records of all appeal actions including the justification for their approval. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
15.16.280 - Violations deemed misdemeanor. 
A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor as the same is now or may hereafter be denied by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 967, § 2, 1-25-2011)  
Chapter 15.18 - STREET AND FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
15.18.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Block" means property facing or abutting one side of any public street between the next intersecting streets or between the terminus of a dedicated right-of-way of a street and an intersecting street. 
B.  "Development" means: 
1.  The construction of any structure upon any parcel of vacant land abutting a public street, which structure is intended or designed for human use or occupancy; or 
2.  The moving of any structure onto any parcel of vacant land abutting a public street, which structure is intended or designed for human use or occupancy; or 
3.  The modification or reconstruction of any existing structure on any parcel of land abutting a public street, which modifications or reconstruction will increase traffic or impose a greater need for street improvements. For the purposes of this subdivision, the following modifications or reconstruction shall be deemed to be development which will not increase traffic or impose a greater need for street improvements and for which the requirements of this chapter shall not apply: 
a.  In the case of a multifamily residential, commercial or industrial structure, where the cost of such modification or reconstruction is ten thousand dollars or less, provided there is no change in use; or 
b.  In the case of a single-family residential structure, where the cost of such modification or reconstruction is five thousand dollars or less. 
At the commencement of each fiscal year, the amounts in paragraphs a and b shall be adjusted by the city manager to reflect the annual change in the Consumer Price Index, and such adjusted figures shall be filed with the city manager and building department and shall be available to all applicants for building permits. 
If the structure has been modified or reconstructed within the preceding three calendar years, the cost of modification or reconstruction shall be added to the cost of the modification or reconstruction in any permit application to determine the cost amounts in paragraphs a and b. 
C.  "Driveway" means a paved portion of a public street providing an obstructed passage from the roadway to an off-street area used for driving, servicing, parking or otherwise accommodating motor vehicles. 
D.  "Frontage improvements" means and includes sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways and pavement to the centerline of the street or streets which are applicable to the parcel of land for which a permit is applied, and shall include as to such parcel its pro rata share of any extension of such improvements in the block as may be reasonably necessary to connect such improvements with existing frontage improvements at the next intersecting street. 
(Ord. 496 § 4, 1983; Ord. 413 § 2, 1980).  
15.18.020 - Frontage improvements required—Exceptions. 
No permit or approval for the development of any parcel of land abutting a public street shall be issued or granted unless: 
A.  Frontage improvements have been installed and approved in accordance with improvement standards adopted by resolution of the council; or 
B.  The owner of the parcel enters into a written agreement with the city for installation of such improvements and furnishes improvement security, in an amount and in a form approved by the city engineer, to guarantee performance of the agreement; or 
C.  A deferral has been granted pursuant to Section 15.18.030; or 
D.  An agreement has been executed pursuant to Sections 15.18.040 or 15.18.060 through 15.18.110; or 
E.  A variance has been granted pursuant to Section 15.18.050; or 
F.  An agreement with the city for installation of frontage improvements under prior Ordinance No. 345 or previous similar ordinances has been executed or a deferral or variance under such prior ordinances has been granted. 
(Ord. 413 § 3, 1980).  
15.18.030 - Deferral—Payment in lieu of installation. 
The council may, if it finds that practical difficulties or extenuating circumstances exist, or that the requirements of Section 1 of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which repeals Ordinance No. 345, would impose an unreasonable burden on the property owner or permittee, delay the installation of such frontage improvements until such time as more than fifty percent of the total frontage of the block within which the parcel is located has been improved, or until such time as the owners of more than sixty percent of the frontage of the block within which the parcel is located have either agreed in writing to install the frontage improvements or have filed a petition with the clerk requesting such improvements. 
As an alternative, the council may require the permittee to pay, in lieu of installation of frontage improvements, a fee equivalent to the estimated costs of such improvements at the projected time of their installation, to be deposited in a special account for the construction of such improvements, provided that such improvements must be constructed within a reasonable time thereafter. If the actual costs of the installation of the improvements is less than the amount of the fees paid, the balance shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(Ord. 413 § 4, 1980).  
15.18.040 - Agreement to join in future financing. 
A.  Notwithstanding Section 15.18.020, where a building permit is requested to construct a residential structure on a validly created parcel of sufficient size for the zone in which the property is located, as prescribed by Title 17, and the parcel is located within the boundaries of that area shown in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city manager or his duly authorized representative may issue the building permit when the owner of the property executes an agreement with the city that the owner, and his heirs, successors and assigns, waive any protest to the formation of an assessment district, or other reasonable financing arrangement, whereby the improvements specified by this chapter will be installed at a future date. 
B.  The city manager is authorized to execute such agreements on behalf of the city, and the clerk is authorized to record the same. 
C.  The purpose of this section is: 
1.  To alleviate the problem of requiring the installation of improvements on a parcel-by-parcel basis in older areas of the city where it is impractical to do so; and 
2.  To permit areas of sufficient size to be improved under an assessment district or other equitable financing arrangement in order to: 
a.  Lower costs to individual parcels, and/or 
b.  Provide for uniform engineering throughout the older areas of the city. 
(Ord. 538 §§ 1, 2, 1985; Ord. 413 § 5, 1980).  
15.18.050 - Variance. 
The property owner or applicant for a permit to develop any parcel of land may apply to the council for a variance from the provisions of this chapter. The council may grant a variance only if it finds that practical difficulties or extenuating circumstances exist, that strict application of the chapter would impose an unreasonable burden on the property owner or permittee, and that granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations upon other properties in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 413 § 6, 1980).  
15.18.060 - Grant program—Special circumstances area, findings. 
The council finds and determines that special circumstances exist with regard to developed properties located within the boundaries of the area shown in Exhibit B, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, which generally can be described as properties abutting Rocklin Road between Interstate 80 and First Street and properties abutting Pacific Street between the Roseville City boundary and Sierra Meadows Road. These special circumstances are: 
A.  These streets are main arterials of the city and crucial to the circulation of traffic within the entire city; 
B.  The width of these streets is greater than the width of other streets because they are main arterials; 
C.  The depth of the pavement required on these streets is greater than on other streets because they are main arterials; 
D.  The expense of installing frontage improvements along these streets is necessarily greater than along other streets because they are main arterials; and 
E.  This added expense of installing frontage improvements has impeded commercial growth and needed improvements to existing structures on these streets. 
(Ord. 413 § 7(A), 1980).  
15.18.070 - Grant program—Necessity findings. 
The council hereby finds and determines that it is necessary to establish a grant program to encourage and assist owners of existing buildings in making the improvements required by Section 15.18.020 for the following reasons: 
A.  To encourage and make possible the improvement of existing buildings in an area where the street improvements required by Section 15.18.020 are unusually expensive for the reasons stated in Section 15.18.060; 
B.  To encourage the expansion, redevelopment and modernization of existing buildings located in the area shown in Exhibit B, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, in order to maintain and improve the economic vitality of such area and the city; 
C.  To prevent the commencement of blight, disuse and inefficient use of existing buildings and the resulting cost to the city. 
(Ord. 413 § 7(B), 1980).  
15.18.080 - Grant program—Amount—Application deadline. 
Any person who proposes development to modify, alter or expand a structure which exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which is within the area described in Exhibit B, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, may apply to the city for a grant in order to pay a portion, but not more than fifty percent, of the cost of installing the improvements required by Section 15.18.020. The proposed development must conform to the city's general plan, Title 17 and all other applicable ordinances. Each application must be submitted by January 1st to be considered for a grant during the following fiscal year. 
(Ord. 413 § 7(C), 1980).  
15.18.090 - Grant program—Priority list. 
Each year after receipt of applications made pursuant to Section 15.18.080, the city engineer shall establish a priority list by ranking each proposed project according to the following criteria: 
A.  The amount of traffic on the street to be improved; 
B.  The amount of traffic to be generated by the proposed project; 
C.  The physical condition of the street to be improved; 
D.  Increase in safety to pedestrians and vehicular traffic; 
E.  The likelihood that contiguous portions of the same street will be improved with resulting savings, if larger segments of the street are improved at the same time. 
(Ord. 413 § 7(D), 1980).  
15.18.100 - Grant program—Funding. 
A.  The council shall establish a street improvement grant fund in the city's budget and each year shall allocate moneys, when available, to such fund. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to compel the council to allocate moneys to the street improvement grant fund or approve a grant of moneys to applicants during a particular fiscal year. 
(Ord. 413 § 7(E, M), 1980).  
15.18.110 - Grant program—Awards—Funds carryover. 
A.  As soon as possible after adoption of the budget, the city engineer shall present to the council a proposed priority list together with a proposed grant amount to be received by each applicant. 
B.  The council shall approve or revise and approve a priority list and award of grant moneys. 
C.  Upon approval of the grants, each applicant who has been awarded a grant may enter into an agreement pursuant to which, in return for completing the improvements required pursuant to Section 15.18.020, the city will credit to the applicant the amount awarded in the grant. Such agreement shall require that the improvements be completed within one year of approval of the grant. 
D.  After inspection and certification by the city engineer that the improvements required by Section 15.18.020 have been completed in accord with the city's standards, the city shall credit to the applicant the amount of the grant. 
E.  In lieu of paying money to the applicant for the amount of the grant, the city may direct improvements to be made, the value of which is equivalent to the amount of the grant. 
F.  If at the end of the fiscal year moneys remain in the street improvement grant fund, either because they have not been approved for a grant or because the applicant has not installed the improvements and qualified for credit, the moneys shall be available for grants for the next fiscal year. 
G.  The grant program established pursuant to Sections 15.18.060 through this section shall terminate when the council determines, after a report from the city engineer, that financial assistance to properties to install street improvements is no longer necessary. 
(Ord. 413 § 7(F—L), 1980).  
15.18.120 - Double frontage. 
Where a parcel abuts more than one public street, frontage improvements shall be required for the frontage of the parcel on each public street, subject to the provisions of Section 15.18.020. 
(Ord. 413 § 8, 1980).  
15.18.130 - Excepted subdivisions—Restoration or replacement exception. 
A.  This chapter shall be inapplicable to parcels in those subdivisions commonly known as Rustic Hills, Bridle Trails Estate, Secret Ravine Ranch Estates and Sunset Village Oaks and shall also be inapplicable in any subdivision hereafter created when it is determined, pursuant to Title 16, that the improvements required by this chapter are not necessary or desirable within such subdivision. 
B.  This chapter shall be inapplicable when the permit is for the restoration or replacement of a structure which has been partially or totally destroyed by an act of God, including, but not limited to, floods, earthquakes and lightning, or which has been found by the city to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 413 § 9, 1980).  
Chapter 15.24 - SCHOOL IMPACT MITIGATION 
Sections: 
 
15.24.010 - Authority—Necessity. 
A.  The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted under authority of Government Code Section 65974 for the purpose of providing interim school facilities to alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development. 
B.  The council declares: 
1.  Public education is provided by school districts serving the area within the city boundaries ("the districts"). 
2.  From time to time new residential development may cause overcrowding in one or more schools in the districts. 
3.  It is necessary that a method be available to provide the districts with interim classroom facilities when conditions of overcrowding exist, in order than education not be adversely affected. 
(Ord. 507 § 1, 1983; Ord. 382 § 1, 1978).  
15.24.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions set forth in Section 65973 of the Government Code, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Board" means the board of trustees of a district. 
B.  "Declaration of impact" means a statement adopted by a board, and forwarded to the council, declaring the existence of an impacted school or schools, in accordance with the requirements of Section 65971 of the Government Code. 
C.  "District" means any school district whose boundaries encompass any part of or all of the city. 
(Ord. 382 § 2, 1978).  
15.24.030 - Impact declaration by board. 
A board may, from time to time, adopt a declaration of impact for any school or schools whose attendance areas are located wholly or partially within the boundaries of the city and file the same with the city manager or his designee for consideration by the city council. The contents of the declaration of impact shall be as required by Government Code Section 65971. 
(Ord. 487 § 1, 1982: Ord. 382 § 3, 1978).  
15.24.040 - Council approval of declaration—Requirements invoked. 
Upon receipt of a declaration of impact from a board, the city council shall consider the declaration and adopt a resolution stating its concurrence or nonconcurrence in the findings contained in the declaration. If the council concurs in the findings, the resolution shall prohibit the approval by the council or any officer, employee or commission of the city of new residential development within the attendance areas of the impacted school or schools pending compliance with Section 15.24.050 or Section 15.24.055. Except as provided in Section 15.24.045, a resolution concurring in a finding of impaction shall be valid only until December 1st following the date of adoption. 
(Ord. 499 § 1. 1983: Ord. 487 § 2(A), 1982: Ord. 382 § 4 (part), 1978).  
15.24.045 - Extension of declaration—Conditions. 
In November of each year, the council shall consider the reports submitted by a district pursuant to Section 1 5.24.060B and Government Code Sections 65976 and 65978. If, based on a review of the reports, the council determines that conditions of impaction still exist in schools for which a resolution concurring in a declaration of impact has been adopted and is in effect, the council shall extend the validity of the resolution for the period of time deemed appropriate, but in no event beyond one year from the date the resolution would otherwise have expired. 
(Ord. 487 § 2(B) 1982: Ord. 382 § 4 (part), 1978).  
15.24.050 - Land and fee requirements. 
A.  The council shall require, as a condition of approval of new development within the attendance area of an impacted school, either the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, in accordance with the provisions of Section 65974 of the Government Code. 
B.  The decision concerning whether to accept land, fees, or an appropriate combination shall be determined after consultation with the concerned board regarding the needs of the district as they relate to the impacted school or schools. 
C.  The amount of any fee shall be prescribed by resolution of the council and shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. 382 § 5, 1978).  
15.24.055 - Mitigation by separate agreement. 
As an alternative to dedicating land and/or paying fees under Section 15.24.050, the concerned board may arrange for mitigation of school impaction by a separate agreement with an applicant for a new residential development. Submission of evidence of such an agreement at the time of issuance of a building permit shall be deemed compliance with the requirements of Section 15.24.040. 
(Ord. 499 § 2, 1983).  
15.24.060 - Use of fees and land—Accounting. 
A.  Each district shall use the fees and/or land solely to alleviate the conditions of overcrowding within the affected attendance area. 
B.  Each district shall provide to the council the schedule and report required by Sections 65976 and 65978 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 382 § 6, 1978).  
15.24.070 - Development disapproval unaffected. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be read to limit the right of the council to disapprove new residential development for any lawful reason, including, but not limited to, the impact that such development may have on a school or schools within a district which cannot be alleviated by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 382 § 7, 1978).  
Chapter 15.28 - GRADING AND EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
Sections:  
Article I. - Purpose, Scope and Definitions 
 
15.28.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the grading and erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of the city of Rocklin, and shall be referred to herein as the "grading ordinance." 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.020 - Purpose and scope. 
A.  This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating grading on all property within the city of Rocklin to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare; to avoid pollution of watercourses with nutrients, sediments, or other earthen materials generated or caused by surface runoff on or across the permit area; to comply with the city's national pollution discharge elimination system permit issued by the California regional water quality control board; and to ensure that the intended use of a graded site is consistent with the city of Rocklin general plan, provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted by the city relating to grading activities, city of Rocklin improvement standards, any applicable specific plans or other land use entitlements, and any other provisions of this code or uncodified ordinances. 
B.  This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control grading and erosion control activities, including fills and embankments; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction and erosion control plans for all graded sites. 
C.  If any part of this chapter is found invalid, the remainder of this chapter shall remain in effect. 
D.  If there is any inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 33, Appendix of the California Building Code as adopted by the city, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail and control. Nothing in this chapter is intended to repeal or replace requirements of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city. 
E.  All grading shall be performed in conformance with the city of Rocklin improvement standards. If there is any inconsistency or conflict between the requirements of this chapter and the improvement standards, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail and control. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, wherever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Approving authority" means the city engineer, and in matters involving an appeal, the city manager. 
B.  "Bedrock" means the solid undisturbed rock in place either exposed at the ground surface or beneath surficial deposits of loose rock or soil. 
C.  "Bench" means a relatively level step excavated into sloping natural ground on which engineered fill or embankment fill is to be placed. 
D.  "Best management practices" (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
E.  "Building official" means the Chief Building Official of the City of Rocklin or his or her designee. 
F.  "City engineer" means the Community Development Department Engineering Services Manager for the City of Rocklin, or his or her designee. 
G.  "Civil engineer" means a professional engineer registered as a civil engineer by the state of California. 
H.  "Compaction" means the increase of density of a soil or rock fill by mechanical means. 
I.  "Cut" means the removal of naturally occurring earth materials by mechanical means, and includes the conditions resulting therefrom. 
J.  "Depth of fill" means the vertical dimension from the exposed fill surface to the original ground surface. 
K.  "Depth of excavation" means the vertical dimension from the exposed cut surface to the original ground surface. 
L.  "Embankment," see "Fill." 
M.  "Encroachment permit" means a permit issued under Chapter 12.04. 
N.  "Engineering geologist" means a registered geologist certified as an engineering geologist by the state of California. 
O.  "Engineering geology" means the application of geologic knowledge in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
P.  "Erosion" means the wearing away and transportation of earth material as a result of the movement of wind, water, or ice. 
Q.  "Excavation," see "Cut." 
R.  "Existing grade" means the elevation of the ground surface at a given point prior to excavating or filling. 
S.  "Expansive soil" means any soil which exhibits significant expansive properties as determined by a geotechnical engineer or the city engineer. 
T.  "Fill" means the deposit of soil, rock or other materials placed by man and includes the conditions resulting therefrom; "fill" includes stockpiling. 
U.  "Finish grade" means the final grade of the site after excavating or filling which conforms to the approved final grading plan. The finish grade is also the grade at the top of a paved surface. 
V.  "Geologic hazard" means any condition in naturally occurring earth materials which may endanger life, health or property. Geologic hazards include, but are not limited to: faults; existing or potential landslides, mud slides, or rock falls; weak, expansive or creeping soil; subsidence; earthquake-induced shaking, ground movement, ground failure or liquefaction; and seiche or tsunami inundation. 
W.  "Geotechnical engineer" means a civil engineer registered by the state of California who is qualified in the field of soil mechanics and soil engineering. 
X.  "Geotechnical engineering" means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and may include the inspection, testing and construction thereof. 
Y.  "Grading" means any cutting, deep ripping or filling, or combination thereof. 
Z.  "Grading permit" means a permit issued by the city engineer to authorize grading. 
AA.  "Grading plan" means a plan prepared in accordance with this chapter showing grading and related work. 
BB.  "Grading work" means grading and related work, such as, but not limited to, drainage improvements and erosion and sediment control. 
CC.  "Hillside lot" means lot on which the slope of ground, measured from the front setback line to the rear of the lot, or across the lot from side property line to side property line, or diagonally across the lot, at the approximate building site, is twenty percent or greater. 
DD.  "Improvement Standards" means the City of Rocklin Construction Specifications, Improvement Standards and Standard Drawings, latest version as adopted by the city council. 
EE.  "Keyway" means a special backfilled excavation which is constructed beneath the toe area of a planned fill slope on sloping ground to improve the stability of the slope. 
FF.  "Landscape architect" means a landscape architect registered by the state of California. 
GG.  "Lot," see "Parcel." 
HH.  "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under Sections 307, 402, 318, and 405 of the Clean Water Act. 
II.  "Owner" means the person shown as the legal owner of the property on the latest equalized assessment roll in the Placer County assessor's office or as otherwise known to the city. 
JJ.  "Parcel" means land described as a lot or parcel in a recorded deed or shown as a lot or parcel on a subdivision map or parcel map on file in the Placer County recorder's office. 
KK.  "Permittee" means any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter. 
LL.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, corporation or public agency, whether principal, agent, employee, or otherwise. 
MM.  "Preliminary grading plan" means a plan that shows the proposed grading work in relation to the existing site prepared and submitted with the application for a grading permit. 
NN.  "Public works director" means the public works director for the city of Rocklin, acting through his or her designee. 
OO.  "Rainy season" means the period of the year between October 1 and April 14 of the following year, inclusive. 
PP.  "Sediment" means any material transported or deposited by water, including soil and debris or other foreign matter. 
QQ.  "Sediment control measures" means dikes, sediment detention traps, sediment detention basins, filters, fences, barriers, swales, berms, drains, check dams, and other measures which control the deposit of soil or earth material. 
RR.  "Site" means any lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land, whether held separately or joined together in common ownership or occupancy, where grading is to be performed or has been performed. 
SS.  "Slope" means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which may be expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
TT.  "Soil" means all earth material of any origin that overlies bedrock and may include the decomposed zone of bedrock which can be excavated readily by mechanical equipment. 
UU.  "Stockpiling" means the storage of material for future construction either on- or off-site which exceeds a depth of three feet above natural grade, which is not associated with a retail landscape or material storage yard. 
VV.  "Terrace" means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage, maintenance, or other purposes. 
WW.  "Waters of the state" means any surface water or groundwater, including saline water, within the boundaries of the state of California. 
XX.  "Work," see "Grading work." 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
Article II. - Requirement, Conditions, and Scope of Grading Approvals 
 
15.28.040 - Administration. 
The community development department is designated as the department responsible for the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.050 - Grading approval—Required. 
Except for the specific exemptions listed hereinafter, no person shall do or permit to be done any grading on any site in the city without first obtaining approval of such grading from the city in accordance with the provisions of the grading ordinance. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.060 - Grading permit—Exemptions. 
The following grading may be done without obtaining grading approval unless grading approval is required in mitigation monitoring agreements or other conditions of project approval. Exemption from the grading approval requirement shall not be deemed to be an exemption from or permission to violate any other provision of this chapter or the Rocklin Municipal Code. All grading work, including work exempted from the grading approval requirement, shall be carried out in a manner consistent with the requirements of the grading ordinance. Work exempted from a city-issued grading approval shall be required to take all steps and implement best management practices to assure that the potential for erosion and control of sediment from any project site is minimized: 
A.  Excavations for cemetery graves; 
B.  Excavations for wells; 
C.  Minor excavations when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The quantity of soil removed or disturbed is fifty cubic yards or less. 
2.  The depth of the excavation is less than two feet on ground sloping less than twenty percent. 
3.  The slope of the cut face is two feet horizontal to one foot vertical or less. 
D.  Minor fill when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The quantity of soil involved is fifty cubic yards or less placed on ground sloping less than twenty percent. 
2.  The height is one foot or less. 
3.  The slope of the fill embankment face is two feet horizontal to one foot vertical or less. 
4.  The drainage patterns existing prior to the fill are not altered. 
E.  Minor agricultural land leveling when the change in elevation is two feet or less; 
F.  Grading in refuse disposal areas and sanitary landfills; 
G.  Trenches for public utilities; 
H.  Exploratory excavations under the direction of soils engineers or engineering geologists; 
I.  Grading work done for the purpose of creating ponds or catching stormwater where the city engineer determines the following conditions exist: 
1.  The proposed grading work will not create a hazard to private property and improvements. 
2.  The proposed grading work will not substantially affect existing drainage patterns or create erosion hazards. 
J.  Other grading activities which the city engineer determines comply with the exemption criteria set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.070 - Grading approval—Scope—Liability. 
A.  Grading approval may be issued by the building official in connection with the issuance of a building permit, or the city engineer after approval of improvement plans, or where grading is commenced prior to such issuance or approval, through the issuance of a separate grading permit. 
B.  The issuance of grading approval shall not be construed as an approval of any action or condition constituting a violation of the provisions of the grading ordinance or of any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. 
C.  Neither issuance of grading approval under the provisions of the grading ordinance nor compliance with the provisions hereof or with any conditions imposed in a permit issued hereunder shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or property or impose any liability upon the city for damage to any person or property. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.080 - Conditions of grading approval. 
A.  No grading shall be approved unless the project conforms with the city's general plan, any adopted specific or general development plans, and applicable city ordinances, including the zoning ordinance and the subdivision ordinance. 
B.  Where the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires the preparation and approval of environmental documents concerning a project which will result in grading for which a grading permit is required under this chapter, no grading shall be approved until all CEQA mitigation and other requirements have been incorporated into the project, including, but not limited to, mitigation measures relating to protection of threatened and endangered species under applicable federal and state endangered species laws. 
C.  Where a proposed development project requires the filing of a tentative map or the intended use requires approval of a discretionary permit or variance, grading may also require approval from the city planning and building department. 
D.  Work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the grading ordinance and the applicable criteria set forth in the Improvement Standards. 
E.  Grading approval shall be limited to work shown on the grading plans as approved by the city. The city engineer may impose any condition deemed necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, to prevent the creation of a hazard to public or private property, and/or to assure proper completion of the grading, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts as disclosed by any environmental document findings, including, but not limited to, those matters specified in subsection B of this section; 
2.  Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of the grading ordinance; 
3.  Requirements for fencing or other protection of grading which would otherwise be hazardous; 
4.  Requirements for dust, erosion, sediment and noise control, hours of operation and season of work, access roads and haul routes; 
5.  Requirements for safeguarding watercourses, whether natural or manmade, from excessive deposition of sediment or debris. In no case shall deposition of sediment or debris cause an exceedance of applicable water quality standards; 
6.  Assurance that the land area in which grading is proposed and for which habitable structures are proposed is not subject to hazards of land slippage or significant settlement or erosion and that the hazards of flooding can be eliminated or adequately reduced; 
7.  Requirements for safeguarding existing water wells; 
8.  Requirements for fencing to protect the health and livelihood of trees on the site. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.090 - Water obstruction. 
No person shall do or permit to be done any grading which may obstruct, impede, or interfere with the natural flow of stormwaters, whether such waters are unconfined upon the surface of the land or confined within land depressions, natural drainage ways, unimproved channels, watercourses, improved ditches, channels or conduits, in said manner as to cause flooding where it would not otherwise occur, aggravate any existing flooding condition or cause accelerated erosion except where said grading is in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, and regulations including, but not limited to, the provisions of the grading ordinance. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.100 - Construction in public rights-of-way. 
No person shall perform any grading work within the right-of-way of a public road or street, or within a public easement, without prior written approval of the director of public works, and without obtaining a city encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.110 - Hazards. 
Whenever the city engineer determines that any grading on private property constitutes a condition which could endanger persons or property, or could adversely affect the safety, use or stability of adjacent property, or an overhead or underground utility, or any public way, watercourse or drainage channel, or could adversely affect the water quality of any water bodies or watercourses, or causes a violation of the city's NPDES permit, the owner of the property upon which the condition is located, or other person or agent in possession or control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the city engineer, shall, within the period specified therein, stop all work. The city engineer may require the submission of plans, soil or geological reports, detailed construction recommendations, drainage study or other engineering data prior to and in connection with any work or activity proposed or required to correct such condition. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
Article III. - Grading Approval; Applications and Permits 
 
15.28.120 - Grading approval—Application. 
Application for a grading approval shall be made on a form provided by the city engineer. The application shall include the following information: 
A.  The name, address, telephone number, and twenty-four-hour emergency contact telephone number of the applicant; 
B.  The names, addresses, and the telephone numbers of all property owners other than the applicant; 
C.  The name, address, telephone number and registration number of the party responsible for preparing the grading plan; 
D.  The name, address, and telephone number of the party responsible for preparing the erosion and sediment control plan; 
E.  The name, address, and telephone number, and registration number of the registered civil engineer responsible for the preparation of the soils and engineering report, if required; 
F.  A plan for performing any required special inspections, including the name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for conducting the special inspections; 
G.  A description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made; 
H.  A description of the location on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot, block, tract, and house and street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work; 
I.  A description of the physical characteristics of the land that will be subject to or affected by the proposed grading work, including all natural features, such as streams and creeks, wetlands, riparian areas, rock outcroppings, and slopes; known prehistoric, historic, and unique archaeological resources; and all existing trees. This description may be included on the plans and specifications required by subsection K of this section; 
J.  Plans and specifications conforming to the most current Improvement Standards; if the site of the proposed grading is subject to conditions specified in an approved tentative subdivision or parcel map or an approved use permit, or other land use entitlement, the plans and specifications shall also demonstrate compliance with all applicable conditions of approval; 
K.  An erosion and sediment control plan (ESC plan) shall be prepared for all projects to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site and prevent pollution of site runoff during the period beginning when any preconstruction- or construction-related grading or soil storage first occurs, until all final improvements and permanent structures are complete. The ESC plan shall be prepared and submitted concurrently with the grading plan. The ESC plan shall be submitted on a clean separate sheet or sheets. The separate sheet(s) shall be drawn clearly and legibly and entitled "erosion and sediment control plan"; 
L.  The estimated quantity of cut and fill shall be shown on the grading plan; 
M.  The haul route and a separate grading plan if excess fill is to be placed on land within the city of Rocklin; 
N.  If required, State Regional Water Quality Control Board approved storm water pollutant protection plan (SWPPP), including the waste discharge identification number issued by the RWQCB, for the proposed grading work, the applicable provisions of which shall be incorporated into the ESC plan; 
O.  Such other information as reasonably may be required by the city engineer; 
The application shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the property owner or the owner's authorized agent or lessee. If the applicant is the owner's agent or lessee, the agent or lessee shall submit evidence of authority to obtain the permit. Once the permit is issued, the applicant shall become the permittee. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.130 - Improvement plans in lieu of application for permit. 
Where a subdivision improvement plan is being processed in conjunction with either an approved tentative, parcel, or final map; or a site plan is being processed in accordance with the provisions of this code, such plan shall also be considered as an application for grading approval. Such plans shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved or denied in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth in the grading ordinance and other applicable city specifications. If an improvement plan or site plan is approved, then a separate grading permit shall not be required. Subject to all of the requirements of the grading ordinance, approval of the improvement plans constitutes approval of the grading work intended. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.140 - Grading prior to issuance of building permit or approval of improvement plans. 
Applicants for a permit to allow grading prior to issuance of a building permit or approval of improvement plans shall meet the following requirements prior to issuance of a grading permit: 
A.  A preliminary grading plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the city engineer or building official. This plan shall conform to the requirements of the grading ordinance and any applicable conditions placed on the project as a result of any formal discretionary permit process. The applicant shall execute a separate acknowledgment that any additional grading or revisions to work necessitated by conflicts discovered during the improvement plan check or subsequent construction shall be corrected at the applicant's expense. 
B.  Erosion and sediment control plans in accordance with provisions of Article IV of this chapter shall be submitted for review and approval by the city engineer or building official. 
C.  When applicable, a winterization certification shall be submitted for review and approval by the city engineer or building official in accordance with Section 15.28.270 of this chapter. 
D.  No grading permit shall be issued until all applicable CEQA mitigation and other requirements have been met or incorporated into the project plans. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.150 - Referral to other public agencies. 
The city engineer may refer the application to other interested public agencies for their recommendations. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.160 - Permission of other agencies or owners. 
No application for grading approval shall relieve the applicant of responsibility for securing other permits or approvals, including, but not limited to, those specified in Section 15.28.080(B), required for work which is regulated by any other department or other public agency, or for obtaining any easements or authorization for grading on property not owned by the applicant. Proof of applicable public agency permits and/or easements may be required prior to issuance of grading approval. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.170 - Application—Fees. 
A.  The applicant shall pay a fee to cover the city's costs of reviewing plans, specifications, reports and other materials related to grading approval and performing all engineering services, CEQA review, field investigations, inspections, routine laboratory tests of materials and compaction or other work or services in connection with the issuance of grading approval or to determine or enforce compliance with any requirement or provision set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The fee or fees required by subsection A shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be paid to the city either before grading approval is issued or before the issuance of a building permit, or both, in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. The city engineer may charge additional fees in any case where the city incurs costs that are not covered by the initial fee payment(s), or where the actual costs exceed the amounts previously paid by the application permittee. 
C.  If grading work is done in violation of the grading ordinance or does not comply with the terms and conditions of a grading approval issued for such grading, the permittee shall pay the city for all costs actually incurred by the city to inspect or investigate such violation and to perform inspection and plan checking of work required to correct the violation. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.180 - Minor grading plans and specifications. 
A.  A minor grading plan shall be submitted with the application when the grading work involves less than five thousand cubic yards total of cut and fill and the city engineer determines that the grading work is of a minor nature because the proposed work does not involve: 
1.  Steep slopes (greater than or equal to fifteen percent); 
2.  Location in a flood hazard area; 
3.  Potential damage to structures on or adjacent to the subject site; 
4.  Potential blockage of drainage channels; 
5.  Potential impairment of significant natural vegetation, biological habitats, public views or other sensitive natural or cultural resources. 
B.  A minor grading plan shall consist of the following information as determined by the city engineer, provided that information submitted with any required plot plan, site plan, or development plan may also be used to fulfill these submittal requirements: 
1.  General vicinity map; 
2.  Property limits of the site; 
3.  Existing contours and drainage channels, including those areas of the subject site and adjoining properties which may be affected by the proposed grading either directly or through drainage alterations; 
4.  Location of any buildings or structures within fifty feet of the area which may be affected by the proposed grading operations; 
5.  Limiting dimensions, elevations or finished contours to be achieved by the grading and proposed drainage channels and related construction. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.190 - Engineered grading plans and specifications. 
A.  An engineered grading plan shall be submitted with the application where the proposed grading work is not of a minor nature as described in Section 15.28.180(A) of this chapter; provided, that if the city engineer determines that, due to terrain, soil characteristics, grading design, etc., engineered grading plans are not necessary to ensure a safe and adequate grading operation, the city engineer may waive the requirement for an engineered grading plan. 
B.  An engineered grading plan shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the standards and requirements of this article and all other provisions of this chapter. If applicable, the engineered grading plan shall be part of the improvement plans for the development project to which it relates, and shall comply with all grading-related environmental mitigation measures and conditions of approval of the development project established by the city for the project. In all cases, plans and specifications in a number and size consistent with the requirements of the most current Improvement Standards, signed by a civil engineer, shall be submitted with the application and shall include the following information as determined by the city engineer: 
1.  General vicinity map; 
2.  Property limits of the subject site; 
3.  Details of terrain and area drainage and accurate contours of existing ground at intervals shown in the Improvement Standards; 
4.  Location of any buildings or structures within fifty feet of the area which may be affected by the proposed grading operations; 
5.  Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finished contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction; 
6.  Specifications covering construction and material requirements; 
7.  Soil engineering report, which shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures; criteria for corrective measures when necessary; and opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading; 
8.  Engineering geology report, which shall include a description of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions, and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading; 
9.  A mitigation plan that addresses the conditions necessitating the engineered grading plan, such as steep slopes, location in a geologic study area or flood hazard area, potential damage to structures on the subject site or adjacent property, or potential impairment of natural vegetation, habitat, public view or other sensitive resources; 
10.  Drainage plan, if not included in any of the above; 
C.  For engineered grading, the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan shall incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the engineered grading plan and shall be responsible for the certification of the grading within his or her area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but shall not be limited to, certification as to the establishment of line, grade, and drainage of the development area and lot compaction and elevation. Certification shall be based on site inspection and actual knowledge. The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent if the need arises for liaison among other professionals, the contractor, and the city engineer. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-graded record drawings upon completion of the work. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.200 - Improvement security required. 
A.  As a condition for the issuance of grading approval, the city engineer may require the deposit of an improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient by him or her to assure faithful performance of the grading work in the event of default on the part of the applicant. Said security shall be in a form acceptable to the city. 
B.  In the case of subdivisions, the improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all grading work and subdivision improvements have been accepted by the city. 
C.  For projects other than subdivisions, the improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all grading work has been approved by the city engineer. 
D.  In addition to the improvement security, the city engineer may also require the deposit of maintenance security in an amount deemed sufficient by him or her to guarantee and maintain the grading work performed, to assure the proper functioning of drainage systems and adequate erosion and sedimentation control. Said maintenance security shall be in a form acceptable to the city and shall remain in effect for a period of one year after the date of acceptance of the improvements or grading work, as designated in subsections B and C of this section, or such other periods of time as required by the city engineer. 
E.  Any deposit required by the city engineer pursuant to this title shall be payable to the city. 
F.  Upon failure to complete the work, failure to comply with all of the terms of the grading ordinance, or failure of the completed site to function properly to provide proper drainage or erosion and sedimentation control, the city may do the required work, or cause it to be done and collect from the applicant or surety all costs incurred, including, but not limited to, administrative and inspection costs. Any unused portion of a deposit shall be refunded to the applicant after deduction by the city of the cost of the work. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.210 - Grading permit—Issuance. 
A.  Upon receipt and review of a complete application, payment of fees, and posting of security, if the city engineer is satisfied that the work described in the application and the plans will conform to the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances, the city engineer shall issue the grading permit, subject to whatever terms and conditions the city engineer determines are necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Completion of work within a specified period of time; 
2.  Hours and days of operation; 
3.  Designation and approval of haul routes; 
4.  Rainy season limitations; 
5.  Designation of area covered by the permit; 
6.  Implementation of the general plan and all other applicable EIR mitigation measures; 
7.  Provision of easements for stormwater conveyance through open channels; 
8.  Approval of appropriate permitting requirements of other governmental agencies. 
B.  When the city engineer issues the permit, he or she shall endorse in writing or stamp on all sets of plans and specifications "APPROVED." Thereafter, the approved plans and specifications shall not bechanged, modified, or altered without prior written authorization from the city engineer. All work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. The city engineer may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur or weather generated problems arise which were not anticipated at the time the permit was issued. 
C.  Retention of Plans. One set of endorsed approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be retained by the city engineer, one set by the engineering construction inspectors, one set by the building division, one set by the public works director, and one set shall be returned to the permittee, which set shall be kept on the building or work site at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
D.  Issuance of the permit shall not prevent the city engineer from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or ordering the cessation of grading and development activities under the permit when in violation of this chapter, any other ordinance of the city, and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
Article IV. - Grading Standards and Erosion and Sediment Control 
 
15.28.220 - Grading standards. 
All grading work shall be performed in conformance with the Improvement Standards and/or the California Building Standards Code. If there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Improvement Standards or California Building Standards Code, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.230 - Erosion and sediment control. 
A.  The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final approval. Where the city engineer determines, based upon engineering information produced by the applicant, that cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted. 
B.  An erosion and sediment control plan shall be required with any grading approval and shall include the following items: 
1.  Protective measures to be taken during construction such as hydromulching, berms (temporary or permanent), interceptor ditches, subsurface drains, terraces and/or sediment traps in order to prevent erosion by surface water or groundwater of the cut faces of excavations or of the sloping surfaces of fills; 
2.  Permanent methods of revegetation following completion of proposed grading or improvements; 
3.  Approximate sequence and timing of grading and construction increments and/or subsequent revegetation and/or landscaping work. 
C.  Revegetation Standards. 
1.  Permanent revegetation or landscaping, if required, is to be commenced on the construction site as soon as practical and in no case exceeding twelve months after achieving final grades and utility placements. Whenever practical, land is to be developed in increments of workable size which can be completed during a single construction season; erosion control measures are to be coordinated with the sequence of grading or improvements. 
2.  Grading equipment is to be confined to the area immediately adjacent to areas of disturbance as indicated by the approved plan. 
3.  All surfaces disturbed by vegetation removal, grading, haul roads, or other activity of construction which alters the natural vegetative cover are to be prepared for expedient revegetation or otherwise maintained to control erosion unless covered with impervious or other improved surfaces pursuant to approved plans within fourteen days following the completion of grading, or removal of vegetation if no grading was involved. 
4.  Topsoil removed from the surface in preparation for grading and construction is to be stored away from drainage structures and, whenever possible, away from inhabited residential areas and on or near the site, protected from erosion while grading operations are underway; provided, that such storage may not be located where it would cause suffocation of root systems of trees intended to be preserved. After completion of such grading, topsoil shall be restored to expose cut and fill embankments or building pads so as to provide a suitable base for seeding and planting. 
5.  Acceptable methods of revegetation include straw-mulching, hydro-mulching or planting of mixture specified in the Improvement Standards. Other methods of revegetation may be approved by the city engineer where equivalent protection is provided. 
6.  All revegetation and landscaping are to be conducted within suitable growing periods. Native plant materials are specifically encouraged in order to reduce irrigation demands. 
7.  Temporary sedimentation control facilities are to be installed in conjunction with initial grading operations and maintained throughout the construction period to remove sediments from runoff waters during development. 
8.  Permanent sediment catchment basins or other types of sediment retention facilities are required wherever necessary to prevent discharge of sediment into waters of the state. Sediment retention facilities shall be inspected and cleaned according to a regular maintenance schedule. 
9.  The planting or seeding of vegetative protection must be effective. If the vegetation does not grow and offer proper protection, it must be replanted or reseeded. 
10.  The maintenance of vegetative protection on graded slopes shall be the responsibility of the permittee and shall be guaranteed until the vegetation is well established or is officially assumed by another party approved by the public works director. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
Article V. - Execution of Work 
 
15.28.240 - Performance of work—Inspection. 
A.  The city engineer may inspect any work done pursuant to the grading ordinance at any time during the course of construction. No person shall be deemed to have complied with the grading ordinance until a final inspection of the work has been made by the city engineer. 
B.  As a condition of any grading approval, the applicant shall provide the city a right-of-entry and reasonable access, in accordance with Section 15.28.370 of this chapter, to the site during the performance of all work and for a minimum period of one year after acceptance by the city engineer of all improvements pursuant to the grading ordinance. 
C.  When required by the California Building Standards Code or the city engineer, special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Standards Code and this chapter at the sole expense of the permittee. 
D.  The city engineer may, during the course of grading activity, require inspection and testing of minor grading by an approved testing agency, the expense of which shall be borne by the applicant. The testing agency's responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, certification concerning the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill and the compaction of fills. When the city engineer has cause to believe that unforeseen geologic factors may be involved, the grading operation will be required to conform to engineered grading requirements at the sole expense of the permittee. 
E.  During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data, and soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and city engineer by the geotechnical engineer and the engineering geologist. The geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and certification of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He or she shall report findings to the civil engineer for engineering analysis. The city engineer shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring certification and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.250 - Location of property lines. 
Prior to any grading work or related activities, the owner must flag all property corners of the parcel of land to be graded. If the property corners are unknown, or whenever the location of a property line or easement or the title thereto is disputed during the application process or during a grading operation, a survey by a licensed land surveyor or civil engineer or other resolution of the title dispute, all at the expense of the applicant, may be required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.260 - Other responsibilities of applicant. 
A.  Protection of Utilities. The applicant shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services. 
B.  Protection of Adjacent Property. The applicant shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person(s) shall excavate on land that is so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, structure or other public or private property or easement without supporting and protecting such property from any damage which might otherwise result. 
C.  Advance Notice. The applicant shall notify the city engineer at least forty-eight hours prior to the start of work. 
D.  Erosion and Sediment Control. It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to prevent discharge of sediment from the site, in quantities greater than before the grading occurred, to any watercourse, drainage system, or adjacent property. 
E.  Compliance with Stormwater Runoff Pollution Control Code. At all times during the preconstruction and construction of any project for which grading approval is issued until all final improvements and permanent structures are complete, the applicant shall fully comply with all applicable requirements of the city's Stormwater Runoff Pollution Control Code, set forth in Chapter 8.30 of this code. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.270 - Winterization certification. 
A.  A winterization certification shall be submitted no later than September 15th for all projects where any construction will occur between October 15th and April 15th. Construction that will occur solely between April 16th and October 14th will not be required to submit a winterization certification. 
B.  The winterization certification shall consist of a written statement or descriptive plan sheet from the owner certifying that the project under construction is prepared for an event which will stop construction, such as rain or snow, that all ESC plan best management practices are in place and operating correctly, that housekeeping practices are maintained and that the site can be left or abandoned safely for an extended period of time during the rainy season without causing any erosion and sediment control problems. 
C.  If a winterization certification is required and has not been submitted and approved prior to September 16th, the grading approval will be suspended until a winterization certification is submitted and approval obtained. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.280 - Term of permit—Extensions. 
A.  A grading permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance unless noted otherwise on the permit. The expiration date shall be noted on the permit. 
B.  The permittee may, before the expiration of the permit, apply for an extension of time in which to complete the work in a reasonable and expeditious manner. Extensions of time may be granted by the city engineer for a period or periods not exceeding a total of one additional year, where the city engineer finds unusual circumstances warrant the extension of time and will not create a hazard or nuisance. Denial of an extension of time shall not preclude the right of the permittee to apply for a new permit for the remaining balance of the work. Written consent of the security provider to any extension of time must be furnished before the approval of the extension becomes effective, unless the security consists of a cash deposit. 
C.  Every permit issued by the city engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred twenty calendar days. 
D.  Once a permit has expired, no work may resume until a new permit is obtained. The fee for a permit to complete work under an expired permit shall be one-half the amount of the current fee, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work and the suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.290 - Transfer of permit. 
A permit may be transferred to another person with the prior written approval of the city engineer. The city engineer may make such modifications as he or she deems appropriate as a condition of the transfer. No transfer shall be effective until the transferee furnishes the required security. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.300 - Transfer of responsibility for certification. 
If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement engineer or testing agency has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of their technical competence, for certification of the whole work upon completion of the work. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.310 - Amendment to permit. 
If the permittee wishes to make changes in the plans, grades, timing or extent of work, he or she shall submit a request to the city engineer for written approval and incorporation into the permit before any change in the work is commenced. The city engineer may amend the permit to approve such changes if appropriate, may conditionally approve, or may deny approval of such changes. 
Failure to obtain prior approval for any change in the work shall be cause for the suspension of the permit until approval is obtained, and may result in the revocation of the permit if such changes are deemed to be hazardous to adjoining properties or to the public at large. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.320 - Appeals. 
Any person directly and adversely affected by any determination made by the city engineer, chief building official or public works director, under this chapter, may appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager no later than ten days after receiving notice of the decision. The notice of appeal shall state the name, mailing address, and telephone number of the person appealing, the action being appealed, and the grounds for the appeal. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the city manager shall schedule a meeting at which the appeal will be considered by city manager and shall notify the appellant, and the permittee if other than the appellant, of the time, date, and place of the meeting. The scope of consideration of the appeal shall be limited to the grounds specified in the notice of appeal. No later than thirty days after considering the appeal, the city manager shall render a decision on the appeal. A copy of the city manager's decision shall be provided to the appellant and the permittee, if other than the appellant. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
Article VI. - Enforcement 
 
15.28.330 - Enforcement official. 
The city engineer shall enforce the provisions of the grading ordinance. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.340 - Suspension and revocation of grading approval. 
The city engineer may suspend or revoke grading approval for good cause. In the event that a suspension or revocation is appealed to the city manager, no work shall be performed pending appeal except as expressly authorized, in writing, by the city engineer. Good cause includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Conditions at the site vary appreciably from those shown on the approved plans; 
2.  Construction does not conform to the approved grading plan, final erosion and sediment control plan, stormwater pollution prevention plan, time schedules, or conditions of the grading permit; 
3.  The site is left in a condition hazardous to the public or to the adjacent properties, and permittee does not comply with reasonable requirements to correct said conditions; 
4.  The permittee does not comply with the city engineer's directives and reasonable requirements to safeguard the workers, the public or other persons acting in a lawful manner; 
5.  The permittee, in connection with the operations for which the permit was issued, fails to operate his or her equipment properly on public roads; or allows material to encroach, obstruct, or be deposited within a public road right-of-way or within a drainage channel in a manner not authorized by said permit; or causes unauthorized obstruction or diversion of drainage channels; 
6.  The permittee fails to have a qualified special inspector, working under the supervision of a registered civil engineer, on the site during operations when so required by the permit or fails to have the work under proper supervision at all times; 
7.  Emergency conditions exist on the site which constitute a threat to health, safety or public welfare. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.350 - Stop work order. 
A.  Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation, the city engineer may order the work stopped by serving written notice of such violation on any persons engaged in, doing, or causing such work to be done. Any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the city engineer to proceed with the work. If there are no persons present on the premises, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place. The notice shall state the nature of the violation. Any person violating a stop work order shall be guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Upon receipt of or knowledge of the existence of such stop work notice, the person performing the work shall: 
1.  Stop work immediately; and 
2.  Within twenty-four hours, provide the city engineer with a list of remedies which can be immediately undertaken to bring the work into compliance with this title; and 
3.  Within twenty-four hours after acceptance of such remedies by the city engineer, undertake, at the violator's expense, such action as is necessary to bring the work into compliance with this title; 
4.  If engineering work is required to identify and define the proper course of action, as determined by the city engineer, such work shall be provided by the permittee at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.360 - Abatement of unlawfully created conditions. 
A.  Any condition in violation of the grading ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement in accordance with Title 8 of this code. In the event that the city engineer determines that a violation has created a condition which is of such a nature to be imminently dangerous to public health, safety or welfare, such condition may be abated in accordance with the summary abatement procedures set forth at Chapter 8.04, et seq., of this code. 
Without limitation, the following conditions are declared to constitute an imminently dangerous condition: 
1.  When a violation has altered natural drainage patterns and has caused flooding to any downstream or upstream property; 
2.  When a violation results in a condition which creates drainage alteration such that upstream or downstream property may be flooded when weather conditions change and the owner, lessee, or licensee of the property on which the violation exists cannot be found; 
3.  When a violation results in a hazard, requiring immediate correction for the preservation of public health, safety, or welfare; 
4.  When a violation results in a discharge or release of significant amounts of sediment which causes or threatens to cause flooding, property damage, or unsafe conditions. 
B.  The costs incurred by the city to abate any nuisance caused by a violation of this chapter shall be assessed against the subject property as a lien or made a personal obligation to the owner of the property as provided in Chapter 8.04, et seq., of this code. Such costs may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Engineering, design, and other consultant or contractor costs; 
2.  Contractor service bills or public employee wages at cost; 
3.  Administrative overhead and supervision based on ten percent of all other costs incurred; 
4.  Interest which shall accrue and be billed at the rate of ten percent of all unpaid amounts from the date of billing; 
5.  Attorney fees and costs. 
C.  The abatement procedures set forth in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other rights or remedies which are or may be available to the city to correct or cause to be corrected any violation of the grading ordinance, or to abate a condition which is otherwise a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.370 - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer may enter the premises at all reasonable times to the extent authorized by law to perform any duty imposed by this chapter. If such entry is refused, the city engineer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.380 - Infraction. 
Any person violating any provision of the grading ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
15.28.390 - Nonexclusive remedies. 
The remedies provided herein are not exclusive, and are in addition to any other remedy or penalty provided by law for violation of the grading ordinance. 
(Ord. 904 § 1 (part), 2006).  
Chapter 15.32 - PLAN REVIEW FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL PROJECTS 
Sections: 
 
15.32.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating the design and construction of frontage improvements, site grading and site drainage for public school facilities as authorized under Government Code Section 53097. 
(Ord. 811 § 1 (part), 1999).  
15.32.020 - Plan review and approval required. 
Prior to submission of a public school project to the Department of the State Architect, a public school district shall submit two complete sets of plans detailing all proposed frontage improvements, grading, drainage and erosion control measures for review and approval by the city engineer. The plans shall be prepared in substantial compliance with city of Rocklin standard specifications and improvement standards. 
(Ord. 811 § 1 (part), 1999).  
15.32.030 - Time limits for review and approval. 
The city engineer shall review the plans for frontage improvements, grading and drainage within fourteen days after submission by the public school district, and shall either approve the plans as submitted or return the plans to the school district with a written request for changes, corrections, or other modifications. If after fourteen days the plans have not been reviewed and returned with comments, the plans shall be deemed approved as submitted. Upon resubmittal of corrected or modified plans, the city engineer shall have an additional ten days after submission to approve or comment on the revised plans. Should the city engineer fail to approve or return with comments, the corrected or modified plans within ten days after resubmission, the plans shall be deemed approved as resubmitted. 
(Ord. 811 § 1 (part), 1999).  
15.32.040 - Compliance with city frontage improvements ordinance. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the school district shall be subject to the provisions of Chapters 12.04 and 15.18, including the requirement to obtain an encroachment permit prior to commencing any work in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 811 § 1 (part), 1999).  
15.32.050 - Compliance with city grading ordinance. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the school district shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.28, including the requirement to obtain a grading permit prior to commencing grading work. 
(Ord. 811 § 1 (part), 1999).  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this title is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act set forth in Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state and may be cited as the subdivision ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.101, 1978).  
16.04.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The council of the city has, in the interest of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city, adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter to carry out the following purposes: 
1.  To implement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Title 7, Division 2, Government Code); 
2.  To provide policies, standards, requirements, and procedures to regulate and control the design and improvement of all subdivisions within the city; 
3.  To implement the programs, policies and objectives of the general plan; 
4.  To direct the growth of the city and to preserve the essential characteristics of the city. 
B.  In support of those purposes there shall be the maximum practical retention of desirable environmental and ecological features of the terrain; trees and vegetation shall be retained or replaced and natural waterways and watercourses shall be preserved in their natural state. 
C.  It is also intended that there shall be a minimum disturbance and alteration of the natural topography. Development shall be fitted to the topography rather than the terrain altered to fit the development. Grading of land shall be kept to a minimum; streets should generally follow land contours with rectilinear block layouts discouraged. 
D.  An imaginative approach in the design of subdivisions and the siting of structures on parcels is encouraged rather than a monotonous, unimaginative approach to meet minimum requirements. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.102, 1978).  
16.04.030 - Conformity with other ordinances. 
Neither the approval nor conditional approval of a subdivision map pursuant to this title shall constitute or waive compliance with any other applicable provision of any ordinance of the city or other regulation adopted by the city, nor shall any such approval authorize or be deemed to authorize a violation or failure to comply with other applicable ordinances of the city. Nothing in this title shall be construed to permit the premature or haphazard subdivision of land in derogation of Title 17 or the general plan as the same relate to open space. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.103, 1978).  
Chapter 16.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Applicability of definitions. 
Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, words and phrases used in this title shall be deemed to have the same meaning attributed to them in the Subdivision Map Act, and definitions contained in the Subdivision Map Act are incorporated in this chapter and shall be deemed to apply as though set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.104, 1978).  
16.08.020 - Plural and singular—Shall and may—Includes. 
A.  All words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular; each gender includes the other; and any tense includes the other tenses unless the context requires otherwise. 
B.  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
C.  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.105, 1978).  
16.08.030 - Undefined words or phrases. 
When a word or phrase used in this title is not defined in this chapter, such word or phrase shall be defined as follows: 
A.  If the word or phrase has a dictionary definition, then such definition shall be used, unless the use of such definition would lead to an unreasonable result. 
B.  If no dictionary definition exists, then the word or phrase shall be defined as set forth in any generally recognized treatise or authority on zoning or planning. 
C.  If there is neither a dictionary definition, nor a definition in a generally recognized treatise or authority, then the word or phrase shall be defined according to its general usage and understanding in the community. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.107, 1978).  
16.08.040 - Advisory agency. 
The planning commission of the city shall be the advisory agency 
(Ord. 365 § 1.108, 1978).  
16.08.050 - Approved access. 
"Approved access" means right of vehicular travel to a public street, as shown on a final subdivision map or final parcel map or as approved by the commission or council. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.107, 1978).  
16.08.060 - City. 
"City" shall mean the city of Rocklin. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.107, 1978).  
16.08.070 - City planner, planner, planning director. 
"City planner," "planner," "planning director" means the planning director of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.113, 1978).  
16.08.080 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.110, 1978).  
16.08.090 - Council. 
"Council" means the city council of the city. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.111, 1978).  
16.08.100 - County. 
"County" means the county of Placer. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.112, 1978).  
16.08.110 - Design and improvement standards. 
"Design and improvement standards" means standards and specifications for the design of subdivisions and public improvements therein adopted by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.133, 1978).  
16.08.120 - Final map or final subdivision map. 
"Final map" or "final subdivision map" means a map prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and presented for recording, which conforms to an approved tentative subdivision map, the Subdivision Map Act, and the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.126, 1978).  
16.08.130 - Flood hazard. 
"Flood hazard" means a hazard to land or improvements due to seasonal inundation or to overflow water having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of water courses. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.114, 1978).  
16.08.140 - Floodplain. 
"Floodplain" means the one-hundred-year floodplain as defined by applicable criteria and surveys of the Army Corps of Engineers for the city or, where no data is available from the Corps of Engineers, then as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.115, 1978).  
16.08.150 - Front lot line. 
In the case of an interior lot, "front lot line" means a line separating the lot from the street, and in the case of a corner lot, "front lot line" means a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.121, 1978).  
16.08.160 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.116, 1978).  
16.08.170 - Geological hazard. 
"Geological hazard" means any hazard inherent in the crust of the earth, or artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property or improvements due to the movement, failure or shifting of earth. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.117, 1978).  
16.08.180 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land which is identified with a separate and distinct number or letter on a final map or parcel map recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.118, 1978).  
16.08.185 - Lot, corner. 
"Corner lot" means a lot that is located at the intersection of two streets and has frontage on each street, see Figure 16.08.281. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
16.08.186 - Lot, interior. 
"Interior lot" means a lot which is not located at the intersection of two streets, see Figure 16.08.281. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
16.08.187 - Lot, reverse corner. 
"Reverse corner lot" means a lot located at the corner of two intersecting streets where the two adjoining lots each front on the respective adjacent streets such that the rear yard and street side yard of the home on the corner lot abuts the front yard of the home on the adjoining lot behind it, see Figure 16.08.281. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
16.08.190 - Lot area, lot size. 
"Lot area" or "lot size" means the amount of land in a lot measured in square feet or acres. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.125, 1978).  
16.08.200 - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured along the median between the two side lot lines. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.120, 1978).  
16.08.210 - Lot lines. 
"Lot lines" means the lines bounding a lot. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.124, 1978).  
16.08.220 - Lot width. 
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between front and rear lot lines. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.119, 1978).  
16.08.230 - Parcel. 
"Parcel" means a piece of real property. It may be synonymous with "Lot," but may also include property which, though appearing as separate entities on a map filed for record, or on the maps of the county assessor, has never been legally divided or has merged. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.129, 1978).  
16.08.240 - Parcel map, final parcel map. 
"Parcel map" or "final parcel map" means a map prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and presented for recording which conforms to an approved parcel map, with the Subdivision Map Act, and the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.127, 1978).  
16.08.250 - Private road easement. 
"Private road easement" means a parcel of land not dedicated as a public street, over which a private easement for road purposes is proposed to be or has been granted to the owners of property contiguous or adjacent thereto, which intersects or connects with a public street or a private street; in each instance, the instrument creating such easement shall be or shall have been duly recorded or filed in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.130, 1978).  
16.08.260 - Public way. 
"Public way" means any street, highway, alley, pedestrian way, equestrian or hiking trail, biking path, channel, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, easement, right-of-way, or other way which the public has a right of use. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.131, 1978).  
16.08.270 - Rear lot line. 
"Rear lot line" means a line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line or, in case of an irregular or triangular lot, a line ten feet within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.122, 1978).  
16.08.280 - Side lot line, interior. 
"Interior side lot line" means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line that directly abuts another lot, see Figure 16.08.281. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.123, 1978).  
16.08.281 - Lot definitions figure. 
  
LOT DEFINITIONS
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
16.08.285 - Side lot line, street. 
"Street side lot line" means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line that directly abuts a street, see Figure 16.08.281. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
16.08.290 - Subdivision Map Act. 
"Subdivision Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state (Government Code, Title 7, Division 2, Subdivisions, commencing with Section 66410) and all amendments or additions thereto. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.132, 1978).  
16.08.300 - Tentative map, tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel map. 
"Tentative map," "tentative subdivision map" or "tentative parcel map" means a map presented to the design review committee or commission for approval of land divisions which require a final map, or parcel map, when a tentative map is required by this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.128, 1978).  
16.08.305 - Vesting tentative map. 
"Vesting tentative map" means a tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map that has printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed under Section 16.18.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 603 § 2, 1989).  
16.08.310 - Zoning code. 
"Zoning code" means Title 17 and all amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 365 § 1.134, 1978).  
Chapter 16.12 - REGULATIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1061, § 2, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, repealed former § 16.12.010 which pertained to access and size required to build—zoning conformance, and derived from Ord. No. 365, § 2.101, adopted in 1978.  
16.12.020 - One building per lot or parcel. 
Except where expressly permitted by the commission or council, only one main building or structure (exclusive of permitted accessory buildings) shall be constructed on a lot or parcel. 
(Ord. 365 § 2.102, 1978).  
16.12.030 - Tentative map required when. 
A tentative map is required for every subdivision where required or permitted by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 2.103, 1978).  
16.12.040 - Parcel map required when. 
For those subdivisions where a final map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act, a parcel map is required. 
(Ord. 365 § 2.104, 1978).  
16.12.050 - Lot line adjustment. 
As provided in subsection (d) of Section 66412 of the Subdivision Map Act, this title shall not apply to any lot line adjustment, provided: 
A.  The resulting lots meet the area requirements of Title 17 for the zone in which the property is located; and 
B.  The planning director, planning commission or council, by resolution, approves such an adjustment. 
C.  The following procedure shall be used when applying for lot line adjustment approval pursuant to this section: 
1.  An application for approval of a lot line adjustment shall be submitted to the planning director on forms provided by the city. The application shall be accompanied by: 
a.  Five copies of a map on eight and one- half by eleven inches bond paper, showing the existing property line and the proposed location of the new property line. The map shall be drawn to scale and show all existing structures, easements, landscaping, including trees, and any other improvements and their location in relation to all property lines; 
b.  Two copies of a current title report for each parcel affected; 
c.  New deed descriptions for all parcels affected by the lot line adjustment; 
d.  Filing fees, as established by council resolution. 
2.  Upon determination by the planning director that the application is complete, the director shall have fifteen days in which to notify the applicant that the lot line adjustment is either approved, conditionally approved, or denied. 
3.  Any decision by the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission by the applicant or any interested party, in accordance with Chapter 17.86. 
4.  Following affirmative action by the planning director, the commission or the council, the applicant shall submit the following final documents for recording to the city engineer: 
a.  New deeds on all parcels affected; 
b.  One eight and one-half by eleven inches exhibit map for each parcel affected; 
c.  Any offers of dedication; 
d.  Street improvement plans or deferral agreements, if applicable; 
e.  Applicable fees, including recordation fees and plan check fees; 
f.  Additional information as required by the city engineer. 
5.  Upon acceptance of the information set out in subdivision 4, the city engineer shall file all final documents with the clerk for recording. 
(Ord. 428 §§ 1. 2, 1980; Ord. 365 § 2.105, 1978).  
Chapter 16.16 - TENTATIVE MAP 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the subdivider shall file with the city for every subdivision a tentative map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.101, 1978).  
16.16.020 - Preparation—Scale—Sheet size. 
A.  The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn by, or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
B.  The scale of the map shall be at least one inch equals one hundred feet. If necessary to provide the proper scale, more than one sheet may be used, but the relation of the several sheets shall be clearly shown on each. 
C.  No single sheet shall exceed seventy-two inches in length and fifty-four inches in width. The minimum size map shall be eighteen inches in width and twenty-six inches in length. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.102, 1978).  
16.16.030 - Content. 
The tentative map shall contain the following information in addition to such information as may be required by the Subdivision Map Act: 
A.  Proposed subdivision name, if any, and tract number, if applicable; 
B.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owner and subdivider of the land; 
C.  Name, address and telephone number of the persons, firm or organization that prepared the map, and the applicable registration or license number; 
D.  A vicinity or key map of appropriate scale and covering sufficient adjoining territory so as to clearly indicate nearest street intersections, major access streets, property lines of other adjacent properties in the ownership of the subdivider, and other significant features which will have a bearing on the proposed subdivision and its location in relationship to surrounding areas; 
E.  Date of preparation, north point and scale of the map. If based on a survey, the date of the survey; 
F.  Boundaries of the subdivision with sufficient information to locate the property; 
G.  The boundaries and dimensions of all lots, with all lots consecutively numbered. In subdivisions of four or less lots, the square footage or acreage of each lot shall be stated. In subdivisions of five or more lots, the minimum, maximum and average lot sizes shall be stated; 
H.  Subdivision name and tract numbers of adjacent subdivisions, if any, and property lines sufficient to show their relationship to the proposed subdivision; 
I.  Contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet, unless waived by the city engineer. Topographic information shall be sufficient to fully show the configuration of the land and any and all depressions that may present drainage problems, and shall extend beyond the tract boundaries where necessary to show drainage conditions on surrounding property which may affect the subdivision. Residential lots exceeding a twenty-five percent slope shall be so noted; 
J.  The location of all railroad rights-of-way and grade crossings; approximate locations of all existing wells, abandoned wells and sumps, including septic systems or other underground systems; active or abandoned quarries; and an indication of any physical restrictions or conditions in the subdivision which affect the use of the property; 
K.  All structures, including fences and signs, within the subdivision, dimensioned and distanced to other structures and to existing and proposed street and lot lines, present and future use of all structures to be noted; 
L.  The locations, widths and purposes of all existing and proposed easements for utilities, drainage and other public purposes, whether public or private, shown by dashed lines, within and adjacent to the subdivision, including proposed building setback lines; 
M.  Statement of proposed utility services; 
N.  The locations of all potentially dangerous areas, including geologically hazardous areas, and areas subject to inundation or flood hazard adjacent to the property involved and the proposed method of providing stormwater drainage and erosion control; 
O.  The locations of all streams and tributaries and their respective floodplains and all ponds, reservoirs and riparian areas; 
P.  The approximate location and general description of any trees of a diameter of six inches or greater with notations as to their retention or destruction. Additionally, where groves of trees exist, the perimeter of the canopy shall be shown symbolically on the map; 
Q.  The location of any significant natural features and/or possible historical or archaeological site or remains, including but not limited to, natural springs, caves, Indian grinding rocks, petroglyphs, burial sites, historical buildings and/or their ruins, and significant rock outcroppings; 
R.  The boundaries and dimensions of all lots, and a number assigned to each lot; the total number of lots and the area of the average lot; 
S.  The location, width and existing/proposed names or designations of all existing or proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and other rights- of-way, including but not limited to bikeways, paths, etc., whether public or private. Any change in existing street names shall be specifically requested in writing; 
T.  The boundaries of existing and proposed public areas, including but not limited to parks, public libraries, and fire stations, in and adjacent to the subdivision, with the nature of each indicated thereon. If land is to be offered for dedication for park or recreation purposes or for purposes of providing public access to natural resources, the same shall be so designated; 
U.  Any modification being requested in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 16.36 which is shown on the tentative map shall be clearly labeled and identified as to nature and purpose; 
V.  If separate final maps are to be filed on portions of the property shown on the tentative map, the subdivision boundaries which will appear on those final maps, and the sequence, if any, in which the final maps will be filed. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.103, 1978).  
16.16.040 - Accompanying data. 
The following drawings, statements and other data, shall be filed on or with the tentative map: 
A.  Two copies of a preliminary title report on the property proposed to be subdivided; 
B.  A statement of existing and proposed zoning and existing and proposed uses of the property; 
C.  A preliminary soils report by a registered civil engineer, based on adequate test borings, unless such report is waived by the city engineer on the basis of his knowledge of soil conditions in the proposed subdivision; 
D.  A preliminary grading plan unless waived by the planner after consultation with the city engineer. When the grading plan is revised after the tentative map and preliminary grading plan have been considered and approved at a public hearing, the revised plan shall be filed with the director and shall be subject to the same hearing process and findings requirements as the original application, except that the subsequent hearings and decisions shall be limited to the revised grading plan and the effects of the revisions on the design and improvement requirements of the tentative map; 
E.  A statement of any proposed phasing of development; 
F.  Application for any modification that may be proposed, together with supporting drawings and statements and other data as may be required by the provisions of Chapter 16.36; 
G.  Any other data required as a prerequisite to approval of the tentative map, including plans, reports, fees, or other requirements. 
(Ord. 633 § 1, 1990; Ord. 365 § 4.104, 1978).  
16.16.050 - Filing. 
The subdivider shall file with the planning department a sepia of the tentative map and twenty-five additional copies thereof, together with supporting data required by this title. A tentative map shall not be considered as having been filed until it complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.105, 1978).  
16.16.060 - Application for approval. 
An application for approval of the tentative map shall be filed with the planning department on a form provided by the city. The application shall be signed by the owner(s) of the property to be subdivided or his (their) representative pursuant to written authorization. The application shall be accompanied by: 
A.  A map drawn to scale showing the exterior property lines of all properties within a three- hundred-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision with the parcel numbers noted thereon; 
B.  A list of the names and addresses of the owners of such properties as shown on the last equalized assessment roll; 
C.  Environmental questionnaire; 
D.  Filing fee. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.106, 1978).  
16.16.070 - Waiver of statutory time by developer. 
Whenever a tentative map is subject to environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and/or when the subdivider concurrently applies for an entitlement under the zoning code, or an amendment to the general plan, the subdivider shall be requested to waive the statutory time for the consideration of and action upon the tentative map. If the subdivider declines to waive the statutory time, the tentative map shall not be accepted for filing until the requirements of CEQA are complied with and/or consideration of all other pending applications are first acted upon. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.107, 1978).  
16.16.080 - Soils investigation. 
If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the city engineer as a condition precedent to consideration of the tentative map by the commission. The soils investigation shall be done in the manner provided in Government Code Section 66491. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.108, 1978).  
16.16.090 - Incomplete or incorrect data. 
If at any time during the processing of the tentative map, the map or accompanying data are found to be incomplete or incorrect with respect to pertinent required information, the subdivider shall be promptly advised of the changes or additions that must be made before further action may be taken on the tentative map. Failure to provide the omitted or inaccurate information shall be cause for disapproval of the tentative map, unless an extension of time for acting upon said map is mutually agreed upon by the subdivider and the commission. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.109, 1978).  
16.16.100 - Other public agency reports and recommendations. 
The planning department shall transmit copies of the tentative map and other applicable data to other public or private agencies or departments that may be affected by the proposed subdivision for a report and recommendation to the commission. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.110, 1978).  
16.16.110 - School district and postal service notice. 
Within ten days of the filing of a tentative map the planning director shall send a notice of the filing of the tentative map to the governing board of any elementary, high school, or unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located, as provided by Section 66455.7 of the Government Code, and shall also provide such notice to the Postmaster, U.S. Postal Service, Rocklin. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.111, 1978).  
16.16.120 - Development review committee advice to commission. 
The development review committee shall: 
A.  Advise the commission in its review of the tentative map on the conformance of the tentative map to the standards, rules and regulations adopted by the commission and to the requirements of all applicable plans and ordinances of the city; and 
B.  Advise the commission of the requirements, if any, of other city departments and of county, special district, state or other public and private agencies affected by the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.112, 1978).  
16.16.130 - Staff report. 
Any staff report to the commission shall incorporate within the report the recommendations made by the development review committee. A copy of this report shall be served on the subdivider by mail or personal delivery at least three calendar days prior to the date set for consideration of the tentative map by the commission. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.113, 1978).  
16.16.140 - Commission consideration—Deadline. 
Within the time specified by Section 66452. 1 of the Subdivision Map Act, unless such time has been waived, or extended by mutual agreement between the subdivider and the city, the commission shall consider the tentative map at a public hearing and thereafter render its report. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.114, 1978).  
16.16.150 - Public hearing—Notice. 
Noticing shall be consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.115, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 2, 6-13-2017)  
16.16.160 - Public hearing—Conduct. 
At the public hearing the commission shall consider the report of the development review committee, and hear the testimony of the subdivider and any other interested person relative to the tentative map. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.116, 1978).  
16.16.170 - Action by commission—Alternatives—Basis. 
After the close of the public hearing the commission: 
A.  Shall, in the case of any tentative parcel map, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the map and report its action to the subdivider; 
B.  May, in the case of a tentative subdivision map, 
1.  Disapprove the map and report its action to the subdivider; 
2.  Recommend to the council approval or conditional approval of the map. 
C.  The commission shall base its decision on the conformity of the tentative map to the requirements of this title, the zoning code, the general plan, any applicable specific plans, and any other applicable ordinances, resolutions, or provisions of law. The commission shall make such findings as are required by Section 66474 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
D.  The decision of the commission approving, conditionally approving, or disapproving a tentative parcel map, or disapproving a tentative subdivision map, is final unless appealed as provided in Section 16.16.200, 
(Ord. 365 § 4.117, 1978).  
16.16.180 - Withdrawal. 
A request for withdrawal of a tentative map shall be submitted to the commission in writing in advance of the hearing unless the request is made at the public hearing on the tentative map. On the receipt of any such request, the commission shall notify all concerned parties of the withdrawal. No refund of the filing fee shall be made for any such withdrawn map unless such request is made prior to the distribution of copies of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.118, 1978).  
16.16.190 - Council action. 
A.  If the commission recommends to the council approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map, the council shall consider the report of the commission and act thereon as set forth in Section 66452.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. Action shall be taken after a public hearing, notice of which shall be given as prescribed in Section 16.16.150. 
B.  The council shall base its decision on the conformity of the tentative map to the requirements of this title, the zoning code, the general plan, any applicable specific plans, and any other applicable ordinances, resolutions, or provisions of law. The council shall make such findings as are required by Section 66474 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.119, 1978).  
16.16.200 - Appeal—Who may file—Procedure generally. 
The subdivider, or any interested person, may appeal to the council from a decision by the commission approving, conditionally approving, or disapproving a tentative parcel map, or disapproving a tentative subdivision map. The appeal shall be filed, heard and decided within the time specified in Section 66452.5 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.120, 1978).  
16.16.210 - Appeal—Notice. 
The clerk shall give notice of hearing of the appeal as provided by Section 16.16.150. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.121, 1978).  
16.16.220 - Appeal—Hearing—Council action. 
The council may deny or sustain the appeal, sustain, reject or modify the decision of the commission, in whole or in part, or it may return the matter to the commission for further consideration and report to the council. The council may hear the testimony of any interested person and may consider any relevant evidence whether or not the same was considered by the commission. The clerk shall forward to the appellant and the commission a written report of the decision of the council on the appeal. 
(Ord. 365 § 4.122, 1978).  
Chapter 16.18 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAP 
Sections: 
 
16.18.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Sect. 66498.1) of Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code (the "Vesting Tentative Map Statute"). 
(Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
16.18.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Except as otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter, the provisions of this title shall apply to vesting tentative maps. 
B.  The regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
16.18.030 - Consistency. 
Any land subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map shall be consistent with the Rocklin General Plan, any applicable specific plan and Title 17 (zoning code) and any other applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
16.18.040 - Concurrent application. 
If a subdivider files an application for a vesting tentative map, seeking the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, concurrent applications for all other discretionary entitlements including rezoning, specific plan use permit and design review must be filed. 
(Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
16.18.050 - Application. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to residential, commercial and industrial developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  Making application for a vested tentative map shall be in the sole discretion of the subdivider. 
(Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
16.18.060 - Filing. 
A vesting tentative map shall contain, or be accompanied by, the following information, in addition to all other filing requirements applicable to tentative maps contained in this title: 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map"; 
B.  A vesting tentative map shall be accompanied by the following information in a form satisfactory to the community development director and city engineer: 
1.  Pertinent submittal materials to make concurrent application(s) for any other required discretionary entitlements in accordance with Section 16.18.050, 
2.  Detailed drawings, including a site plan, building elevations and landscape plan for the development of the land proposed for subdivision. This requirement may be waived by the community development director for single- family residential subdivisions that do not have planned development zoning classifications, 
3.  Sewer, water, storm drain and road details, 
4.  Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put, 
5.  Detailed Grading Plans. When the grading plan is revised after the vesting tentative map and preliminary grading plan have been considered and approved at a public hearing, the revised plan shall be filed with the director and shall be subject to the same hearing process and findings requirements as the original application, except that the subsequent hearings and decision shall be limited to the revised grading plan and the effects of the revisions on the design and improvement requirements of the tentative map, 
6.  Geological studies, 
7.  Flood control information, 
8.  Any other studies requested by the community development director and city engineer. 
(Ord. 633 § 2, 1990; Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
16.18.070 - Processing. 
A.  All vesting tentative maps shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 16.16; provided, that notwithstanding Section 16.16.170 A, all vesting tentative maps shall be heard and considered by the council. 
B.  A vesting tentative map shall not be approved if all other discretionary permits and/or approvals have not been approved either prior to or concurrently with the map. 
C.  Notwithstanding Section 16.20.060, the time for filing a parcel or final map for a vesting tentative map shall not be extended. Failure to file a parcel or final map within the time period established by Section 16.20.050 shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map for all or any part of the property included within the vesting tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new map pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  A vesting tentative map shall not be approved or conditionally approved unless, in addition to all other required findings, the council finds on the basis of the studies and reports submitted by the subdivider that all public facilities necessary to serve the subdivision or mitigate any impacts created by the subdivision will be available for the entire time that the vesting tentative map is valid plus any time during which the rights conferred by Section 16.18.080 exist. 
(Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
16.18.080 - Rights conferred. 
A.  Approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the city's ordinances, policies and standards used to determine whether to approve or disapprove an application for a tentative map in effect at the time the application for the vesting tentative map is deemed complete. A determination of whether a development substantially complies with the approved or conditionally approved map, or with the ordinances, policies or standards described in this subsection, may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.86. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a subsequent permit or entitlement for development, unless it is an approved vesting tentative map, may be conditioned or denied if it is determined that: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the users of the subdivision or those persons in the immediate vicinity in a condition dangerous to their health or safety; 
2.  The condition or denial is required to comply with state or federal law. 
(Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
16.18.090 - Expiration. 
A.  The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall expire if: 
1.  A final map or parcel map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map; 
2.  The applicant has requested and the city has approved a change in the type, density, bulk or design of the development, unless an amendment to the vesting tentative map has been approved. 
B.  Upon the filing of a final map or parcel map for a vesting tentative map the rights conferred by Section 16.18.080 shall continue for one year. Where several final maps or parcel maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map this period shall begin for each phase when the final map or parcel map for that phase is recorded. 
C.  The time period set forth in subsection B of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is accepted. 
D.  A subdivider may apply to the council for a one-year extension of the rights conferred by subsection B of this section any time before the initial one-year time period expires. An extension may be granted if the council finds that the map still complies with the requirements of this title. The council may approve, conditionally approve or deny an extension in its sole discretion. 
E.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time set forth in subsections B through D of this section, the rights shall continue until the expiration of the building permit and any extensions of the building permit. 
F.  Upon the expiration of the time limits specified in subsections B, C, D and E, all rights conferred by this section shall cease and the project shall be considered as the same as any subdivision which was not processed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 603 § 3 (part), 1989).  
Chapter 16.20 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Required when. 
Except as provided in this chapter, a parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any subdivision for which a final map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.101, 1978).  
16.20.020 - Exceptions. 
A.  The commission may by resolution waive the requirement for a parcel map if it determines such map is not required because the proposed division of land complies with all the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, and it makes the findings set forth in Section 66428 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  If the commission determines that a parcel map is not required it shall find and record in writing in the office of the recorder of the county that the proposed division of land complies with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.102, 1978).  
16.20.030 - Tentative map required. 
A tentative map shall be submitted for all land to be divided by a parcel map. Except as provided in this chapter, the tentative map shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.16. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.103, 1978).  
16.20.040 - Filing deadline. 
Within thirty-six months of the date of approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may cause a parcel map to be prepared and filed in accordance with the tentative map as approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 801 § 1, 1999: Ord. 365 § 5.105, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 4, 1-9-2018)  
16.20.050 - Failure to file. 
Failure to file a parcel map within thirty-six months of the date of approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, or within any extended period of time granted by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall terminate all proceedings. Before a parcel may thereafter be filed, a new tentative map shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 470 § 1, 1982: Ord. 427 § 1, 1980; Ord. 365 § 5.106, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 4, 1-9-2018)  
16.20.060 - Extension of deadline. 
A.  The commission may grant one or more extensions of time up to, but not exceeding a total of four years, beyond the initial thirty-six months allowed for the filing of a parcel map. No single extension shall be granted for longer than a twenty-four-month period. Applications for time extensions shall be made in writing to the planning department prior to the expiration of the tentative map. The application shall include a justification for approval of the extension, an explanation stating the reason the map was not finalized within the initial map life, and an anticipated project activity timeline. A representative for the project shall also be required to be present at any/all public hearings for the extension. Upon submittal of a complete application to extend the map, the map shall be automatically extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved or denied, whichever occurs first. A fee for processing any such extension shall be required in an amount to be determined by resolution of the council. 
B.  Denial of a time extension by the commission may be appealed to the council as provided in subsection (c) of Section 66463.5 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 801 § 2, 1999: Ord. 470 § 2, 1982; Ord. 427 § 2, 1980; Ord. 365 § 5.107, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 4, 1-9-2018)  
16.20.070 - Preparation—Requirements generally. 
The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and to the following: 
A.  General form and layout of the map, including size and type of lettering, drafting and location of acknowledgements, etc., shall be as determined by the city engineer. 
B.  The scale of the map shall be one inch equals fifty feet, unless otherwise permitted by the city engineer, but in any case the map shall show clearly all details of the subdivision. 
C.  All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot. 
D.  If more than three sheets are necessary to show the entire subdivision, an index map shall be included on one of the sheets. 
E.  Parcel map number, scale and north point shall be shown on each sheet. 
F.  A title sheet, designated as page number 1 of the parcel map, shall be provided; except where the size of the subdivision permits, the information to be required to be shown thereon may be shown on the same sheet as the map of the subdivision. 
G.  The parcel map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when filed that legible prints and negatives can be made from it. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.108, 1978).  
16.20.080 - Title sheet. 
There shall be a title sheet which shall include the following information: 
A.  Title, comprising the parcel map number as secured from the planning department, placed at the top of the sheet, followed by the words, "City of Rocklin;" 
B.  Below the title shall be a subtitle consisting of a description of all the property being divided by reference to a map or maps, final judgment in any action in partition, maps previously filed under authority of the Subdivision Map Act, or by reference to any plat of any United States survey, whichever of the above are applicable. References to tracts and subdivisions and the description must be worded identically with original records. References to a book and page(s) of record must be complete. 
C.  Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgements, endorsements, acceptances and notarial seals required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act and or by this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.109, 1978).  
16.20.090 - Information on map—Tentative map conformance. 
The parcel map shall substantially conform to the tentative map approved or conditionally approved by the commission including any approved modifications, and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The boundary line of the subdivision shall be designated by an approximate one-eighth- inch border of light-blue ink applied on the reverse side of the tracing and inside the boundary line. Such border shall be of density to appear on the blue-line print of the map without obliterating any figures, lines or other data; 
B.  If a field survey is required, all survey data and information required; 
C.  All lots or parcels intended for sale or reserved for private purposes with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in each case; 
D.  Each parcel, identified by a number, and its relationship to surrounding surveys. The location of any remainder of the original parcel having a gross area of five acres or more shall be indicated but need not be indicated by survey. The location of such remainder parcel may be indicated by deed reference to the existing remainder boundaries; 
E.  The location and width of streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and other easements and the portions thereof dedicated or offered for dedication to the city; 
F.  The lines of existing public or private easements to which the lots are subject, shown in dash line; 
G.  All limitation on rights of access to and from streets and lots and other parcels of land. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.110, 1978).  
16.20.100 - Data accompanying. 
The following data in sufficient copies as required by the city engineer shall be filed with the parcel map: 
A.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owners, subdivider and persons preparing the parcel map; 
B.  A filing fee as determined by resolution of the council; 
C.  A guarantee of title or letter from the title company, certifying that the signatures of all persons making dedications and executing certificates and acknowledgements required by subdivision (f) of Section 66445 of the Subdivision Map Act appear and are correctly shown; 
D.  If a field survey has been made, the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey was made shall furnish the city engineer field notes or such other information as the city engineer may require; 
E.  The plans, profiles, cross-sections, specifications, applicable permits for the construction and/or installation of improvements as specified by the city engineer; 
F.  A final grading plan, if required; 
G.  The agreement to make improvements and the security for such improvements as required by Article VI of Chapter 16.28; 
H.  All protective covenants, conditions or restrictions of the subdivision in the form in which the same are to be recorded; 
I.  All other data required by law or as a condition of approval of the tentative map, and such other information as is required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.111, 1978).  
16.20.110 - Dedication offers. 
Offers of dedication(s) of land for public purposes shall be included on the title sheet as provided by subsection D of Section 16.20.080; except, that in those instances approved by the city attorney, the offer of dedication may be made by separate instrument. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.112, 1978).  
16.20.120 - Survey or record-data basis. 
If the subdivision creates four parcels or less, the city engineer may authorize that the parcel may be compiled from available record data when the location of any boundary on the parcel map, either by monument or possessory lines is certain. All other parcel maps shall be based upon a field survey made in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.113, 1978).  
16.20.130 - Execution of certificates—Filing map. 
The subdivider shall cause the surveyor's certificate to be executed and shall file with the city engineer as many prints of the parcel map as the city engineer requires. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.114, 1978).  
16.20.140 - City engineer action. 
A.  Upon receipt of the parcel map and accompanying data, the city engineer shall examine the same, determine if the parcel map is in substantial conformity with the approved tentative map, its conditions, the Subdivision Map Act and other requirements of this title. 
B.  The city engineer shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication, either by certificate on the title sheet where the offer is on the title sheet, or on the separate instrument when authorized by Section 16.20.110. 
(Ord. 365 § 5.115, 1978).  
Chapter 16.24 - FINAL MAP 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Required when. 
A final map shall be required for all subdivisions for which a tentative map has been filed except for those subdivisions for which a parcel map has been filed in accordance with Chapter 16.20. 
(Ord. 365 § 6.101, 1978).  
16.24.020 - Condominiums and community apartment projects. 
Approval of a final map for a subdivision resulting from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project or community apartment project shall be subject to the provisions of Section 66427.1 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 365 § 19.102, 1978).  
16.24.030 - Deadline to file. 
Within thirty-six months of the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, or within such additional time as may be granted by the council, the subdivider may cause the proposed subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed and a final map be prepared and filed as provided in this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 801 § 3, 1999: Ord. 470 § 3, 1982: Ord. 365 § 6.102, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 5, 1-9-2018)  
16.24.040 - Failure to file—Extensions. 
A.  Failure to file a final map within the time specified in Section 16.24.030 shall terminate all proceedings, unless an extension of time to file has been granted by the council. The council may grant one or more extensions of time up to but not exceeding a total of an additional four years beyond the initial thirty-six months allowed for filing a final map. No single extension shall be granted for longer than a twenty-four month period. Applications for time extensions shall be made in writing to the planning department prior to the expiration of the tentative map. The application shall include a justification for approval of the extension, an explanation stating the reason the map was not finalized within the initial map life, and an anticipated project activity timeline. A representative for the project shall also be required to be present at any/all public hearings for the extension. Upon submittal of a complete application to extend the map, the map shall be automatically extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved or denied, whichever occurs first. A fee for processing any such extension shall be required in an amount to be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 801 § 4, 1999: Ord. 470 § 4, 1982; Ord. 427 § 3, 1980; Ord. 365 § 6.103, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 5, 1-9-2018)  
16.24.045 - Stay of time period. 
The procedure for reviewing requests for a stay of the time period in which an approved tentative map is valid, pursuant to Section 66452.6 of the Government Code, shall be the same procedure as an application for extension of approval. 
(Ord. 481 § 1, 1982: Ord. 365 § 6.103.5, 1978).  
16.24.050 - Preparation—Specifications generally. 
The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor in the manner required by the Subdivision Map Act and shall conform to all of the following: 
A.  The general form and layout of the map, including size and type of lettering, drafting and location of acknowledgements, etc., shall be determined by the city engineer. 
B.  The scale of the map shall be one inch equals one hundred feet, unless otherwise permitted by the city engineer, but in any case the map shall show clearly all details of the subdivision. 
C.  All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of the foot. No ditto marks shall be used. 
D.  If more than three sheets are necessary to show the entire subdivision, an index map shall be included on one of the sheets. 
E.  The subdivision designation, tract number, scale and north point shall be shown on each sheet. 
F.  A title sheet, designated as page 1 of the final map shall be provided unless the size of the subdivision permits all of the information to be shown on the same sheet. 
G.  The final map shall be in such condition when filed that legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom. 
(Ord. 365 § 6.104, 1978).  
16.24.060 - Title sheet. 
There shall be a title sheet which shall contain the following information: 
A.  Title, comprising the tract number as secured from the city engineer's office, followed by the words "City of Rocklin"; 
B.  Below the title shall be a subtitle consisting of a description of all the property being divided by reference to a map or maps, final judgment in any action in partition, maps previously filed under authority of the Subdivision Map Act, or by reference to any plat of any United States survey whichever of the above are applicable; 
References to tracts and subdivisions and the description must be worded identically with original records. References to a book and page(s) of record must be complete; 
C.  The subtitle of final maps filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage shall consist of the words "A Reversion to Acreage of _______," followed by a legal description, by reference to title and date of approval of the previously approved subdivision map(s) for the property; 
D.  Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgements, endorsements, acceptances and notarial seals required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act and/or by this title; 
E.  The basis of bearings used in the field survey with reference to one or more previously recorded subdivision maps or other record acceptable to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 365 § 6.105, 1978).  
16.24.070 - Content of map—Tentative map conformance. 
The final map shall substantially conform to the tentative map approved or conditionally approved by the council including any approved modifications, and shall include the following: 
A.  The boundary line of the subdivision shall be designated by heavy colored border line; 
B.  All areas shown on the map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision shall be labeled "not a part of this subdivision" or "N. A. P. O. T. S." All lines delineating such areas shall be dashed; 
C.  All survey data and information; 
D.  All lots or parcels whether intended for sale, or reserved for private purposes or offered for dedication to the city or any other public agency, which shall have all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined; 
E.  All lots shall be numbered consecutively without omissions or duplications, throughout the subdivision starting with the number 1. Only parcels offered for dedication other than for streets and easements shall be designated by letters. Each numbered lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet; 
F.  The location and total width of all streets. alleys, pedestrian ways, equestrian hiking trails and biking trails and the names of streets and the width of each street, alley, pedestrian way, equestrian trail, hiking trail and bike path being dedicated; 
G.  The location and widths of any other rights-of-way within the subdivision; 
H.  Building setback lines; 
I.  All necessary data, including widths and boundaries, relating to all public easements which shall be clearly labeled and identified as to nature and purpose. Previously recorded easements shall be identified by reference to record data. Any easement not definitely located of record shall appear in the title sheet. Easements shall be denoted by dash lines; 
J.  All limitation on rights of access to and from streets and lots and other parcels of land; 
K.  The location of any streams, creeks, channels or tributaries and their respective floodplains and any body of water in or adjacent to the subdivision; 
L.  All limitations on rights of access to, or use of any stream, creek, channel, or body of water in or adjacent to the subdivision; 
M.  Any city boundary crossing or adjoining the subdivision shall be clearly designated and identified. 
(Ord. 365 § 6.106, 1978).  
16.24.080 - Accompanying data. 
The following data in as many copies as required by the city engineer shall be filed with the final map: 
A.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owners, subdivider, and persons preparing the final map; 
B.  A filing fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the council; 
C.  A guarantee of title or letter from the title company, certifying that the signatures of all persons making dedications and executing certificates and acknowledgements required of the Subdivision Map Act appear and are correctly shown; 
D.  The agreement to make improvements and the security for such improvements as required by Article VI of Chapter 16.28; 
E.  All protective covenants, conditions and restrictions in the form in which the same are to be recorded; 
F.  All other data required by law or imposed as a condition of approval of the tentative map; 
G.  The following information, if required by the city engineer: 
1.  A traverse sheet in a form to be approved by him and complete plans, profiles and cross sections for the construction and installation of the improvements required by this title. 
2.  A final grading plan. 
(Ord. 365 § 6.107, 1978).  
16.24.090 - Dedication offers. 
Offers of dedication(s) of land for public purposes shall be included on the title sheet as provided by Section 6.24.060(D); except, that in those instances approved by the city attorney, the offer of dedication may be made by separate instrument. 
(Ord. 365 § 6.108, 1978).  
16.24.100 - Filing—City engineer certification. 
The subdivider shall cause all certificates to be executed except those to be executed by the city engineer, the clerk and the county recorder, and shall file with the city engineer the original tracing of the final map and as many prints thereof as the city engineer may require. The city engineer shall examine the map and if he finds it to be in substantial conformity with the approved tentative map and with improvement plans and specifications in compliance with the requirements of this title, and such other plans that are pertinent, he shall execute the certificate of the city engineer on the map. He shall file the map with the clerk. Should the map or other accompanying documents be found to be incomplete or incorrect, the city engineer shall notify the subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made before the map may be certified. 
(Ord. 365 § 6.109, 1978).  
16.24.110 - Council action. 
Within the time specified in Section 66458 of the Subdivision Map Act, after the map is filed by the city engineer with the clerk, the council shall approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. It shall disapprove a map if it does not conform as provided above. It shall make the findings required by Section 66474 of the Subdivision Map Act. If at the time of approval of the final map all public improvements required in the particular subdivision have not been completed and accepted in accordance with the provisions of this title, the council shall, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map, require the subdivider to enter into an agreement as provided by Section 16.28.3 10. The agreement shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, and shall be secured as provided by Sections 16.28.310 and 16.28.320. 
(Ord. 365 § 6.110, 1978).  
Chapter 16.28 - IMPROVEMENTS AND DEDICATIONS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Conformity Requirements and Access Rights 
 
16.28.010 - Legal conformity—Development restriction basis. 
A.  The size, design, character, grade location, orientation and configuration of lots within the proposed subdivision and all public improvements required in connection therewith shall be consistent with the density and uses authorized for the area by the general plan and zoning code of the city, and any applicable specific plans, and the design and improvement standards. 
B.  The density, timing or sequence of development may be restricted by considerations of safety, traffic access or circulation, the slope of the terrain, the physical suitability of the site (including soil conditions), the nature and extent of existing development, the availability of public utilities, or other provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 7.101, 1978).  
16.28.020 - Lot-zoning conformity. 
All subdivision shall result in lots which comply with the requirements set forth for the zone(s) in which the property is located as set forth in Title 17. 
(Ord. 365 § 7.102, 1978).  
16.28.030 - Access rights waiver. 
There may be imposed on an offer of dedication, or a dedication of any street, a requirement that access rights to such street from any property shown on a final or parcel map abutting such street be waived, as authorized by Section 66476 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 7.103, 1978).  
Article II. - Dedication and In-lieu Fees 
 
16.28.040 - Intent. 
It is the intent of the council in enacting this article to take advantage, to the fullest extent permitted by law, of those provisions of the Subdivision Map Act which permit local agencies to prescribe by ordinance the dedication of land for specified public purposes. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.101, 1978).  
16.28.050 - Statutorily required ordinance—Provisions deemed. 
The ordinance codified in this article, chapter and title shall be deemed to be the requisite local ordinance required by the Subdivision Map Act for the imposition of the dedication of land for all purposes therein prescribed, including, but not limited to, the following: 
Use 	Subdivision Map Act Section 
Streets, alleys, drainage, public utilities and other easements 	66475 
Bicycle paths 	66475.1 
Transit facilities 	66475.2 
Parks and recreation facilities (subject to the standards and criteria set forth in Sections 16.28.060 through 16.28.160) 	66477 
Schools 	66478 
 
(Ord. 365 § 8.102, 1978).  
16.28.060 - Parks—Statutory authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state of California. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of the fee is required by this article are in accordance with the recreation element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.103, 1978).  
16.28.070 - Parks—Requirements—Fee in lieu. 
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this article. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.104, 1978).  
16.28.080 - Parks—Fees-only when—General plan recreation element—Desirability. 
Dedication of land, payment of in-lieu fees, or a combination of both shall be determined by consideration of the following: 
A.  Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing fifty parcels or less, and generally dedication will be required only where the subdivision contains more than two hundred parcels; 
B.  The recreation element of the general plan; 
C.  The desirability of dedication in terms of the proximity of existing facilities, the uniqueness of the land, available access and similar consideration. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.105, 1978).  
16.28.090 - Parks—Amount of land. 
Principles and standards for park and recreational facilities have been designated in the recreation element of the general plan. The subdivider shall, when required to, dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision. The amount of land to be provided shall generally not be less than five acres per one thousand of population. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.106, 1978).  
16.28.100 - Parks—Amount of fee. 
Whenever a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the subdivider shall pay a fee as specified by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 422 § 1, 1980: Ord. 365 § 8.107, 1978).  
16.28.110 - Parks—Use of fees or land. 
The land, fees, or combination thereof shall be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision by way of the purchase and development of necessary land, or if the commission determines that there is sufficient land available to serve the subdivision, for improving such land for park and recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.108, 1978).  
16.28.120 - Parks—Subdivisions outside general plan. 
Where the proposed subdivision lies within an area not then, but to be included within the general plan, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, in accordance with the adopted park and recreational principles and standards of the general plan and in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.111, 1978).  
16.28.130 - Parks—Credit for private open space. 
No credit shall be given for private open space in a subdivision except as follows: 
A.  Whenever any subdivision of fifty or more lots is to be developed as a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project, and private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in the proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed fifty percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the commission, upon the recommendation of the parks and recreation commission, finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met: 
1.  That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by Title 17 and the building code shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; and 
2.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or restrictions; and 
3.  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor; and 
4.  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location; and 
5.  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the general plan. 
B.  Before credit is given, the commission shall make written findings that the above standards are met. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.112, 1978). 
(Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-27-2010)  
16.28.140 - Parks—Timing of determination and dedication. 
A.  At the time of approval of the tentative subdivision map or parcel map, the commission shall determine the land to be dedicated and/or the fees to be paid by the subdivider and whether or not any credit shall be given for private open space under Section 16.28.130. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fee without credit at the time of the filing of the final subdivision map or parcel map. 
B.  In the event credit was established, the amount of the credit shall be reimbursed upon a determination of the planning director that the open space and related facilities that qualified the subdivision or parcel map for credit have been completed per the approved plans. 
C.  In the event a portion of the fee upon which the final subdivision or parcel map was conditioned is based on the number of bedrooms per dwelling unit, that portion of the fee shall be paid upon issuance of building permits for the project. 
(Ord. 470 § 5, 1982: Ord. 365 § 8.113, 1978).  
16.28.150 - Parks—Commencement of development. 
At the time of approval of the final map, or parcel map, the council shall specify when development of the park or recreational facilities shall begin. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.114, 1978).  
16.28.160 - Parks—Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article do not apply to industrial subdivisions, nor do they apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of air space in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added, nor to parcel maps for a subdivision containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 365 § 8.115, 1978).  
Article III. - Bridge and Thoroughfare Fees 
 
16.28.170 - Intent. 
It is the intent of the council in enacting this article to take advantage, to the fullest extent permitted by law, of those provisions of the Subdivision Map Act which permit the collection of a fee for the construction of bridges and major thoroughfares. 
(Ord. 365 § 9.101, 1978).  
16.28.180 - Statutorily required ordinance—Considerations in lieu of fees. 
A.  There are adopted by reference, as though set out in full, the provisions of subsections (a) through (f) of Section 66484 of the Subdivision Map Act, and the provisions so adopted shall constitute the local ordinance required for the imposition of fees for bridges and major thoroughfares. 
B.  As required by subsection (a) of Section 66484, reference is made to the circulation element of the general plan and the appropriate provisions thereof. 
C.  As permitted by subsection (b) of Section 66484, considerations, as determined appropriate by the council, may be accepted in lieu of the payment of fees under this article. 
(Ord. 365 § 9.102, 1978).  
Article IV. - Reimbursement for Work Outside Subdivision 
 
16.28.190 - Intent. 
It is the intent of the council in enacting this article to take advantage, to the fullest extent permitted by law, of those provisions of the Subdivision Map Act which permit the city to require a subdivider to install and dedicate to the public improvements with supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision. 
(Ord. 365 § 10.101, 1978).  
16.28.200 - Statutorily required ordinance. 
This article shall be deemed to be the requisite local ordinance required by Section 66485 of the Subdivision Map Act for the imposition on a subdivider of the requirement to install and dedicate to the public improvements with supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision. 
(Ord. 365 § 10.102, 1978).  
16.28.210 - Governing provisions. 
Reimbursement to the subdivider for the installation of supplemental improvements shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 66486, 66487, and 66489 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 10.103, 1978).  
Article V. - Reservations 
 
16.28.220 - Intent. 
It is the intent of the council in enacting this article to take advantage, to the fullest extent permitted by law, of those provisions of the Subdivision Map Act which permit the city to require the subdivider to reserve real property for public use. 
(Ord. 365 § 11.101, 1978).  
16.28.230 - Statutorily required ordinance. 
This article shall be deemed to be the requisite local ordinance required by Section 66479 of the Subdivision Map Act for the imposition on a subdivider of the requirement to reserve certain real property for public uses. 
(Ord. 365 § 11.102, 1978).  
16.28.240 - Principles and standards. 
Where a facility or use specified in Section 66479 is shown in an adopted specific plan or the community facilities element, recreation and parks element and/or a public building element of the general plan, the subdivider may be required by the council to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the principles and standards contained in the specific plan or general plan, subject to the limitations set forth in Section 66479 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 11.103, 1978).  
Article VI. - Improvements 
 
16.28.250 - Required—Conformity. 
The subdivider shall construct or install all public improvements as may be required within the subdivision in accordance with the provisions of Article I. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.101. 1978).  
16.28.260 - Plans—Preparation—Fees. 
A.  Improvement plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered civil engineer and shall conform to Article I and any other applicable improvement standards adopted by the council. The form, layout, scale and other particulars of the plans and the number of copies to be provided, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer. 
B.  The final map shall not be deemed to be submitted for approval until the preparation of the plans is completed and the plans have been accepted by the city engineer. 
C.  Standard engineering fees to be charged by the city for the checking of any plans by the city engineer shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.102, 1978).  
16.28.270 - Plans—Approval—Work beginning. 
The improvement plan shall have been approved by the city engineer prior to the commencement of any work or improvement. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.103, 1978).  
16.28.280 - Utility line undergrounding. 
Utility lines, including but not limited to electrical, natural gas, telephone, cable television, and street lighting service lines shall be placed underground. Pertinent equipment such as transformers, terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed above ground when in the opinion of the city engineer it is impractical under the circumstances to place the same underground. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.104, 1978).  
16.28.290 - Temporary improvements. 
In addition to permanent improvements, temporary improvements may be required to be made prior to or concurrent with permanent improvements. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.105, 1978).  
16.28.300 - Inspections. 
All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the city engineer. The subdivider shall pay the city a fee to defray the cost of making such inspections. The applicable inspection fees shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.106, 1978).  
16.28.310 - Completion agreement. 
A.  If the required improvements are not satisfactorily completed before a final map or parcel map is filed with the city engineer, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city to make all improvements as may be required upon approval of such map. The improvement agreement to be executed by the subdivider shall be in writing, and shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. The same shall be secured in a manner approved by the city attorney, subject to the provisions of Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  This section shall be deemed the local ordinance regarding an agreement to install improvements as required by Section 66411.1 of the Subdivision Map Act for subdivisions of five or less parcels and the agreement executed pursuant hereto shall be the applicable agreement. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.107, 1978).  
16.28.320 - Security—Amount. 
The improvement security shall be provided in the amount of: 
A.  One hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement; 
B.  One hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed securing payment to the contractor, the subcontractor, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment to them for the improvement of the performance of the required act; 
C.  The amount determined to be necessary to guarantee or warrant the work for a period of one year following completion or acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished; 
D.  An additional amount may be included as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees, which may be incurred by the city in enforcing the obligation secured. The improvement security shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work to the extent that such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.108, 1978).  
16.28.330 - Security—Release. 
Release of the improvement securities mentioned above shall be as provided in Section 66499.7 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 12.109, 1978).  
Chapter 16.32 - MONUMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Requirement generally. 
At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards prescribed by Section 66495 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 14.101, 1978).  
16.32.020 - Boundary monuments. 
Monuments shall be set on the exterior boundary of the subdivision at all corners, angle points, beginnings and endings of curves, and at intermediate points as determined by the city engineer to be reasonably necessary to establish the exterior boundaries. The locations of inaccessible points may be established by ties and shall be so noted on the final or parcel map. At least one extension boundary line shall be adequately monumented or referenced prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 365 § 14.102, 1978).  
16.32.030 - Interior monuments. 
Interior monuments shall be set at all block and lot corners and angle points and at the beginnings and ends of curves, and along street and alley center lines at the beginnings and ends of curves, at points of intersection with center lines of other existing and proposed streets and alleys, and at the points of intersection with the exterior boundary lines. Interior property line and center line monuments and ties may be set after the final map or parcel map is recorded. 
(Ord. 365 § 14.103, 1978).  
16.32.040 - Deferral—Agreement—City installation. 
A.  In the event any or all of the required monuments are to be set after recordation of the final map or parcel map, the engineer or surveyor certificate shall specify the date established by the city engineer by which the monuments will be set. The subdivider shall, prior to the submission of such map to the city engineer for filing, furnish to the city an agreement to install the monuments together with security approved by the city attorney in an amount equal to the estimated cost of setting such deferred monuments. 
B.  In the event the deferred monuments are not set within the period of time specified, or within the approved extended period of time, and provided that all improvement work has been completed, the city engineer shall give written notice directing the engineer or surveyor of record to set such monuments within sixty days. 
C.  If the engineer or surveyor of record fails to set the monuments within the time specified the city engineer shall take action to have a substitute engineer or surveyor set the monuments required. The city engineer shall pay to the substitute engineer or surveyor from the security provided by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 365 § 14.104, 1978).  
16.32.050 - Type—Setting—Marking. 
All monuments set in the course of the survey as required by this title shall be of the type specified by the city engineer and shall be set to the depth and in the manner prescribed therefor. Further, all monuments shall be visibly marked or tagged as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 365 § 14.105, 1978).  
16.32.060 - Survey data on maps. 
The city engineer shall specify the survey data and information to be shown on each final map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 365 § 14.106, 1978).  
Chapter 16.36 - MODIFICATION 
Sections: 
 
16.36.010 - Authority limit—Minor change. 
The council and the commission may grant, conditionally grant or deny requests by a subdivider for modifications to the requirements or standards imposed by this title; provided, however, that no modifications may be made to any requirement expressly imposed by the Subdivision Map Act; and further provided, that nothing in this title shall be construed as altering or conflicting with the powers and duties of the council and the commission to authorize variances from the regulations and requirements of Title 17. A minor change in the design of a subdivision which is not violative of the requirements or standards imposed in this title shall not be deemed to be a modification as the term is used in this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 13.101, 1978).  
16.36.020 - Filing time. 
Request for modifications shall be filed with the tentative map. 
(Ord. 365 § 13.102, 1978).  
16.36.030 - Application—Action delay agreement—Fee. 
A.  Applications for modifications shall be filed in writing by the subdivider with the planning department upon a form and in a number of copies required for that purpose as specified by the city engineer. In addition to any other information or material required, the application for modification shall be accompanied by written statement of the subdivider agreeing to an extension of time for action on the tentative map by the commission. The purpose for the extension of time is to permit staff time to examine the merits of the application for modification and to report on the same to the commission. 
B.  Each application shall state fully the nature and extent of the modifications required, the reasons therefor, and the facts relied upon. A nonrefundable fee to be determined by the council by resolution shall accompany each application for a modification. The fee shall be in addition to any fee required for processing the tentative map. 
(Ord. 365 § 13.103, 1978).  
16.36.040 - Design committee review—Affected agencies. 
The planning director shall transmit copies of the modification application to the city engineer and members of the design review committee for review and comment. The planning director may transmit copies to other public or private agencies or departments affected by the proposed subdivision as he deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 365 § 13.104, 1978).  
16.36.050 - Commission consideration—Action alternatives. 
A.  The commission shall consider the application for modification at the time it considers the tentative map. The commission shall proceed to hear testimony of the subdivider or any witnesses in his behalf, the comments of the design review committee, and the testimony of any other interested person. 
B.  On conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall, at the time it takes action on the tentative map, determine, on the basis of the evidence and testimony received, whether: 
1.  In the case of any tentative parcel map the modification shall be granted, conditionally granted, or denied; 
2.  In the case of any tentative subdivision map, to recommend to the council that such modification be granted, conditionally granted or denied. 
(Ord. 365 § 13.105, 1978).  
16.36.060 - Findings required. 
Before granting any modification, the commission shall make all of the following findings: 
A.  That the property to be divided is of such size or shape, or is affected by such topographic conditions, or that there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property that it is impossible, impractical or undesirable in the particular case to conform to the strict application of this title; 
B.  That the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or be injurious to other properties in the vicinity; 
C.  That the modification is in accord with the intent and purposes of this title and is not inconsistent with the general plan and adopted specific plans. 
(Ord. 365 § 13.106, 1978).  
16.36.070 - Council action. 
When the council acts upon a tentative subdivision map, either upon recommendation of the commission that the map be approved or conditionally approved, or upon an appeal from a disapproval of the map by the commission, it shall also act upon any proposed modification, taking into consideration the recommendation of the commission thereon. 
(Ord. 365 § 13.107, 1978).  
Chapter 16.40 - REVERSION, MERGER AND LOT CERTIFICATION 
Sections:  
Article I. - Certificates of Compliance 
 
16.40.010 - Application. 
Any person owning real property within the city may apply for the issuance of a certificate of compliance as set forth in Section 66499.35 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 16.101, 1978).  
16.40.020 - Fee. 
The application shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 365 § 16.102, 1978).  
16.40.030 - Commission consideration—Appeal to council. 
The commission shall consider the application. An appeal to the council from a decision of the commission may be filed with the clerk by any interested person, in writing, within ten days after a decision by the commission. 
(Ord. 365 § 16.103, 1978).  
Article II. - Reversion to Acreage 
 
16.40.040 - Petition filing—Commission report—Council action. 
Petitions for reversions to acreage shall be considered by the commission. The commission shall file a report with recommendations on the reversion with the council, and the council shall act thereon in the manner prescribed by Section 66499.15 through 66499.17 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 17.101, 1978).  
16.40.050 - Fee. 
The petition for reversion to acreage shall be accompanied by a fee to be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 365 § 17.102, 1978).  
Article III. - Merger 
 
16.40.060 - Conditions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, two or more contiguous parcels or lots which have been subdivided under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and applicable local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such lots or parcels are held by the same owner, unless any one of such lots or parcels does not conform to standards for minimum lot size and at least one of such contiguous parcels or lots is not developed with a building for which a lawful permit has been issued, in which case such parcels shall be merged. 
(Ord. 365 § 18.101, 1978).  
16.40.070 - Notice—Hearing. 
Whenever the planning director has knowledge that real property has merged pursuant to Section 16.40.060, he shall cause written notice to be given to the owner or owners of the parcels or lots to be affected by the merger. The notice shall advise the owner or owners of the intention to record a notice of merger and specify the time, date and place of a hearing by the commission at which the owners may present evidence why such notice shall not be recorded. The notice shall be given not less than thirty days prior to the hearing by the commission. The commission shall determine whether a notice of merger shall be recorded. 
(Ord. 365 § 18.102, 1978).  
Article IV. - Correction and Amendment 
 
16.40.080 - Correction certificate—Amending map. 
A certificate of correction or an amending map for the purposes set forth in Section 66469 of the Government Code may be approved by the city engineer. A copy of the amending map or certificate of correction shall be filed with the planning director. 
(Ord. 365 § 19.101, 1978).  
16.40.090 - Modification of recorded final map. 
A recorded final map or parcel map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map, upon approval of the city council. Applications for modification of a recorded final map or parcel map shall be filed, processed and considered at a noticed public hearing in the same manner as tentative maps as set forth in Sections 16.16.060 through 16.16.190. The city council shall not approve the requested modification unless the council finds that these are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of the recorded map no longer appropriate or necessary; that the modifications do not after any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded maps; and that the map as modified does not result in any of the conditions set forth in Section 66474 of the Government Code. In considering a request to modify a recorded final map or parcel map, the city council shall confine the hearing to consideration of and action on the proposed modification only. 
(Ord. 470 § 6, 1982: Ord. 365 § 19.103, 1978).  
Chapter 16.44 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
16.44.010 - Commission—Statutory advisory agency. 
The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency as the term is used in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 365 § 3.101, 1978).  
16.44.020 - Commission—Powers and duties. 
For purposes of this title the commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To review each tentative map and, based upon such review: 
1.  Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove any tentative parcel map, 
2.  Disapprove any tentative subdivision map, 
3.  Recommend to the council approval, or conditional approval, of any tentative subdivision map; 
B.  To approve modifications for any tentative parcel map and to recommend modifications for any tentative subdivision map in accordance with Chapter 16.36; 
C.  To review and make recommendations concerning proposed subdivisions in the unincorporated territory of the county in accordance with Section 66453 of the Subdivision Map Act; 
D.  Such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by the council. 
(Ord. 365 § 3.102, 1978).  
16.44.030 - Development review committee—Created—Composition. 
There is created a development review committee, to consist of a member of the planning department appointed by the city manager, the city engineer, the city manager and such other staff as may be designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. 365 § 3.103, 1978).  
16.44.040 - Development review committee—Powers and duties. 
The development review committee shall review each tentative map for the purpose of identifying any major problems concerning the proposed use of the land, the proposed design and improvements, and conflicts with the general plan or Title 17, and to indicate to the subdivider and/or his surveyor and engineer the existence of any problems or conflicts and any additional information which may be required prior to consideration of the map by the commission. The committee shall exercise such other duties as may be assigned by the commission. 
(Ord. 365 § 3.104, 1978).  
16.44.050 - Disapproval of maps—Restrictions. 
Neither the council nor the commission shall approve a map if it fails to meet any of the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act or this title or conditions imposed pursuant thereto. A final map shall be disapproved only for failure to meet or perform requirements or conditions which were applicable to the subdivision at the time of approval of the tentative map. The commission or council, when disapproving a map, shall make a finding identifying the requirements or conditions which have not been met or performed. 
(Ord. 365 § 3.105, 1978).  
16.44.060 - Disapproval of maps—Waiver for minor error. 
The provisions of Section 16.44.050 may be waived when the failure of the map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error, which does not materially affect the validity of the map. The subdivider may request such a determination by written request filed with the planning director. Such request shall be acted upon by the commission or the council as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. 365 § 3.106, 1978).  
Chapter 16.48 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
16.48.010 - Responsible officers—Suit to restrain or enjoin. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this title, the city engineer and the planning director shall jointly and separately enforce these regulations and the Subdivision Map Act within the city. 
B.  The city attorney is authorized on behalf of the city to file a suit in the Superior Court or other court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease or financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, or the conditions and terms of approval granted pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 365 § 15.101, 1978).  
16.48.020 - Violation—Procedure. 
Any officer or employee of the city who has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall immediately notify the city engineer. Upon receipt of said information, the city engineer shall, if satisfied a violation exists, proceed as set forth in Section 66499.36 of the Subdivision Map Act. The hearing prescribed by such section shall be held before the commission. An appeal to the council from a decision by the commission may be filed with the clerk by any interested person, in writing, within ten days after a decision of the commission. 
(Ord. 365 § 15.102, 1978).  
16.48.030 - Violation—Misdemeanor—Separate offenses. 
Any violation of this title shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. Each day a violation of this title continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 365 § 15.103, 1978).  
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters:  
Chapter 17.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.02.010 - Citation. 
This title shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to, as the "Zoning Code of the City of Rocklin." 
(Ord. 336 § 1.01.000, 1977).  
17.02.020 - Applicability. 
This title applies to the incorporated area of the city and any unincorporated area of the county which has been prezoned pursuant to the Government Code of the state. 
(Ord. 336 § 1.01.010, 1977).  
17.02.030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this title is to: 
A.  Regulate the use of buildings, structures and land as between agriculture, industry, business, residential use, and open space, including agriculture, recreation, enjoyment of scenic beauty and use of natural resources, and other purposes; 
B.  Regulate the location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings and structures; 
C.  Regulate the size and use of lots, setbacks, courts and other open spaces; 
D.  Regulate the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure; 
E.  Regulate the intensity of land use; 
F.  Establish requirements for off-street parking and loading; 
G.  Divide the city into zoning districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this title; 
H.  To provide for the enforcement of the regulations of this title. 
The purposes set forth above are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve, protect and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air; to prevent undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion on the streets; to provide adequate provisions for community utilities; and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. It is a further purpose of this title to implement the general plan of the city. 
(Ord. 336 § 1.01.020, 1977).  
17.02.040 - Amendments and additions—Incorporation. 
Whenever reference is made to any portion of this title, the reference applies to this title as adopted and any amendments or additions hereafter made. 
(Ord. 336 § 1.01.030, 1977).  
17.02.050 - Minimal character of regulations—Uniform applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this title within each zone shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniform for each class or kind of building, structure or use of land throughout the zone. 
(Ord. 336 § 1.01.040, 1977).  
17.02.060 - Construction. 
When not inconsistent with the context: 
A.  Words in the masculine gender include the feminine gender and the neuter gender. 
B.  Words in the singular include the plural. 
C.  The present tense includes the future. 
D.  "May" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.01.000, 1977).  
17.02.070 - Undefined words or phrases. 
When a word or phrase used in this title is not defined in Chapter 17.04, such word or phrase shall be defined as follows: 
A.  If the word or phrase has a dictionary definition, then such definition shall be used, unless the use of such definition would lead to an unreasonable result. 
B.  If no dictionary definition exists, then the word or phrase shall be defined as set forth in any generally recognized treatise or authority on zoning or planning. 
C.  If there is neither a dictionary definition, nor a definition in a generally recognized treatise or authority, then the word or phrase shall be defined according to its general usage and understanding in the community. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.03.000, 1977).  
17.02.080 - Public hearings and noticing. 
Notice of public hearings which are required by Titles 16 and 17 of the Rocklin Municipal Code, to be noticed pursuant to this section, shall be implemented consistent with the following requirements: 
A.  Pursuant to Section 65091 of the California Government Code, not less than ten days before the scheduled date of a hearing, public notice shall be given of such hearing in the manner listed herein. The notice shall state the date, time, and place of the hearing, identify the hearing body, provide a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and provide a general description of the real property, if any, which is the subject of the hearing. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owners of nearby property as required by California Planning and Zoning Law except that the noticing area shall be expanded to a radius of six hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the current tax assessor's records. The noticing information shall be current within six months of the hearing date. 
1.  In addition to the requirements stated above, a minimum of forty parcels shall be notified. If this minimum standard is not met with a six-hundred-foot noticing radius, the notification radius shall be increased in fifty-foot increments until a list of at least forty parcels is compiled. 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 3, 6-13-2017)  
Chapter 17.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - Accessory building. 
"Accessory building" means a building subordinate to the main building on the same lot, the use of which is incidental to the primary use of such main building. It includes barns, stables and similar facilities intended for horses and other large quadrupeds in residential zones where the keeping of such animals is permitted. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.000, 1977).  
17.04.020 - Animal hospital. 
"Animal hospital" means a facility for the care and treatment of animals, including associated veterinary offices. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.190, 1977).  
17.04.030 - Apartment. 
"Apartment" means a multiple-family structure intended for the lease or rental of individual dwelling units. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.010, 1977).  
17.04.031 - Assisted living facility. 
"Assisted living facility" means a type of community care facility that is maintained and operated to provide residents assistance with the personal activities of daily living (including dressing, feeding, toileting, bathing, grooming, mobility, and associated tasks); coordination of services by outside health care providers; monitoring of resident activities to help to ensure their health, safety, and well-being; and may include the administration or supervision of medication, or personal care services by a trained staff person. Housing types at an assisted living facility may range from a shared room to an individual apartment. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B1., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.032 - Auto body and paint shop. 
"Auto body and paint shop" means a business engaged in the repair and/or painting of automobile bodies. 
(Ord. 650 § 1, 1991).  
17.04.033 - Automotive dealership. 
"Automotive dealership" means a retail and service business that offers the sale, lease, purchase, repair and service of new and used: automobiles, sport utility vehicles and light trucks (not to exceed one ton). An automotive dealership may include the following features and operations incidental to the retail activities: indoor and outdoor display areas for promotion of sales of new and used automobiles, sport utility vehicles, and light trucks; vehicle rentals; offices; bays for service and repairs; areas for cleaning and detailing; parking; sales of auto parts and accessories; other areas including customer waiting facilities, kitchen/food service and employee break areas. 
(Ord. 840 § 1, 2001)  
17.04.034 - Automobile repair shop (heavy). 
"Automobile repair shop (heavy)" means a place of business engaged primarily in heavy repair of vehicle parts involving milling, grinding and welding, steam cleaning engines, or radiator repair (i.e., coring and routing) and part replacement or maintenance (automobile repair (light)). Auto body repair and painting are not included in this definition. 
(Ord. 650 § 2, 1991).  
17.04.036 - Automobile repair shop (light). 
"Automobile repair shop (light)" means a business engaged primarily in maintenance and light repair of automobile vehicles including but not limited to oil changes, lubrication, tire repair and sales, smog checking, muffler replacement, transmission repair, brake shops, tune-up shops, auto glass replacement, and radiator shops (maintenance and replacement only). These uses involve maintenance and part replacement only. Auto body repair and painting are not included in this definition. 
(Ord. 650 § 3, 1991).  
17.04.038 - Automobile service station. 
"Automobile service station" means a retail and service business engaged primarily in the servicing of motor vehicles. Servicing includes sale of motor fuels and oils and light automobile repair. Servicing shall not include auto body repair and painting or heavy automobile repair. 
(Ord. 650 § 4, 1991).  
17.04.040 - Boardinghouse. 
"Boardinghouse" means a structure in a residential zone wherein three or more individual rooms or suits of rooms with shared facilities such as kitchen, laundry, and bathrooms are rented or leased by the week, month, or year on a separate basis and one or more meals per day are provided to persons residing therein for compensation. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.210, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B2., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.050 - Building. 
"Building" means as defined in the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.020, 1977).  
17.04.055 - Church. 
See Section 17.04.417—Places of assembly for community services. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B4., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.060 - Clubhouse. 
"Clubhouse" means a facility providing athletic activities, with related equipment, or support space (lockers, shower, supply store, etc.) for outside athletic activities, or both. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.220, 1977).  
17.04.070 - Commercial cluster complex. 
"Commercial cluster complex" means two or more buildings for commercial use constructed on one parcel. 
(Ord. 362: Ord. 336 § 11.02.051, 1977).  
17.04.075 - Commercial modular. 
"Commercial modular" means as defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 18001.8, a structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial purposes, which is required to be moved under permit, and includes a trailer coach as defined in Section 635 of the Vehicle Code. "Commercial coach" has the same meaning as "commercial modular". 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.080 - Community care facility. 
"Community care facility" means any state licensed facility as defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 1502 and as may be amended which is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children and/or adults, including but not limited to the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children. The regulation of many of the uses included in this category is preempted by state law. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.050, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B3., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.082 - Commercial parking lot. 
"Commercial parking lot" means a garage or an indoor or outdoor parking lot or storage area that is operated as or in conjunction with a commercial enterprise and is used primarily for the parking and/or storage of motorized vehicles. Off street parking as required under Rocklin Municipal Code Chapter 17.66 shall not be deemed a commercial parking lot. 
(Ord. 840 § 2, 2001)  
17.04.090 - Conditional use permit, use permit. 
"Conditional use permit" and "use permit" mean a discretionary permit authorizing a particular land use in a zone where such use is permitted only by the issuance of the permit, and not as a matter of right. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.060, 1977).  
17.04.100 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means as defined by Section 783 of the Civil Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.070, 1977).  
17.04.105 - Congregate living health facility. 
"Congregate living health facility" means a facility as defined in California Health and Safety Code 1250(i) that provides inpatient care, including the following basic services: medical supervision, twenty-four-hour skilled nursing and supportive care, pharmacy, dietary, social, recreational, and other special services for residents that require the availability of skilled nursing care on a recurring, intermittent, extended, or continuous basis in a non-institutional, homelike environment. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B5., 10-11-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B5., adopted Oct. 11, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as 17.04.080. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 17.04.105.  
17.04.110 - Convalescent hospital. 
"Convalescent hospital" means the same as a "skilled nursing facility" as defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 1250(c), generally a place of residence for people with physical or mental disabilities who require constant nursing care and have significant deficiencies with activities of daily living. Residents may also receive physical, occupational, and other rehabilitative therapies. These types of facilities also include rest home, nursing home, long-term care facility, rest home, nursing home, and skilled nursing facility. For the purpose of this code convalescent hospitals are treated the same a "Hospitals". 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.080, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B6., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.120 - Convenience store. 
"Convenience store" means small retail food and variety store having no more than three thousand square feet of floor area. This store may include gasoline sales pumps. A convenience store shall not include any automotive repair services or other full service gasoline station facilities or services. 
(Ord. 613 § 2, 1989: Ord. 368: Ord. 336 § 11.02.081, 1977).  
17.04.130 - Day care center. 
"Day care center" means a state-licensed facility as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 1597.750 (Child day care facility), 1596.76 (Day care center), and 1596.78 (Family day care home). Generally described as facilities that provide non-medical care to children under eighteen years of age, in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis. The regulation of this use has largely been preempted by the state. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.090, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B7., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.135 - Development agreement. 
A "development agreement" shall be an agreement adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 65865 and Chapter 17.92. 
(Ord. 476 § 2, 1982: Ord. 336 § 11.02.039, 1977).  
17.04.137 - Domestic swine. 
"Domestic swine" means an animal of the order Ungulata adapted to life in intimate association with people and able to live and breed in a tame condition. A domestic swine is further described as being no more than eighteen inches at the shoulder, and weighing no more than ninety-five pounds. 
(Ord. 663 § 1, 1992).  
17.04.140 - Duplex. 
"Duplex" means a building designed for occupancy by two families in separate dwelling units. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.100, 1977).  
17.04.150 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means as defined by the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.110, 1977).  
17.04.152 - Emergency residential shelter. 
"Emergency residential shelter" means a building, structure or group of structures under single management that provide twenty-four-hour short-term emergency shelter for homeless individuals and/or families. Such facilities provide basic necessities such as access to meals, hygiene facilities, clean linen and other basic human needs associated with the provision of shelter. In addition, these facilities may provide supplemental on-site services such as, but not limited to, an activities center, daycare for resident children, and vocational rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A2., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.155 - Exercise, athletic club or figure salon. 
"Exercise club," "athletic club" or "figure salon" means a facility which provides fitness services and facilities, including, but not limited to, weight rooms, sauna baths, whirlpool baths and exercise equipment. Massages may be offered incidental to such a facility, but a facility where massages are the primary services offered is not an exercise club, athletic club or figure salon. 
(Ord. 463 § 3, 1982: Ord. 336 § 11.02.115, 1977).  
17.04.157 - Factory-built housing. 
"Factory-built housing" means as defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 19971, a residential building, dwelling unit, or an individual dwelling room or combination of rooms thereof, or building component, assembly, or system manufactured in such a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected before installation at the building site without disassembly, damage, or destruction of the part, including units designed for use as part of an institution for resident or patient care, that is either wholly manufactured or is in substantial part manufactured at an offsite location to be wholly or partially assembled onsite in accordance with building standards published in the California Building Standards Code. Factory-built housing does not include a mobile home, a recreational vehicle, or a commercial modular. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.160 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A3, adopted Oct. 11, 2011, deleted § 17.04.160, which pertained to family and derived from Ord. 336, § 11.02.120, 1977.  
17.04.170 - Front setback. 
"Front setback" means the distance between the main building and the street right-of-way line measured across full width of the lot, and the area therein. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.440, 1977).  
17.04.180 - Garage. 
"Garage" means a fully enclosed structure, either attached to or detached from another structure, designed to house automobiles or other motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.130, 1977).  
17.04.185 - Gasoline station. 
"Gasoline station" means a retail and service business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels and oils. No service bays, automobile repair, or installation of automobile parts shall be allowed in a gasoline station. 
(Ord. 650 § 5, 1991).  
17.04.190 - General development plan. 
"General development plan" means the plan for a planned development adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.150, 1977).  
17.04.200 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city, and its several elements, as adopted pursuant to the Government Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.140, 1977).  
17.04.205 - Gross floor area. 
"Gross floor area" means the total number of square feet of actual floor, stair, loft, and mezzanine area included within the outside face of the exterior building walls of all floors of a structure. 
(Ord. 917 § 2, 2007).  
17.04.210 - Height. 
"Height" means the vertical measurement of buildings or structures determined as provided by the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.160, 1977).  
17.04.220 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B19, adopted Oct. 11, 2011, deleted § 17.04.220, which pertained to § 5116 home and derived from Ord. 336, § 11.02.580, 1977.  
17.04.230 - Home business. 
"Home business" means a business conducted wholly within a dwelling unit in a residential zone pursuant to specified conditions. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.170, 1977).  
17.04.240 - Hospital. 
"Hospital" means a health facility that is organized, maintained, and operated for the diagnosis, care, prevention, and treatment of human illness and provides twenty-four-hour inpatient care, including the following basic services: medical, nursing, surgical, anesthesia, laboratory, radiology, pharmacy, and dietary services as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 1250(a). 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.180, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B9., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.250 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means any building or portion thereof containing rooms or suites of rooms, with or without cooking facilities, accessed via interior hallways and common exterior entries intended for overnight or shortterm rental to travelers and business persons. In addition to lodging, hotels may provide a variety of services and facilities such as restaurants, coffee shops, meeting facilities, personal services, accessory retail uses, and accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, athletic facilities, etc. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.200, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B10., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.260 - Industrial cluster complex. 
"Industrial cluster complex" means two or more buildings for industrial use on one parcel. 
(Ord. 362: Ord. 336 § 11.02.231, 1977).  
17.04.270 - Interior side setback. 
"Interior side setback" means the distance between the side of main building and the property line measured across full depth of the lot, and the area therein. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.450, 1977).  
17.04.280 - Junkyard. 
"Junkyard" means an outdoor facility where scrap materials are deposited and/or stored. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.240, 1977).  
17.04.290 - Kennel. 
"Kennel" is a commercial or non-commercial facility for the grooming, keeping, boarding or maintaining of four or more dogs, cats, and/or other animals commonly considered as household pets over the age of four months. A business that provides grooming services only with no boarding is classified as "personal services establishment." Pet stores are classified as retail establishments. Veterinary offices, clinics, and hospitals are not included within the definition of a kennel. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.250, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 953, § 2, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 1084, § 5, 11-14-2017)  
17.04.300 - Lodge. 
See Section 17.04.417—Places of assembly for community services. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.260, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B11., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.310 - Lot. 
"Lot" means as defined in Chapter 16.04. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.270, 1977).  
17.04.320 - Lot area, lot size. 
"Lot area" and "lot size" mean as defined in Chapter 16.04. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.280, 1977).  
17.04.330 - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means as defined in Chapter 16.04. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.290, 1977).  
17.04.340 - Lot width. 
"Lot width" means as defined in Chapter 16.04. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.300, 1977).  
17.04.345 - Massage parlor. 
"Massage parlor" means a building or portion thereof or a place where massage is administered for compensation or from which a massage business or service for compensation is operated; provided, however, that an exercise club, athletic club or figure salon is not a massage parlor. As used herein, "massage" means the manipulation of human body tissues for remedial or hygienic purposes by rubbing, touching, stroking, tapping, kneading or vibrating with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. Massage administered in a medical office, hospital complex, or medical care facility as an incidental service shall not be deemed to render such office, complex or facility a massage parlor within the meaning of this section. 
(Ord. 463 § 4, 1982: Ord. 336 § 11.02.305, 1977).  
17.04.348 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, § 3, adopted June 26, 2018, repealed former § 17.04.348 which pertained to medical marijuana dispensary, and derived from Ord. 890, § 2, adopted in 2004; Ord. 891, § 1, adopted in 2004; Ord. 889, § 2, adopted in 2004.  
17.04.350 - Minimum lot size. 
"Minimum lot size" means the minimum net square footage required for a lot in a particular zone. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.310, 1977).  
17.04.360 - Ministorage. 
"Ministorage" means facilities intended for rental or lease to individuals and/or small businesses for storage of personal effects or business equipment or inventory. "Ministorage" may include outdoor storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, motor homes, and boats. May include caretaker's living quarters not to exceed six hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.311, 1977).  
17.04.365 - Mobile home/manufactured home. 
"Mobile home/manufactured home." Generally, a structure that is transportable in one or more sections, is eight body feet or more in width, or forty body feet or more in length, in the traveling mode, or, when erected onsite, is three hundred twenty or more square feet, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation system when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. "Mobile home" as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 18008, is the name applied to such a structure that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976 does not include a commercial modular, factory-built housing, a manufactured home, a multifamily manufactured home, or a recreational vehicle. "Manufactured home" as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 18007, is the name applied to such a structure that was constructed on or after June 15, 1976. 
(Ord. 457 § 6, 1981: Ord. 336 § 11.02.325, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.370 - Mobile home park, manufactured housing community. 
"Mobile home park and manufactured housing community" mean as defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 18210.7 and 18214, any area or tract of land where two or more lots are rented or leased, held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate manufactured homes, mobile homes, or recreational vehicles used for human habitation. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.320, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.375 - Mobile pushcart vending facility. 
"Mobile pushcart vending facility" means any nonmotorized cart or wagon not firmly fixed to a permanent foundation and designed solely for the sale of a product (e.g., food, flowers, periodicals, novelties, etc.) on improved private property. 
(Ord. 674 § 1, 1993).  
17.04.380 - Motel. 
"Motel" means any building or portion thereof containing rooms or suites of rooms each accessed via a separate outside entrance, with or without cooking facilities, intended for overnight or short term rental to travelers and business persons. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.330, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B12., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.390 - Multiple-family structure. 
"Multiple-family structure" means a building designed for occupancy by more than four families in separate dwelling units. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.340, 1977).  
17.04.395 - Net floor area. 
"Net floor area" means the total number of square feet of actual floor area, excluding vents, shafts, stairs, corridors, attics, and unenclosed porches and balconies included within the inside face of the exterior building walls of all floors of a structure. 
(Ord. 917 § 3, 2007).  
17.04.400 - Nonconforming use. 
"Nonconforming use" means a use which, though lawful when commenced, is now unlawful due to change in the regulations concerning the use. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.350, 1977).  
17.04.410 - Open space. 
"Open space" means as defined by subsection (b) of Section 65560 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.360, 1977).  
17.04.415 - Parking space. 
"Parking space" means any space set aside for parking of automobiles, and may be a garage space, covered space, or uncovered space. Uncovered spaces may or may not be tandem. 
(Ord. 643 § 1, 1991).  
17.04.417 - Places of assembly for community services. 
"Places of assembly for community services" means a facility to accommodate the meetings and related functions of civic, fraternal, religious, and/or charitable nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B13., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.420 - Planned unit development. 
"Planned unit development" means the development of a sizable tract of land, pursuant to approved general and specific plans, wherein traditional use requirements may be altered or waived to facilitate clustering, preserve open space, introduce new concepts in design and construction, and produce an integrated and harmonious project. "Planned unit development" may be residential, commercial, industrial or a combination thereof. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.370, 1977).  
17.04.430 - Planner, city planner, planning director. 
"Planner," "city planner" and "planning director" mean the planning director of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.040, 1977).  
17.04.440 - Planning commission, commission. 
"Planning commission" and "commission" mean the planning commission of the city. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.380, 1977).  
17.04.450 - Planning department. 
"Planning department" means the planning department of the city, of which the city planner is head. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.390, 1977).  
17.04.455 - Principal residential unit. 
"Principal residential unit" means the primary or predominant residential unit on a lot. 
(Ord. 881 § 1, 2004).  
17.04.460 - Professional offices. 
"Professional offices" means offices for doctors, lawyers, dentists, accountants and similar occupations where the clientele seeks the services of the office proprietor as opposed to the purchase of a product. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.400, 1977).  
17.04.470 - Rear setback. 
"Rear setback" means the distance between the rear of the main building and the property line measured across full width of the lot, and the area therein. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.460, 1977).  
17.04.480 - Residential facility. 
"Residential facility" means any of several types of state-licensed facilities which are maintained and operated to provide twenty-four-hour nonmedical residential care to children and/or adults in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual in a family home, group care facility, or other facility. (See California Health and Safety Code § 1502(a)(1) and 1569. 2(K)(1)). 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.410, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B14., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.490 - Rest home, nursing home. 
"Rest home" and "nursing home" mean the same as a "skilled nursing facility" as defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 1250(c), generally a place of residence for people with physical or mental disabilities who require constant nursing care and have significant deficiencies with activities of daily living. Residents may also receive physical, occupational, and other rehabilitative therapies. These types of facilities also include convalescent hospital. For the purpose of this code rest homes and nursing homes are treated the same a "Hospitals". 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.420, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B15., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.500 - Rezoning. 
"Rezoning" means changing the zone from one classification to another. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.430, 1977).  
17.04.510 - Roominghouse. 
"Roominghouse" means a dwelling, other than a hotel, motel, residential community care or single room occupancy facility as herein defined, where lodging only is provided for three or more unrelated persons for compensation. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.230, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B17., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.511 - Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
"Schools, private elementary and secondary," means private elementary and secondary schools, charter schools established under the authority of Government Code et seq. and religious schools. 
(Ord. 813 § 1 (part), 1999).  
17.04.512 - Schools, public elementary and secondary. 
"Schools, public elementary and secondary," means public elementary, middle, junior high and high schools serving grades K—12, excluding charter schools established under the authority of Government Code 47600 et seq. 
(Ord. 813 § 1 (part), 1999).  
17.04.513 - Schools, college and university. 
"Schools, college and university," means community colleges, colleges, universities and professional schools granting associate degrees, certificates, undergraduate and graduate degrees and requiring for admission at least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic training. 
(Ord. 813 § 1 (part), 1999).  
17.04.514 - Schools, specialized education and training. 
"Schools, specialized education and training," means and includes business, secretarial schools and vocational schools offering specialized trade and commercial courses. 
(Ord. 813 § 1 (part), 1999).  
17.04.515 - Secondary residential unit. 
"Secondary residential unit" means a second independent single-family dwelling unit to the principal residential unit, containing its own sleeping quarters, kitchen and bathroom facilities, and entrance from the outside, located on a single-family lot. The secondary residential unit may be either attached to or detached from the principal residential unit. Secondary residential units are not accessory uses or accessory structures. 
(Ord. 881 § 2, 2004: Ord. 544 § 1, 1986: Ord. 514 § 1, 1984).  
17.04.520 - Shopping center. 
"Shopping center" means a retail commercial facility of one or more buildings designed for occupancy by two or more businesses, occupying not less than five gross acres, with parking facilities common to all businesses. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.471, 1977).  
17.04.525 - Single room occupancy facility (SRO facility). 
"Single room occupancy facility (SRO facility)" means a property containing two or more single room occupancy (SRO) rooms. All SRO facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 17.64.060, Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A7., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.526 - Single room occupancy room (SRO room). 
"Single room occupancy room (SRO room)" means a one room living space intended for occupancy by not more than two persons as a place of permanent residence that is provided with individual or shared sanitary and bathing facilities and may or may not include individual or shared, full or partial, kitchen facilities. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A7., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.530 - Site development plan. 
"Site development plan" means a drawing to scale, showing proposed or existing use or property, including location and orientation of building, parking, ingress and egress, fences, landscaping, signs and necessary additional information. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.480, 1977).  
17.04.535 - Special event. 
"Special event" means any temporary, organized activity conducted outdoors on private property. Special event uses are divided into two categories: "special event—administrative review," and "special event—city council review." 
(Ord. 688 § 1, 1993).  
17.04.540 - Specific development plan. 
"Specific development plan" means a plan for a specified portion of a planned development adopted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 17.60.100, et seq. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.500, 1977).  
17.04.550 - Specific plan. 
"Specific plan" means a plan as defined and adopted pursuant to the Government Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.04.490, 1977).  
17.04.560 - Street right-of-way. 
"Street right-of-way" means an existing or proposed dimension of any public thoroughfares as set forth in the general plan or any specific plan. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.510, 1977).  
17.04.570 - Street side setback. 
"Street side setback" means, on corner lot, the distance between the street right-of-way line and the side of main building, measured across the full depth of the lot, and the area therein. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.470, 1977).  
17.04.580 - Structure. 
"Structure" means as defined in the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.520, 1977).  
17.04.585 - Supportive housing. 
"Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and work in the community, as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 50675.14(b)(2) and (3). Examples of population groups that different supportive housing facilities may be targeted toward include persons with low incomes having one or more disabilities such as mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, individuals with developmental disabilities, emancipated youth, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people or families. Supportive housing is considered a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses in the same zone. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A8., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.590 - Townhouse. 
"Townhouse" includes row house and cluster house. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.530, 1977).  
17.04.592 - Transitional housing. 
"Transitional housing" means a facility that provides housing and support services exclusively designated and targeted for recently homeless persons and families that is intended to assist them in obtaining a stable income and permanent housing. Occupancy of such a facility is limited to between six months and twenty-four months. Support services provided may include meals, child care, counseling, vocational rehabilitation and other similar services (California Health and Safety Code Sections 50801 (i) and 50675.2. (h)). Transitional housing is considered a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses in the same zone. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A9., 10-11-2011)  
17.04.595 - Triangular visibility area. 
"Triangular visibility area" means the area at any corner formed by the intersection of two or more public streets. This area is further defined as being between the street right-of-way lines and a diagonal line joining points on the right-of-way lines forty feet from the point of their intersection, or, in the case of rounded corners, the triangular area between the tangents to the curve of a diagonal line joining points on the tangent forty feet from the point of their intersection. The tangents referred to are those at the beginning and the end of the curve at the corner. In the case of intersecting private streets or intersecting public and private streets the triangular area shall be formed by the edge of the private street or alley, the street right-of-way line forty feet from the edge of the driveway or alley and the other of which is on the edge of the private street or alley twelve and one-half feet back of the right-of-way line measured perpendicular to the right-of-way line in a direction away from the street. 
(Ord. 674 § 2, 1993).  
17.04.600 - Triplex. 
"Triplex" means a building designed for occupancy by three families in separate dwelling units. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.540, 1977).  
17.04.610 - Use, land use. 
"Use" and "land use" mean the manner in which property may be used as permitted by the terms of this title. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.550, 1977).  
17.04.620 - Variance. 
"Variance" means a permitted exemption from a requirement imposed upon a use, granted because of peculiarities associated with the property on which the use is located, but not for financial hardship or personal convenience. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.560, 1977).  
17.04.625 - Veterinary clinic. 
"Veterinary clinic" means a facility for the care and medical treatment of household pets, and may include short term boarding, only within the building, for medical and non-medical purposes. Veterinary facilities operating prior to the effective date of this definition may board animals as noted above regardless of any prohibition to such use in their conditional use permit, if any. 
(Ord. 664 § 1, 1992). 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 6, 11-14-2017)  
17.04.630 - Zone. 
"Zone" means a classification applied to property which prescribes the uses to which it may be put. 
(Ord. 336 § 11.02.570, 1977).  
Chapter 17.06 - ZONES AND MAPS 
Sections: 
 
17.06.010 - Division into zones. 
To carry out the purposes of this code, the city is divided into zones as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 336 § 5.01.000, 1977).  
17.06.020 - Residential zones designated—Use of abbreviations. 
Any zone listed in this chapter may be referred to and cited by use of only the abbreviation thereof. 
A.  R1-5—Old City: five thousand square feet net minimum lot size; 
B.  R1-6: six thousand square feet net minimum lot size; 
C.  R1-7.5: seven thousand five hundred square feet net minimum lot size; 
D.  R1-10: ten thousand square feet net minimum lot size; 
E.  R1-12.5: twelve thousand five hundred square feet net minimum lot size; 
F.  R1-15: fifteen thousand square feet net minimum lot size; 
G.  RE-20: twenty thousand square feet net minimum lot size; 
H.  RE-30: thirty thousand square feet net minimum lot size; 
I.  RE-30 NH: thirty thousand square feet minimum lot size; 
J.  RE-1 acre: one acre net minimum lot size; 
K.  RE-2 acre: two acre net minimum lot size; 
L.  RA-3: three acre net minimum lot size; 
M.  RA-5: five acre net minimum lot size; 
N.  RA-10: ten acre net minimum lot size. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990; Ord. 336 § 5.01.010, 1977).  
17.06.030 - Multiple-family residential zones. 
Multiple-family residential zones are as follows: 
A.  R-2: duplex-triplex residential zone; 
B.  R-3: multiple-family residential zone. 
(Ord. 336 § 5.01.030, 1977).  
17.06.040 - Commercial zones. 
Commercial zones are as follows: 
A.  B-P: business-professional zone; 
B.  C-1: neighborhood commercial zone; 
C.  C-2: retail business zone; 
D.  C-3: general and service commercial zone; 
E.  C-4: limited general retail and service commercial zone; 
F.  C-H: highway commercial zone. 
(Ord. 336 § 5.01.040, 1977).  
17.06.050 - Industrial-manufacturing zones. 
Industrial-manufacturing zones are as follows: 
A.  M-1: manufacturing zone; 
B.  M-2: heavy industrial zone. 
(Ord. 336 § 5.01.050, 1977).  
17.06.060 - Open space and recreational zones. 
Open space and recreational zones are as follows: 
A.  O-A: open space and recreational zone. 
(Ord. 336 § 5.01.060, 1977).  
17.06.070 - Planned development zone. 
The planned development zone is designated as follows: 
A.  PD: planned development zone. 
(Ord. 336 § 5.01.070, 1977).  
17.06.080 - Design review combining zones. 
Design review combining zones are as follows: 
A.  DR: design review zone (combining). 
(Ord. 336 § 5.01.070, 1977).  
17.06.090 - Boundaries—Maps—Ordinances. 
The boundaries of zones described in this chapter are shown upon the official zoning maps as adopted by Section 5.02.030 of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The maps, all notations, references and other information contained thereon are incorporated as though set forth in this chapter and are declared to be part of this title. Each official map and planned unit development ordinance shall be identified by the section number of the ordinance codified in this chapter incorporating the map and ordinance as part of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 363: Ord. 336 § 5.01.070, 1977).  
17.06.100 - Map and PUD ordinance authority. 
The official zoning maps and planned unit development ordinances on file in the office of the planning director shall be the final authority as to the current zoning classification of all areas within the city. 
(Ord. 336 § 5.02.010, 1977).  
17.06.110 - Boundary interpretation rules. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various zones as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Zone boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown and where the designation of the map indicating the various zones are approximately bounded by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of such zone. 
B.  Where doubt exists as to the location of a zone boundary in the interior of a block, the boundary shall be the nearest interior lot line existing as of the effective date of this title or on the date when the property may have been subsequently rezoned. 
C.  If a zone boundary line divides or splits a lot, the lot zone shall be deemed to be included within the zone which is the more restrictive. 
(Ord. 336 § 5.02.020, 1977).  
17.06.120 - Unclassified land. 
All lands now or hereafter included within the boundaries of the city which are not designated on official zoning maps described in this chapter as being within any other zone specified in this title shall be deemed to be zoned RA-10 (Residential Agriculture-10 acre net minimum lot size) until such lands are classified into one or more of the other districts as provided in this chapter. The planning commission may grant conditional use permits for uses of such land; provided, that such uses conform to the general plan of the city. Development requirements such as height regulation, lot area, lot width and yard area shall be prescribed by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.01.000, 1977).  
17.06.130 - Open space zones conflicting uses prohibited. 
This section is adopted to comply with Section 65910 of the Government Code having to do with open space zoning. The provisions of this section and of other provisions of this title which relate to open space use shall be liberally construed to the end that conflicting uses shall not be permitted. The following zones are hereby designated the open space zones for the city: 
RE-2 acre 
RA-3 
RA-5 
RA-10 
OA. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.01.010, 1977).  
Chapter 17.07 - GREENBRAE ISLAND ANNEXATION AREA OVERLAY ZONE 
 
17.07.010 - Greenbrae Island Annexation Area overlay zone established. 
A.  This chapter establishes the Greenbrae Island Annexation Area overlay zone (the "Annexation Area overlay zone"). The creation of this overlay zone is intended to smoothly transition the developed properties that have been annexed into the city and are now subject to the city of Rocklin Municipal Code and Zoning Code, from their prior status under Placer County regulations and zoning. This approach is consistent with the city's general plan policy of flexibility and innovation in development and planning techniques. 
B.  Use of property as it existed on the date of annexation into the city within the overlay zone is subject to the regulations of Title 17 as modified by this chapter. Development of previously undeveloped property within the overlay zone is subject to all requirements of the Rocklin Municipal Code including Title 17, the city of Rocklin Zoning Code. 
C.  The properties included within the Annexation Area overlay zone shall be indicated on the official zoning maps of the city by distinct shading over the affected properties. The affected properties are all properties either partially or fully developed on the date approved by Placer LAFCo for annexation into the city, within the area known as the county island area accessed primarily by Aguilar Road, Greenbrae Road, and Foothill Road. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2(Exh. A), 9-8-2015)  
17.07.020 - Development standards for existing developed properties. 
A.  All existing developed parcels conforming to the development standards required by the county zoning at the time of construction of the structures shall be deemed to be conforming in the Annexation Area overlay zone. 
B.  For any major reconstruction involving a new foundation, and if it is determined by the chief building official to be feasible to conform the new structure to the underlying city development standards, then the location of the reconstructed structure must conform to the underlying city development standards. 
C.  After the date of annexation approval by the Placer LAFCo, all new development requiring a city building permit must conform to the underlying city development standards. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2(Exh. A), 9-8-2015)  
17.07.030 - Horses and other similar large quadrupeds, sheep and goats conditionally permitted. 
A.  Horses, other similar large quadrupeds, sheep and goats are permitted in the Annexation Area overlay zone where there is sufficient space to accommodate them subject to the provisions of this section. The term immature offspring used in this section refers to animals that have not yet been weaned and/or are a maximum of one year in age. 
B.  Horses and other similar large quadrupeds are permitted in the following numbers: 
1.  One horse or similar large quadruped where the lot is not less than thirty thousand square feet, and two horses or similar large quadrupeds where the lot area is one acre net or greater. Up to a total of two immature offspring may also be allowed. 
2.  Three horses or similar large quadrupeds and up to a total of two immature offspring where the lot area is two acres net or greater. 
3.  Additional horses or other similar large quadrupeds may be kept on lots in excess of two acres net, in a number to be determined by the director of economic and community development. An administrative special use permit is required for the keeping of additional horses or similar large quadrupeds. 
C.  Sheep and goats are permitted in the following numbers: 
1.  Four mature animals and their immature offspring (not to exceed twelve animals in total) where the lot is not less than thirty thousand square feet, and six mature animals and their immature offspring (not to exceed fifteen animals in total) where the lot area is one acre net or greater. 
2.  Additional animals may be kept, in a number to be determined by the director of economic and community development. An administrative special use permit is required for the keeping of additional animals. 
D.  The number of animals identified as allowed per lot area in subsections A, B and C is not intended to imply that horses or other large quadrupeds as well as sheep and/or goats will be allowed collectively on a single lot in those numbers. The keeping of horses and any other similar large quadrupeds, as well as, sheep and goats on a single lot may only be permitted on sites greater than one acre in size and only with prior approval of a use permit from the economic and community development director. 
E.  Horses, other large quadrupeds, sheep and goats permitted under this section must comply with the provisions of Rocklin Municipal Code Chapter 6.36 regarding livestock. 
F.  Because the potential incompatible impacts of additional animals are a localized impact, a property owner must apply for and obtain an administrative special use permit approved by the director of economic and community development, after payment of a fee and review of the permit which cost and process are substantially equivalent to the administrative special event permit authorized by Rocklin Municipal Code Chapter 17.63. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2(Exh. A), 9-8-2015)  
17.07.040 - Parking of accessory vehicles. 
A.  Parking, storage and operations of accessory vehicles, as those vehicles are defined in Section 17.08.130(B), shall be subject to all regulations set forth in Section 17.08.130 except as provided in part (B) below. 
B.  For all existing developed parcels which can demonstrate physical site constraints making compliance with Rocklin Municipal Code Section 17.08.130(D)(1) infeasible, then parking of the accessory vehicle shall be allowed in the front yard or street side yard setback area, provided the accessory vehicle is parked as far from the street as feasibly possible based on site conditions. Feasibility shall be determined by the economic and community development director. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2(Exh. A), 9-8-2015)  
17.07.050 - Nuisance or abandonment. 
The use of land allowed by this chapter, but not otherwise in strict conformance with the Rocklin Municipal Code, may be continued until: 
A.  The use is declared a nuisance by the city council or a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
B.  The use, with the exception of the keeping of animals, is abandoned for ninety days, whether or not there was the intent to abandon such use. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2(Exh. A), 9-8-2015)  
17.07.060 - Appeals. 
Any person dissatisfied by an act or determination of an official of the city relating to the interpretation of this chapter may appeal such determination to the planning commission as provided in Chapter 17.86. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2(Exh. A), 9-8-2015) 
Greenbrae Island Annexation Area Overlay Zone Map 
  
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2(Exh. B), 9-8-2015)  
Chapter 17.08 - USE REGULATIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
17.08.010 - Applicability of general regulations. 
The use regulations specified in the various zones in this title shall be subject to the general use regulations and exceptions in this chapter, Chapter 17.76, and Chapter 17.78. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.02.000, 1977).  
17.08.015 - Requirements to build. 
A.  No building or structure shall be constructed on any lot or parcel, and no permit shall be issued to permit such construction unless: 
1.  Such lot or parcel was legally created; 
2.  Such lot or parcel has approved access to a public way or private road easement; 
3.  Said building or structure is able to comply with all height, lot coverage, and setback requirements, as set forth in the applicable zoning district and/or elsewhere within this title. 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 3, 12-13-2016)  
17.08.020 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit shall be as follows: 
A.  Single-family Residences. 
1.  Each single-family residence shall consist of one complete dwelling unit as defined in the Uniform Building Code. The minimum square footage of a single-family residence shall be no less than one thousand fifty square feet. Secondary residential units are not single-family residences for the purposes of this section. 
2.  The minimum square footage of a single-family residence size shall be reduced to seven hundred fifty square feet for one-bedroom or two-bedroom units, and nine hundred fifty square feet for three-bedroom units for all units that are made affordable, as defined in the Rocklin Housing Element, to households with incomes at or below eighty percent of median-family income, as defined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the Sacramento Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA). 
B.  Duplex, Triplex. Each living unit shall consist of a complete dwelling unit as defined in the Uniform Building Code. Each living unit shall be a minimum of six hundred square feet. 
C.  Apartments. Each apartment shall consist of one complete dwelling unit, as defined in the Uniform Building Code. Each living unit shall be a minimum of three hundred fifty square feet. 
(Ord. 881 § 3, 2004: Ord. 514 § 2, 1984; Ord. 505 § 1, 1983: Ord. 336 § 7.02.010, 1977).  
17.08.030 - Setback applicability and measurement. 
A.  Application. Setbacks specified in this code for the various zones shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter. 
B.  Measurement. The setback of all buildings and structures shall be determined by the exterior boundaries of the streets and highways and their proposed widening and extensions as indicated in the circulation element of the general plan. The width of any street or highway which does not appear in the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined from the standards for street right-of-way widths and improvements as prescribed in Title 16. 
C.  In all residential zones, the primary structure on any lot may project up to ten feet into the required rear yard setback designated by the regulations of this chapter for those zones or the applicable general development plan for planned development zones: provided, that the square footage lost from the projection is replaced by a yard or court located within the buildable portion of the lot. 
D.  In corner lots in all residential zones, the required rear yard may be located either opposite the established front yard, or opposite the established street side yard, at the discretion of the property owner. 
(Ord. 523 § 1. 1984: Ord. 336 §§ 7.05.000 and 7.05.010, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B18., 10-11-2011)  
17.08.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A1.), adopted Jan. 10, 2017, repealed former § 17.08.040 which pertained to multiple family structure setback, and derived from Ord. No. 336, § 7.03.010, adopted in 1977.  
17.08.050 - Architectural extensions into setbacks—Fireplace setback. 
A.  Architectural features on the main building, such as cornices, eaves, canopies and sills may extend a maximum of three feet into any side setback or street side setback. Eaves and canopies may extend a maximum of three feet into any required front setback. 
B.  Fireplaces shall maintain a three-foot minimum setback to any side lot line. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.03.020, 1977).  
17.08.060 - Height regulation applicability—Exceptions. 
The height regulations specified for the various zones in this title shall be subject to the height regulations and exceptions in this chapter, except that where chimneys, silos, cubicles, flagpoles, monuments, gas storage holders, radio and other towers, water tanks, church steeples and similar structures and mechanical appurtenances are permitted in the zone, height limits may be exceeded by a use permit. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.04.000, 1977).  
17.08.070 - Outdoor storage. 
All outdoor storage of products, machinery, equipment or other items shall be within a fence or wall. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.02.060(g), 1977).  
17.08.080 - Commerce or industry abutting residential zone. 
A.  Notwithstanding the height restrictions in Chapter 17.76, where a commercial or industrial zone abuts a residential zone, a solid masonry wall, six feet in height and designed to the satisfaction of the planning director, shall be erected on the property line which forms the boundary between the zones. The purpose of this solid masonry wall is to provide a substantial buffer between potentially incompatible uses to reduce common noises, provide enhanced security, and create an aesthetic barrier. 
B.  An exception to this requirement may be approved by the planning director upon a showing of adequate compatibility between the adjoining uses evaluating relevant factors such as aesthetic considerations, natural terrain buffers, building height, bulk and orientation, noise, light and glare, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, property values and psychological factors. 
C.  The exception set forth in subsection B. above shall apply in all zoning areas of the city, and shall amend all planned development general development plans adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 445 § 2 (part), 1981: Ord. 336 § 7.02.060(j), 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1019, § 2, 11-12-2014)  
17.08.090 - Accessory buildings—Garages—Barns and stables. 
A.  An accessory building in any residential zone shall be located to the rear or side of the main dwelling unit, not less than ten feet there from. Such accessory building shall not be located within five feet of the side property line for interior lots and, in the case of a corner lot, shall not project beyond the required front yard. 
B.  A detached garage shall not be located within five feet of any alley. 
C.  Barns and stables, or any other building or structure used for the keeping of animals, shall be located on the rear one-half of the lot and not closer than twenty feet to any side or rear property line. 
D.  A structure which is open on three sides, such as a patio cover, may encroach into the required rear yard setback up to five feet from any rear wall of the principal structure, but in no case may it be closer than five feet from the rear property line nor shall it create a condition where the maximum lot coverage for the zone is exceeded. 
(Ord. 610 § 1, 1989; Ord. 336 § 7.02.040, 1977).  
17.08.100 - Accessory uses. 
Accessory uses are defined as uses incidental related, appropriate, and clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which do not alter the principal use of the lot or building or adversely affect other properties in the zone. Such accessory uses are authorized in any zone subject to the definitions set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.02.050, 1977).  
17.08.110 - Accessories require primary use. 
Except where expressly permitted, or where authorized upon the issuance of a conditional use permit, accessory buildings and accessory uses are allowed only where there is an existing primary use on the premises. 
(Ord. 370: Ord. 336 § 7.02.055, 1977).  
17.08.120 - Utility and transmission lines. 
A.  Public utility distribution and power transmission lines, and underground facilities for distribution of gas, water, communications, electricity, and cable television, may be constructed in all zones. 
B.  For privately owned utilities, review and approval of such location shall be subject to review and approval of the planning commission pursuant to applicable law. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.02.020, 1977).  
17.08.130 - Off-street parking of accessory vehicles. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The parking restrictions set forth in this section are designed to limit temporary parking, and prohibit storage of, accessory vehicles as that term is defined below to improve the appearance and aesthetic values of the city and to further eliminate or prevent the occurrence of potential traffic hazards. 
B.  The words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this Chapter 17.08 have the meanings set forth below. 
1.  "Accessory vehicle" means and includes campers, recreational vehicles and utility trailers as defined below. 
2.  "Camper" means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and to provide facilities for human habitation or camping purposes. 
3.  "Enforcement official" means the community development director, chief of police, or city of Rocklin Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee respectively. 
4.  "Offsite storage location" means a site, typically a commercial facility designed for the specific purpose of renting space for such a use, at which an accessory vehicle shall be stored and which is outside of the city's residential zones. 
5.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle or trailer which is capable of human habitation or designed or used for recreational camping or travel use, whether self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, or any structure inspected, approved and designated a recreational vehicle by and bearing the insignia of the state of California or any other state or federal agency having the authority to approve recreational vehicles. "Recreational vehicle" includes, without limitation, any of the following: (1) camp trailer, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 242; (2) fifth-wheel travel trailer , as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 324; (3) house car, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 362; (4) trailer coach, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 635; (5) mobilehome, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 396; (6) boat, watercraft, and/or a trailer for a boat or watercraft; (7) trailers designed to carry persons, property or animals on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle; and (8) recreational vehicle, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 18010. 
6.  "Store" or "Stored" means parking for a period of time beyond the temporary period allowed by subsection E. below for loading, unloading and maintenance. An accessory vehicle observed to be parked for a period of nine days, whether consecutive or intermittent, within any thirty-day period in the frontyard setback, street sideyard setback, or on the public street within one thousand feet of the property line where the person who owns or has possession, custody or control of the accessory vehicle resides, shall be prima facie evidence of a stored accessory vehicle. 
7.  "Utility trailer" means a nonmotorized vehicle designed to carry persons, property, animals, waste, materials, watercraft, or any other items on its own structure and to be drawn by another motor vehicle which is not designed for recreational purposes. 
C.  No person shall use any accessory vehicle for living or sleeping purposes, or as a principal place of business operations except as specifically provided in this Title 17. Utility connections for water, sewer, or power shall be prima facie evidence of occupancy as a residence or business, except for the temporary (twenty-four hours) use of power to recharge batteries or service appliances. 
D.  Except as provided in subsection E below, no accessory vehicle shall be parked or stored: 
1.  In any front yard or street side yard setback in any zone; 
2.  In any required off-street parking area in any commercial or industrial zone for longer than seventy-two hours, unless the off-street commercial parking area is specifically provided to serve a business whose primary purpose is to service, sell, repair or perform maintenance upon an accessory vehicle. 
E.  Exceptions. 
1.  In residential zones, temporary parking of a single accessory vehicle shall be permitted in the front yard or street side yard setback for a period not to exceed forty-eight consecutive hours for the purposes of loading, unloading, cleaning and general maintenance. It is the intent of this subsection that the provisions for loading and unloading, cleaning and general maintenance be granted solely for accessory vehicles owned or rented by the residents of the property on which the accessory vehicle is being parked. For the purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered to have been parked or left standing for forty-eight or more consecutive hours if it has remained inoperable or has not been moved at least one-half mile during the forty-eight-hour period. An inoperable vehicle is a vehicle that cannot be moved under its own power or a vehicle which cannot operate legally and safely on the highways of the state. If visible, the mileage reflected on the odometer of the vehicle shall be rebuttably presumed to be an accurate indication of the distance that the vehicle has or has not been moved. Obstruction of the odometer of the vehicle will result in a presumption that the vehicle has not been moved. Absent any presumption, the totality of the circumstances, including but not limited to tire markings, vegetation and vehicle condition, shall be considered in determining whether the vehicle has or has not been moved. 
2.  Mobile or portable structures for city, county, state, and federal government use are permitted in all zones. 
3.  Construction site temporary offices may be located pursuant to Section 17.08.140. 
4.  A motor home or mounted camper which is normally used for every day transportation, is mounted on a one ton or less pickup, is not more than nine feet in height measured from the surface of the street. 
F.  It is a violation of this section to store an accessory vehicle in residential zoning districts at the following locations: 
1.  On private property in the frontyard setback including the driveway; 
2.  The street sideyard setback; 
3.  On public rights-of-way, within one thousand feet of the property line where the person who owns or has possession, custody or control of the accessory vehicle resides. 
G.  An accessory vehicle observed to be parked for a period of nine days within any thirty-day period, in the frontyard setback, street sideyard setback, or on the public street within one thousand feet of the property line where the person who owns or has possession, custody or control of the accessory vehicle resides, shall be prima facie evidence of a stored accessory vehicle in violation of this section. Presentation to the enforcement official of a contract with a bona fide commercial storage yard specifically identifying the accessory vehicle in question and clearly stating the monthly storage charge and business contact information shall, upon verification by the enforcement official, be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is not being stored in violation of this section. 
H.  Violation of this section is deemed to be an infraction and is punishable as such pursuant to Chapter 1.14 of this code, or at the discretion of the enforcement official or city attorney, may be punishable by the use of any other civil or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in, the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 849 § 1, 2001: Ord. 574 § 1, 1987; Ord. 457 § 5, 1981: Ord. 402 § 1, 1979: Ord. 336 § 7.02.030, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 969, § 1, 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 1090, § 16, 3-13-2018)  
17.08.132 - Use and parking limitations in single-family residential areas. 
A.  Setback Area Permeable Surface Requirements. 
1.  For all lots five thousand square feet in size or larger in all single-family residential zones, a minimum of forty percent of the combined front yard and street side yard setback area shall be preserved with permeable surfaces, such as lawn, grass or other landscaping. 
2.  Exception. In those limited circumstances where a property owner has shown that because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, or other unique circumstance, the strict application of the requirements of this title is found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classifications; and the community development director has found that the grant of an exception would not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated, the community development director may grant an exception to the permeable surface coverage standards noted herein. The community development director shall document in writing the findings of fact upon which he/she has based any decision to either approve or deny a request for an exception. 
B.  Off-Street Parking Limitations. 
1.  No more than six vehicles may be parked at any time in the combined front yard and street side yard area between the residence and the street at a single-family dwelling unit. If a violation of this requirement results in a citation, each vehicle over the allowed six vehicles shall be treated as a separate citation. 
2.  Exception. Temporary parking of seven or more vehicles shall be permitted in the combined front yard and street side yard area between the residence and the street at a single-family dwelling unit for a period not to exceed seventy-two consecutive hours for any purpose, up to a combined total of five days within any thirty-day period. 
3.  Seven or more vehicles observed to be parked for a period of six days within any thirty-day period in the combined front yard and street side yard area between the residence and the street shall be prima facie evidence of parking vehicles in violation of this section. 
4.  A household may request to have more than six vehicles in the combined front yard and street side yard area between the residence and the street at a single-family dwelling unit by submitting an exemption application to the community development director, or designee, for consideration. Annual exemptions shall be issued if the applicant can demonstrate: 
i.  That the requested number of vehicles to be parked in the area between the residence and the street is less than or equal to the number of licensed drivers who reside at the dwelling unit; 
ii.  Each resident's driver's license has the same address as that where the vehicle is to be parked; and 
iii.  Each vehicle has current registration at the same address where the vehicle is to be parked. 
If granted, exemptions will be applicable for up to one year from date of their approval and households are required to reapply for renewal on an annual basis. An exemption application form, available at the community development department, must be completed and submitted with the required documentation. 
(Ord. No. 1116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-9-19)  
17.08.134 - Commercial vehicle parking in residential zones. 
A.  No commercial vehicle as defined in Vehicle Code section 15210, or trailer as defined in Vehicle Code section 630, or utility trailer as that term is defined above in subpart 17.08.130.B.7, exceeding nine feet in height or twenty-five feet in length for a single vehicle, or thirty-five feet in combined total length when attached to another vehicle or trailer, shall park between the hours of six p.m. and six a.m. on private property or public rights-of-way within residential zoning districts. 
B.  This prohibition shall not apply to any commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on a public street or highway within the city or delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure within the city for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
C.  Violation of this section is deemed to be an infraction and is punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.18 of this code, or by administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.14 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 969, § 2, 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 1090, § 17, 3-13-2018)  
17.08.140 - Construction site temporary offices. 
A.  Any person who has obtained and maintains a valid approval to develop any real property may install a mobile or portable office at the construction site to be used for the purposes of a temporary construction field office or for storage of construction tools. 
B.  Such temporary office or storage space shall not be used as living quarters. 
C.  Any office or storage space shall be removed at the time of completion of the improvements. 
(Ord. 406 § 1, 1979: Ord. 336 § 7.01.030, 1977).  
17.08.150 - Swimming pools. 
A.  Swimming pools in residential zones shall not encroach into required front yard setbacks or street side yard setbacks. There shall be a rear yard setback of at least three feet, and interior side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of three feet on one side and a minimum of five feet on the opposite side. 
B.  Filter and heating systems for swimming pools shall not be located closer than three feet from any property line. 
C.  Coverage by a swimming pool shall not be considered in measuring maximum lot coverage. 
D.  Any swimming pool, either in ground or above ground, shall be surrounded by a fence or wall complying with Section 3109.4.4.3 of the California Building Code (CBC). Exception: an existing fence with protrusions, cavities or other physical characteristics that could serve as handholds or footholds, but otherwise complies fully with CBC 3109.4.4, will be deemed to comply when one of four secondary drowning prevention safety features are installed in accordance with CBC 3109.4.4.2, option 2, 3, 6, or 7. The residence shall be equipped with exit alarms on those doors providing direct access to the pool and any gates in such fence or wall shall be self-closing, self-latching, and swing away from the pool. The fence or wall must be installed before water is placed in the pool and must comply with all other applicable provisions of this section and Chapter 17.76. 
(Ord. 771 § 1, 1997; Ord. 609 § 1, 1989; Ord. 336 §§ 7.02.070 and 7.02.060(f), 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1073, § 4, 7-11-2017)  
17.08.160 - Secondary residential units. 
A.  Each secondary residential unit shall consist of one complete dwelling unit, as defined in the Uniform Building Code. A one-bedroom secondary residential unit shall be a minimum two hundred seventy-five total square feet in area. Additional bedrooms or rooms designated other than bedrooms, with the exception of utility, heating and air-conditioning rooms, shall increase the total square footage of the dwelling unit by a minimum of seventy square feet per room. The secondary unit shall not exceed forty percent of the square footage of the principal residential unit excluding garages. 
B.  When a new dwelling unit is proposed on a lot already improved with a principal residential unit, either the new unit or the existing unit may be designated as the secondary residential unit. The extent to which design and location of the two units clearly distinguish the principal residential unit from the secondary residential unit shall be considered in approving any second unit. 
C.  Secondary residential units are not accessory uses or accessory structures. 
D.  Secondary residential units shall follow all principal residential unit zoning standards for the zone in which it is located. 
E.  To assure the appearance of secondary residential units will be compatible and harmonious with the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties and to protect property values within the community, secondary residential units shall be designed and constructed to be compatible with the primary residential structure and the immediate neighborhood. Height, form, materials, and design of the secondary residential structure shall include the most aesthetically pleasing features, themes, or elements of the primary residential structure and the neighborhood in which it is located. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Rocklin Municipal Code, secondary residential units shall be considered a permitted use in any General Development Plan that lists secondary residential as conditional uses. 
(Ord. 881 § 4, 2004).  
17.08.170 - Mobile/manufactured home design criteria. 
All mobile/manufactured homes proposed to be located on a residential single family lot in the city of Rocklin shall comply with the following minimum criteria to ensure compatibility: 
A.  The mobile/manufactured home shall be attached to a permanent foundation system approved by the building inspector of the city. 
B.  The exterior finish material(s) used on the mobile/manufactured home and any attached garage or other addition shall be a wood, stucco plaster, vinyl or other exterior finish material customarily used to sheath new residential structures in the city and in the area. 
C.  The exterior finish material(s) shall extends towards the ground to a point consistent with that customary on new residential structures in the city. 
D.  A skirting material, that emulates the texturing and coloring of a solid masonry, brick, or stone perimeter foundation, shall be installed around the perimeter of the structure to bridge the gap between the exterior finish materials on the structure and the structures foundation or finish grade as applicable. The height of said skirting material shall be generally consistent with the foundation height customary to new residential structures. 
E.  Roofing material and the roof overhang, and the roof pitch shall be similar to the material, overhang and pitch design customarily used on new residential structures in the city. Roof overhangs shall be a minimum of sixteen inches. 
F.  The mobile/manufactured home shall comply with development standards applicable to the zone in which it is to be located including but not limited to setbacks, lot coverage, and off street parking facilities. 
G.  The facade which fronts on the street is designed with sufficient detail to make it visually compatible with conventional residential structures in the city. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.08.180 - Emergency residential shelter. 
Emergency residential shelters shall be subject to the following requirements in those zone districts and planned development areas where listed as a permitted use. 
A.  Location. Emergency residential shelters may be located in any industrial zone district or equivalent planned development zone where it is listed as a permitted use. Emergency homeless shelters shall not be located within one thousand feet of any other emergency residential shelters, or other similar program, unless such program is located within the same building or on the same lot. Nor, shall any temporary resident shelter be located within five hundred feet of any elementary school, junior high school, high school, or any zone district wherein temporary resident shelters are not permitted. 
B.  Development Standards. Comply with the City of Rocklin Design Guidelines and Development Standards for the applicable zoning district. 
C.  Business Practices. The emergency residential shelter must comply with the following business practices: 
1.  Emergency residential shelters shall be in compliance with all building codes and fire standards. 
2.  The maximum occupancy of an emergency residential shelter shall not exceed sixty individuals. 
3.  Emergency residential shelters shall provide on-site waiting and intake areas that are screened from public view. 
4.  There shall be at least one staff member of the temporary resident shelter on-site at all times while temporary residents are present. 
5.  Security lighting shall be provided to the satisfaction of the community development director. 
6.  The applicant shall coordinate with the Rocklin Police Department to prepare a security plan for the facility, and shall provide the Rocklin Police Department with the name(s) and telephone number(s) of a responsible party(ies) to contact. The Rocklin Police Department may require the provision of on site private security when the facility is occupied if deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
7.  Emergency residential shelters shall establish and maintain set hours for client intake/discharge. Said hours shall be posted at the entry to the facility. 
Emergency residential shelters are encouraged to be located no more than one-half mile from an existing bus route or, provide transportation between the facility and a transit corridor or bus line. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A2., 10-11-2011)  
17.08.190 - Retaining walls. 
Any retaining wall located within a required front yard or street side yard setback area in any residential zone district shall comply with the Visibility Requirements contained in the City of Rocklin, Construction Specifications, Improvement Standards, and Standard Drawings approved by the Rocklin City Council. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B16., 10-11-2011)  
Chapter 17.09 - R1-3.5 ZONE 
 
17.09.010 - Purpose. 
The R1-3.5 single-family residential zone is intended to facilitate development of small lot, traditional lot and block residential subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R1-3.5 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Chapter 17.08; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Chapter 17.08; 
D.  Secondary residential units as regulated elsewhere in this title. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R1-3.5 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses, or repair shops; 
B.  Schools, private or public elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.040 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R1-3.5 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty-five feet. 
B.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.050 - Lot area. 
The minimum lot area for each lot in the R1-3.5 zone shall be three thousand five hundred square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structure and buildings in the R1-3.5 zone shall not exceed seventy percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R1-3.5 zone shall be fifty feet. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.080 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the R1-3.5 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front—Porch and Living Area. There shall be a front setback of not less than ten feet. 
B.  Front—Face of Garage. There shall be a front setback of not less than eighteen feet. 
C.  Rear—Primary Structure. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Rear—Structure Open on Three Sides. There shall be a setback of not less than four feet to the vertical structure and there shall be a setback of not less than one foot to the eaves. 
E.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than four feet with no encroachments by structural or architectural elements, including fireplaces and chimneys. 
F.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
G.  A ten-foot by twenty-foot (two-hundred-square-foot) clear area shall be maintained within the required setbacks as a rear yard/patio area. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.090 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
17.09.100 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A3.), 1-10-2017)  
Chapter 17.10 - R1-5 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose. 
The R1-5 single-family residential old city zone is intended solely to facilitate development of land which has been subdivided into lots of less than six thousand square feet prior to the adoption of this title. The zone will not be applied to other land within the city. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.02.000, 1977).  
17.10.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R1-5 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
F.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 5, 2004: Ord. 813 § 2, 1999: Ord. 336 § 6.02.010, 1977).  
17.10.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R1-5 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses, or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Mobile home parks; 
D.  Community care facility, day care center or residential facility; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 6, 2004: Ord. 813 § 3, 1999: Ord. 569 § 1, 1987; Ord. 517 § 1, 1984; Ord. 514 § 3, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.02.020, 1977).  
17.10.040 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R1-5 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.02.030, 1977).  
17.10.050 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R1-5 zone shall be five thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.02.040, 1977).  
17.10.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R1-5 zone shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.02.060, 1977).  
17.10.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R1-5 zone shall be fifty feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.02.070, 1977).  
17.10.080 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the R1-5 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than twenty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than five feet. 
D.  Street Side. On corner lots, there shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.02.080, 1977).  
17.10.090 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.02.090, 1977).  
17.10.100 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the R1-5 district shall be as follows: 
A.  A single-family dwelling shall provide a garage at least twelve feet in width by twenty feet in depth. 
B.  A driveway pad the width of the garage and at least twenty feet in length immediately contiguous to the garage opening shall also be provided. 
C.  For a residence constructed prior to the adoption of this title, a carport is permitted if an existing garage is converted to living accommodations. 
(Ord. 556 § 1, 1986; Ord. 336 § 6.02.100, 1977).  
Chapter 17.12 - R1-6 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R1-6 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
F.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 7, 2004: Ord. 813 § 4, 1999: Ord. 336 § 6.03.000, 1977).  
17.12.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R1-6 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Community care facility, day care center or residential facility; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 8, 2004: Ord. 813 § 5, 1999: Ord. 581 § 12, 1988; Ord. 517 § 2, 1984; Ord. 514 § 4, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.03.010, 1977).  
17.12.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R1-6 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.03.020, 1977).  
17.12.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R1-6 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lots: six thousand five hundred square feet; 
B.  Interior lots: six thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.03.030, 1977).  
17.12.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R1-6 zone shall not exceed forty percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.03.050, 1977).  
17.12.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R1-6 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: sixty-five feet; 
B.  Interior lot: sixty feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.03.060, 1977).  
17.12.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the R1-6 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty-five feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than twenty feet. 
C.  Interior. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than five feet. 
D.  Street. On corner lots, there shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.03.070, 1977).  
17.12.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the R1-6 zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.03.080, 1977).  
17.12.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.03.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.14 - R1-7.5 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.14.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R1-7.5 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
F.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 9, 2004: Ord. 813 § 6, 1999: Ord. 336 § 6.04.000, 1977).  
17.14.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R1-7.5 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses, or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Community care facility, day care center or residential facility; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 10, 2004: Ord. 813 § 7, 1999: Ord. 581 § 13, 1988; Ord. 517 § 3, 1984; Ord. 514 § 5, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.04.010, 1977).  
17.14.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R1-7.5 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.04.020, 1977).  
17.14.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R1-7.5 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lots: eight thousand square feet; 
B.  Interior lots: seven thousand five hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.04.030, 1977).  
17.14.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R1-7.5 zone shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.04.050, 1977).  
17.14.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R1-7.5 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: eighty feet; 
B.  Interior lot: seventy-five feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.04.060, 1977).  
17.14.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the R1-7.5 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty-five feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than twenty-five feet. 
C.  Interior. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than seven and one-half feet. 
D.  Street. There shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.04.070, 1977).  
17.14.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the R1-7.5 zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.04.080, 1977).  
17.14.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the R1-7.5 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.04.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.16 - R1-10 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.16.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R1-10 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
F.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 11, 2004: Ord. 813 § 8, 1999: Ord. 336 § 6.05.000, 1977).  
17.16.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R1-10 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Community care facility, day care center or residential facility; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 12, 2004: Ord. 813 § 9, 1999: Ord. 581 § 14, 1988; Ord. 517 § 4, 1984; Ord. 514 § 6, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.05.010, 1977).  
17.16.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R1-10 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.05.020, 1977).  
17.16.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R1-10 zone shall be ten thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.05.030, 1977).  
17.16.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R1-10 zone shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.05.050, 1977).  
17.16.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R1-10 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: eighty-five feet; 
B.  Interior lot: eighty feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.05.060, 1977).  
17.16.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure in the R1-10 zone shall hereafter be erected or enlarged unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than thirty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than twenty-five feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than fifteen feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.05.070, 1977).  
17.16.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the R1-10 zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.05.080, 1977).  
17.16.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the R1-10 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.05.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.18 - R1-12.5 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.18.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R1-12.5 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
F.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 13, 2004: Ord. 813 § 10, 1999: Ord. 336 § 6.06.000, 1977).  
17.18.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R1-12.5 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses; or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Community care facility, day care center or residential facility; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 14, 2004: Ord. 813 § 11, 1999: Ord. 581 § 15, 1988; Ord. 517 § 5, 1984; Ord. 514 § 7, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.06.010, 1977).  
17.18.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R1-12.5 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.06.020, 1977).  
17.18.035 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R1-12.5 zone is twelve thousand five hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 581 § 15.5, 1988).  
17.18.040 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R1-12.5 zone shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.06.050, 1977).  
17.18.050 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R1-12.5 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: ninety-five feet; 
B.  Interior lot: ninety feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.06.060, 1977).  
17.18.060 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure in the R1-12.5 zone shall hereafter be erected or enlarged unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than thirty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than thirty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.06.070, 1977).  
17.18.070 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the R1-12.5 zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.06.080, 1977).  
17.18.080 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the R1-12.5 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.06.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.20 - R1-15 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.20.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R1-15 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
F.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 15, 2004: Ord. 813 § 12, 1999: Ord. 336 § 6.07.000, 1977).  
17.20.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R1-15 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses, or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Community care facility, day care center or residential facility; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 16, 2004: Ord. 813 § 13, 1999: Ord. 581 § 15, 1988; Ord. 517 § 6, 1984; Ord. 514 § 8, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.07.010, 1977).  
17.20.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R1-15 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.07.020, 1977).  
17.20.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R1-15 zone shall be fifteen thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.07.030, 1977).  
17.20.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage in the R1-15 zone by all structures and buildings shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.07.050, 1977).  
17.20.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R1-15 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: one hundred feet; 
B.  Interior lot: ninety-five feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.07.060, 1977).  
17.20.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than thirty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than thirty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than fifteen feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.07.070, 1977).  
17.20.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.07.080, 1977).  
17.20.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.07.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.22 - RE-20 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.22.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RE-20 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
E.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 17, 2004: Ord. 813 § 14, 1999: Ord. 336 § 6.08.000, 1977).  
17.22.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RE-20 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 18, 2004: Ord. 821 § 1, 2000: Ord. 813 § 15, 1999: Ord. 581 § 17, 1988; Ord. 517 § 7, 1984; Ord. 514 § 9, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.08.010, 1977).  
17.22.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the RE-20 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.08.020, 1977).  
17.22.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the RE-20 zone shall be twenty thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.08.030, 1977).  
17.22.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the RE-20 zone shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the lot area; provided, however, that up to an additional five percent coverage may be allowed pursuant to a use permit. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.08.050, 1977).  
17.22.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the RE-20 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: one hundred ten feet; 
B.  Interior lot: one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.08.060, 1977).  
17.22.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the RE-20 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than thirty-five feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than thirty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than twenty feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.08.070, 1977).  
17.22.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the RE-20 zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.08.080, 1977).  
17.22.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the RE-20 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.08.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.24 - RE-30 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.24.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RE-30 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
E.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 19, 2004: Ord. 813 § 16, 1999: Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.09.000, 1977).  
17.24.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RE-30 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 20, 2004: Ord. 813 § 17, 1999: Ord. 581 § 18, 1988; Ord. 517 § 8, 1984; Ord. 514 § 10, 1984; Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.09.010, 1977).  
17.24.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the RE-30 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet, except barns which shall be a maximum of nineteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.09.020, 1977).  
17.24.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the RE-30 zone shall be thirty thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.09.030, 1977).  
17.24.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the RE-30 zone shall not exceed twenty percent of the lot area; provided, however, that up to an additional five percent coverage may be allowed pursuant to a use permit. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.09.050, 1977).  
17.24.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the RE-30 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: one hundred thirty feet; 
B.  Interior lot: one hundred twenty-five feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.09.060, 1977).  
17.24.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the RE-30 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than thirty-five feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than thirty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than twenty feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.09.070, 1977).  
17.24.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the RE-30 zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.09.080, 1977).  
17.24.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the RE-30 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.09.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.25 - RE-30 NH ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.25.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RE-30NH zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
E.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 21, 2004: Ord. 813 § 18, 1999: Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RE-30NH zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 22, 2004: Ord. 813 § 19, 1999: Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.025 - Prohibited uses. 
Horses or other large quadrupeds are prohibited in the RE-30 NH zone. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the RE-30 NH zone are: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet, except barns which shall be a maximum of nineteen feet. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the RE-30 NH zone shall be thirty thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the RE-30 NH zone shall not exceed twenty percent of the lot area; provided, however, that up to an additional five percent coverage may be allowed pursuant to a use permit. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the RE-30 NH zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: one hundred thirty feet; 
B.  Interior lot: one hundred twenty-five feet. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the RE-30 NH zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than thirty-five feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than thirty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than twenty feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the RE-30 NH zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
17.25.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the RE-30 NH zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 631 § 1 (part), 1990).  
Chapter 17.26 - RE-1 ACRE ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.26.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RE-1 acre zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
E.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 23, 2004: Ord. 813 § 20, 1999: Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.10.000, 1977).  
17.26.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RE-1 acre zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 24, 2004: Ord. 813 § 21, 1999: Ord. 581 § 19, 1988; Ord. 517 § 9, 1984; Ord. 514 § 11, 1984; Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.10.010, 1977).  
17.26.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the RE-1 acre zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet, except barns which shall be a maximum of nineteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.10.020, 1977).  
17.26.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the RE-1 acre zone shall be one net acre. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.10.030, 1977).  
17.26.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the RE-1 acre zone shall not exceed twenty percent of the lot area; provided, however, that up to an additional five percent coverage may be allowed pursuant to a use permit. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.10.050, 1977).  
17.26.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the RE-1 acre zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: one hundred fifty feet; 
B.  Interior lot: one hundred fifty feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.10.060, 1977).  
17.26.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the RE-1 acre zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than fifty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than fifty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than twenty feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than thirty feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property, line whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.10.070, 1977).  
17.26.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the RE-1 acre zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.10.080, 1977).  
17.26.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the RE-1 acre zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.10.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.28 - RE-2 ACRE ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.28.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RE-2 acre zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Schools, public elementary and secondary; and 
E.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 25, 2004: Ord. 813 § 22, 1999: Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.11.000, 1977).  
17.28.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RE-2 acre zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
D.  Mobile home parks; and 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 881 § 26, 2004: Ord. 813 § 23, 1999: Ord. 581 § 20, 1988; Ord. 517 § 10, 1984; Ord. 514 § 12, 1984; Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.11.010, 1977).  
17.28.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the RE-2 acre zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet, except barns which shall be a maximum of nineteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.11.020, 1977).  
17.28.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the RE-2 zone shall be two net acres. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.11.030, 1977).  
17.28.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings shall not exceed ten percent of the lot area; provided, however, that up to an additional five percent coverage may be allowed pursuant to a use permit. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.11.050, 1977).  
17.28.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the RE-2 acre zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: two hundred feet; 
B.  Interior lot: two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.11.060, 1977).  
17.28.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the RE-2 acre zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than fifty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than fifty feet. 
C.  Interior side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than twenty feet. 
D.  Street side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than thirty feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property, line whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.11.070, 1977).  
17.28.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the RE-2 acre zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.11.080, 1977).  
17.28.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the RE-2 acre zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.11.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.30 - R-A ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.30.010 - Purpose—Applicability. 
A.  There currently exists property in the R-A zone as defined by certain zoning regulations repealed by the ordinance codified in this title. 
B.  The R-A zone will cease to exist when all property currently in such zone is place in another zone. 
C.  Until such time as a parcel of property is placed in another zone, and notwithstanding Section 1.01.060 of the ordinance codified at this chapter to the contrary, the provisions of those zoning regulations applicable to the R-A zone prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified at this chapter shall be applicable to such property. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.12.000, 1977).  
Chapter 17.32 - RA-3 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.32.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RA-3 zone are: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Agricultural crops, fruit trees, nut trees, vines, horticulture; and 
E.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 27, 2004: Ord. 336 § 6.13.000, 1977).  
17.32.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RA-3 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, storage yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Sale of agricultural products produced on the premises; 
C.  Greenhouses and nurseries excluding retail sale of plants and products produced off the premises; 
D.  § 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Stables and barns (but no other accessory buildings) as regulated by Section 17.08.090 where there is no occupied single-family dwelling on the premises, and where a conditional use permit is also issued for the keeping of animals; and 
F.  Mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 881 § 28, 2004: Ord. 581 § 21, 1988; Ord. 517 § 11, 1984; Ord. 514 § 13, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.13.010, 1977).  
17.32.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the RA-3 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings or structures shall be fourteen feet, except barns which shall be a maximum of nineteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.13.020, 1977).  
17.32.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the RA-3 zone shall be three net acres. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.13.030, 1977).  
17.32.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage in the RA-3 zone by all structures and buildings shall not exceed ten thousand square feet; provided, however, that additional coverage not exceed five hundred square feet may be permitted pursuant to a use permit. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.13.050, 1977).  
17.32.060 - Lot width. 
No lot in the RA-3 zone shall exceed a 3:1 depth-to-width ratio. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.13.060, 1977).  
17.32.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the RA-3 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than fifty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than fifty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than fifty feet. 
D.  Street side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than fifty feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.13.070, 1977).  
17.32.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the RA-3 zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.13.080, 1977).  
17.32.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the RA-3 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.13.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.34 - RA-5 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.34.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RA-5 zone are: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Agricultural crops, fruit trees, nut trees, vines, horticulture; and 
E.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 29, 2004: Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.14.000, 1977).  
17.34.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RA-5 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, storage yards, warehouses, or repair shops; 
B.  Sale of agricultural products produced on the premises; 
C.  Greenhouses and nurseries excluding retail sale of plants and products produced off the premises; 
D.  § 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Stables and barns (but no other accessory buildings) as regulated by Section 17.08.090 where there is no occupied single-family dwelling on the premises, and where a conditional use permit is also issued for the keeping of animals; and 
F.  Mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 881 § 30, 2004: Ord. 581 § 22, 1988; Ord. 517 § 12, 1984; Ord. 514 § 14, 1984; Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.14.010, 1977).  
17.34.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the RA-5 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet, except barns which shall be a maximum of nineteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.14.020, 1977).  
17.34.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the RA-5 zone for each lot shall be five net acres. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.14.030, 1977).  
17.34.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the RA-5 zone shall not exceed ten thousand square feet; provided, however, that additional coverage not exceeding five hundred square feet may be permitted pursuant to a use permit. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.14.050, 1977).  
17.34.060 - Lot width. 
No lot in the RA-5 zone shall exceed a 3:1 depth-to-width ratio. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.14.060, 1977).  
17.34.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the RA-5 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than fifty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than fifty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than fifty feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than fifty feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property, line whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.14.070, 1977).  
17.34.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.14.080, 1977).  
17.34.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.14.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.36 - RA-10 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.36.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RA-10 zone are: 
A.  Single-family dwelling; 
B.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
C.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
D.  Agricultural crops, fruit trees, nut trees, vines, horticulture; and 
E.  Secondary residential units. 
(Ord. 881 § 31, 2004: Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.15.000, 1977).  
17.36.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RA-10 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, storage yards, warehouses, or repair shops; 
B.  Sale of agricultural products produced on the premises; 
C.  Greenhouses and nurseries excluding retail sale of plants and products produced off the premises; 
D.  § 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Accessory single-family dwellings for agricultural employees; 
F.  Stables and barns (but no other accessory buildings) as regulated by Section 17.08.090 where there is no occupied single-family dwelling on the premises, and where a conditional use permit is also issued for the keeping of animals; and 
G.  Mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 881 § 32, 2004: Ord. 581 § 23, 1988; Ord. 517 § 13, 1984; Ord. 514 § 15, 1984; Ord. 370 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.15.010, 1977).  
17.36.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the RA-10 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings or structures shall be fourteen feet, except barns which shall be a maximum of nineteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.15.020, 1977).  
17.36.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the RA-10 zone shall be ten net acres. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.15.030, 1977).  
17.36.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the RA-10 zone shall not exceed ten thousand square feet; provided, however, that additional coverage not exceeding five hundred square feet may be permitted pursuant to a use permit. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.15.050, 1977).  
17.36.060 - Lot width. 
No lot in the RA-10 zone shall exceed a 4:1 depth-to-width ratio. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.15.060, 1977).  
17.36.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the RA-10 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than fifty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than fifty feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than fifty feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than fifty feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property, line whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.15.070, 1977).  
17.36.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.15.080, 1977).  
17.36.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the RA-10 zone subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.15.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.38 - R-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.38.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R-2 zone: 
A.  Single-family dwelling subject to regulations in Chapter 17.12; 
B.  Duplex; 
C.  Triplex; 
D.  Accessory uses as regulated by Section 17.08.100; 
E.  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 17.08.090; 
F.  Schools, public elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 813 § 24, 1999: Ord. 336 § 6.16.000, 1977).  
17.38.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit; 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, but excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Churches, parks, playgrounds; 
C.  Community care facility, day care center or residential facility; 
D.  Section 5116 homes as regulated by Chapter 17.80; 
E.  Mobile home parks; 
F.  Schools, private elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 821 § 2, 2000: Ord. 813 § 25, 1999: Ord. 581 § 24, 1988; Ord. 517 § 14, 1984; Ord. 336 § 6.16.010, 1977).  
17.38.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R-2 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
C.  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.16.020, 1977).  
17.38.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R-2 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lots: seven thousand square feet; 
B.  Interior lots: seven thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.16.030, 1977).  
17.38.050 - Lot area per family unit. 
The maximum lot area per family unit in the R-2 zone shall be three thousand five hundred square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.16.050, 1977).  
17.38.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R-2 zone shall not exceed fifty percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.16.050, 1977).  
17.38.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R-2 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: sixty-five feet; 
B.  Interior lot: sixty feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.16.060, 1977).  
17.38.080 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the R-2 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty-five feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than twenty feet. In addition thereto, not less than one thousand square feet shall remain uncovered on the rear of each lot. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than five feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.16.070, 1977).  
17.38.090 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit in the R-2 zone shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.16.080, 1977).  
17.38.100 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the R-2 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.16.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.40 - R-3 ZONE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), adopted Jan. 10, 2017, repealed Ch. 17.40 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.40, §§ 17.40.005—17.40.090 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 336, §§ 6.17.010—6.17.090, adopted in 1977; Ord. No. 517, § 15, adopted in 1984; Ord. No. 555, § 1, adopted in 1986; Ord. No. 581, § 25, adopted in 1988; Ord. No. 813 §§ 26, 27, adopted in 1999; Ord. No. 821 §§ 3—5, adopted in 2000; and Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A5., adopted Oct. 11, 2011. 
 
17.40.005 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the R-3 zone: 
A.  Apartments, townhouses, condominiums (for residential use, including cluster developments); 
B.  Accessory buildings subject to regulations in Chapter 17.08; 
C.  Accessory uses as regulated by Chapter 17.08; 
D.  Duplexes, triplexes, subject to regulations in Chapter 17.38. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
17.40.010 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 zone subject to issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Roominghouses and boardinghouses; 
B.  Schools, private or public elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
17.40.020 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the R-3 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be fifty feet. The maximum allowable height may be increased beyond fifty feet subject to justifications provided and accepted as part of a design review approval. 
B.  The maximum height for accessory buildings or structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
17.40.030 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R-3 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lots: six thousand five hundred square feet. 
B.  Interior lots: six thousand square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
17.40.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R-3 zone shall not exceed sixty percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
17.40.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R-3 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: sixty-five feet; 
B.  Interior lot: sixty feet. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
17.40.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the R-3 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than fifteen feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than fifteen feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
17.40.080 - Dwelling unit minimum area. 
The minimum square footage per dwelling unit shall be regulated by Section 17.08.020. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
17.40.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. No. 1062, § 2(Exh. A2.), 1-10-2017)  
Chapter 17.42 - B-P ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.42.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the B-P zone: 
A.  Professional offices and clinics; 
B.  Accessory buildings subject to regulations in Section 17.08.090; 
C.  Accessory uses subject to regulations in Section 17.08.100. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.18.000, 1977).  
17.42.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the B-P zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Lodges; 
B.  Club houses; 
C.  Churches; 
D.  Community care facility, day care center, or residential facility; 
E.  Bar-restaurant combination, restaurant or coffee shop; 
F.  Mobile pushcart vending facility. 
(Ord. 674 § 3, 1993; Ord. 581 § 26, 1988; Ord. 336 § 6.18.010, 1977).  
17.42.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the B-P zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet, and the maximum number of stories shall be two, with the following exception: 
With a use permit the maximum allowable height may be increased up to fifty feet and the maximum number of stories may be increased up to four. 
B.  The maximum height for accessory buildings or structures shall be fourteen feet. 
(Ord. 555 § 2, 1986: Ord. 336 § 6.18.020, 1977).  
17.42.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the B-P zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: ten thousand square feet; 
B.  Interior lot: nine thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.18.030, 1977).  
17.42.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the B-P zone shall not exceed sixty percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.18.050, 1977).  
17.42.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the B-P zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: one hundred feet; 
B.  Interior lot: ninety feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.18.060, 1977).  
17.42.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the B-P zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than fifteen feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than fifteen feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.18.070, 1977).  
17.42.080 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the B-P zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.18.090, 1977).  
Chapter 17.44 - C-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.44.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the C-1 zone: 
A.  Retail Business Establishments. All uses to be conducted entirely within a building with no outside storage or display permitted: 
1.  Book store and periodical store; 
2.  Record store; 
3.  Drug store; 
4.  Stationery store; 
5.  Gift shop; 
6.  Flower shop; 
7.  Toy store; 
8.  Business or professional office; 
9.  Banks; 
10.  Soda fountain/ice cream parlor; 
11.  Restaurant-bar combination, restaurant, coffee shop; 
12.  Arts and crafts store, hobby shop; 
13.  Jewelry store; 
14.  Confectionery store; 
15.  Church; 
16.  Bakery/donut shop; 
17.  Video store. 
B.  Personal Service Establishments. All uses to be conducted entirely within a building with no outside storage or display permitted: 
1.  Barber shop; 
2.  Beauty shop; 
3.  Photographic studio, photo shop; 
4.  Radio and/or television repair; 
5.  Shoe repair; 
6.  Pick-up station for laundry or dry cleaners. 
C.  Schools, public elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 813 § 28, 1999: Ord. 692 § 1, 1993: Ord. 464 § 2, 1982; Ord. 461 § 1, 1981; Ord. 336 § 6.19.000, 1977).  
17.44.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-1 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Public utility buildings and uses, not excluding equipment or storage yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
B.  Exercise or athletic club, figure salon; 
C.  Commercial cluster complex; 
D.  Day care centers; 
E.  Schools, private elementary and secondary; 
F.  Schools, college and university; 
G.  Schools, specialized education and training; 
H.  Hardware stores; 
I.  Mobile pushcart vending facility. 
(Ord. 813 § 29, 1999: Ord. 692 § 2, 1993: Ord. 674 § 4, 1993; Ord. 650 § 6, 1991; Ord. 581 § 27, 1988; Ord. 492 § 1, 1983; Ord. 362 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.19.010, 1977).  
17.44.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the C-1 zone: 
A.  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories shall be two. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.19.020, 1977).  
17.44.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the C-1 zone shall be six thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.19.030, 1977).  
17.44.050 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the C-1 zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Corner lot: sixty-five feet; 
B.  Interior lot: sixty-five feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.19.040, 1977).  
17.44.060 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the C-1 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than five feet, except when adjacent to a residential zone, not less than twenty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
C.  Interior Side. None required except ten feet when adjacent to a residential zone. 
D.  Street Side. On corner lots, there shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.19.050, 1977).  
17.44.070 - Off-street parking. 
Offstreet parking in the C-1 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.19.090, 1977).  
17.44.080 - Zone size minimum. 
No area shall be zoned to the C-1 zone neighborhood commercial zone unless the following minimum area, depth, and width requirements of the total zone are provided: 
A.  Minimum zone area: one acre; 
B.  Minimum zone width: one hundred forty feet; 
C.  Minimum zone depth: one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.19.050, 1977).  
Chapter 17.46 - C-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.46.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the C-2 zone: 
A.  Retail Business Establishments. All uses to be conducted entirely within a building with no outside storage or display permitted: 
1.  All uses as permitted in the C-1 zone; 
2.  Coin-operated laundry or dry cleaners; 
3.  Furniture store; 
4.  General merchandise store, department store; 
5.  Hardware store; 
6.  Household appliance store; 
7.  Liquor store; 
8.  Retail food store; 
9.  Adult related businesses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.79 and Chapter 5.44; 
10.  Variety store. 
B.  Personal Service Establishments. All uses to be conducted entirely within a building with no outside storage or display permitted: 
1.  All uses as permitted in the C-1 zone; 
2.  Theatres, except sex-oriented motion picture theatres as defined in Section 17.79.020; 
3.  Exercise or athletic club, figure salon; 
4.  Public utility uses, but not including equipment yards, storage yards, warehouses or repair shops. 
C.  Schools, public elementary and secondary. 
(Ord. 813 § 30, 1999: Ord. 692 § 3, 1993: Ord. 464 §§ 3, 4, 1982; Ord. 336 § 6.20.000, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 946, §§ 4, 5, 4-14-2009)  
17.46.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-2 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Commercial parking lot; 
B.  Retail plant nursery; 
C.  Billiard room; 
D.  Bowling alley; 
E.  Indoor skating rink; 
F.  Antique store; 
G.  Second-hand goods store; 
H.  Gasoline station; 
I.  Motel and hotel; 
J.  Shopping center; 
K.  Convenience store; 
L.  Commercial cluster complex; 
M.  Day care facility for children under twelve years of age; 
N.  Temporary business establishments for the collection of aluminum beverage containers and other ferrous materials. Such use may be authorized by use permit also in any commercial or industrial district which allows uses permitted in the C-2 zone; 
O.  Massage parlor; 
P.  Day care center; 
Q.  Schools, private elementary and secondary; 
R.  Schools, college and university; 
S.  Schools, specialized education and training; 
T.  Automobile service station; 
U.  Automobile repair shops (light), as a part of a complex, on a minimum of two acres, with two or more businesses on one or more parcels. The other businesses in the complex shall not be limited to automobile repair shops (light), provided they are determined to be compatible as determined by the planning commission. If more than one parcel is involved, reciprocal parking and access easements shall be required between all parcels involved; 
V.  Veterinary clinic; 
W.  Mobile pushcart vending facility. 
(Ord. 813 § 31, 1999: Ord. 692 § 4, 1993: Ord. 674 § 5, 1993; Ord. 664 § 2, 1992: Ord. 650 § 7, 1991: Ord. 581 § 28, 1988; Ord. 492 § 2, 1983; Ord. 463 § 1, 1982; Ord. 455 § 2, 1981; Ord. 362 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.20.010, 1977).  
17.46.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the C-2 zone: 
The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet, and the maximum number of stories shall be two, with the following exception: 
With a use permit the maximum allowable height may be increased up to fifty feet, and the maximum number of stories may be increased up to four. 
(Ord. 555 § 3, 1986: Ord. 336 § 6.20.020, 1977).  
17.46.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the C-2 zone shall be ten thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.20.030, 1977).  
17.46.050 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the C-2 zone shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.20.040, 1977).  
17.46.060 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the C-2 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than five feet, except when adjacent to a residential zone, not less than ten feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
C.  Interior Side. None required except ten feet when adjacent to a residential zone. 
D.  Street Side. On corner lots, there shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line of the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.20.050, 1977).  
17.46.070 - Zone size minimums. 
No area shall be zoned to the C-2 retail business zone unless the following minimum area, width, and depth requirements of the total zone are provided: 
A.  Minimum zone area: one acre; 
B.  Minimum zone width: one hundred forty feet; 
C.  Minimum zone depth: one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.20.060, 1977).  
17.46.080 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided subject to the regulations of Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.20.070, 1977).  
Chapter 17.48 - C-3 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.48.010 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the C-3 zone: Uses to be conducted entirely within a building: 
A.  All uses permitted in the C-2 zone, excluding the C-1 uses; 
B.  Creamery; 
C.  Dry cleaners; 
D.  Laundry; 
E.  Locker plant; 
F.  Mortuary; 
G.  Nursery, florist; 
H.  Plumbing shop; 
I.  Secondhand sales; 
J.  Wholesaling; 
K.  Billiard room; 
L.  Bowling alley; 
M.  Skating rink; 
N.  Churches. 
(Ord. 669 § 2, 1992; Ord. 336 § 6.21.000, 1977).  
17.48.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-3 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Commercial parking lot; 
B.  Gasoline station; 
C.  Outdoor storage and sales; 
D.  Animal hospital, veterinary clinic; 
E.  Auto sales and service; 
F.  Automobile service station; 
G.  Autobody and paint shop; 
H.  Heavy equipment sales and service; 
I.  Sheet metal shop; 
J.  Tree surgeon establishments; 
K.  Convenience store; 
L.  Commercial cluster complex; 
M.  Mini-storage; 
N.  Massage parlor; 
0.  Automobile repair shops (light); 
P.  Automobile repair shops (heavy); 
Q.  Schools, private elementary and secondary; 
R.  Schools, college and university; 
S.  Schools, specialized education and training; 
T.  Mobile pushcart vending facility. 
(Ord. 813 § 32, 1999: Ord. 674 § 6, 1993; Ord. 650 § 8, 1991; Ord. 581 § 29, 1988; Ord. 463 § 2, 1982; Ord. 362 (part); Ord. 336 § 6.21.010, 1977).  
17.48.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the C-3 zone: 
The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet, and the maximum number of stories shall be two, with the following exception: 
With a use permit the maximum allowable height may be increased up to fifty feet, and the maximum number of stories may be increased up to four. 
(Ord. 555 § 4, 1986: Ord. 336 § 6.21.020, 1977).  
17.48.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum lot area for each lot in the C-3 zone shall be twenty thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.21.030, 1977).  
17.48.050 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the C-3 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than five feet, except when adjacent to a residential zone, not less than ten feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
C.  Interior Side. None required except ten feet when adjacent to a residential zone. 
D.  Street Side. On corner lots, there shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setback required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.21.040, 1977).  
17.48.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the C-3 zone shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.21.050, 1977).  
17.48.070 - Zone size minimums. 
No area shall be zoned to the C-3 general and service commercial zone unless the following minimum area, depth, and width requirements of the zone are provided: 
A.  Minimum zone area: one acre; 
B.  Minimum zone width: two hundred feet; 
C.  Minimum zone depth: two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.21.060, 1977).  
17.48.080 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the C-3 zone subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.21.070, 1977).  
Chapter 17.50 - C-4 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.50.010 - Purpose. 
The C-4 zone is intended solely to facilitate development of parcels which have been developed with a mix of commercial uses on existing small lots within two specifically defined areas of the city prior to the adoption of this title. The zone will not be applied to other land within the city. 
(Ord. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.000, 1977).  
17.50.020 - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the C-4 zone: 
Retail business establishments: All uses to be conducted entirely within a building with no outside storage, sales or display permitted: 
A.  All uses listed as permitted uses within the C-1 zone as set forth in Section 17.44.010; 
B.  Retail furniture store; 
C.  Household appliance store; 
D.  Auto parts store. 
(Ord. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.010, 1977).  
17.50.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-4 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Uses set forth in Section 17.46.010 as permitted uses in the C-2 zone. 
B.  Uses set forth in Section 17.46.020 as uses permitted with a conditional use permit in the C-2 zone. 
C.  Uses set forth in Section 17.48.010 as uses permitted with a conditional use permit in the C-3 zone. 
D.  Uses set forth in Section 17.48.020 as used permitted with a conditional use permit in the C-3 zone. 
(Ord. 581 § 30, 1988; Ord. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.020, 1977).  
17.50.040 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the C-4 zone: 
The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet, and the maximum number of stories shall be two, with the following exception: 
With a use permit the maximum allowable height may be increased up to fifty feet, and the maximum number of stories may be increased up to four. 
(Ord. 555 § 5, 1986: Ord. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.030, 1977).  
17.50.050 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the C-4 zone shall be seven thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.040, 1977).  
17.50.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the C-4 zone shall be fifty feet. 
(Ord. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.050, 1977).  
17.50.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the C-4 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. Building frontages shall abut the existing right-of-way, except as follows: 
1.  When adjacent to a residential zone, a building frontage shall not be less than that required for the residential zone; 
2.  When parcels are fifty feet or over in width, thirty percent of the building frontage shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the existing right-of-way; 
3.  When an unsafe sight-distance for motorists would result. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
C.  Interior Side. None required except ten feet when adjacent to a residential zone. 
D.  Street Side. Building frontage shall abut the existing right-of-way, except as follows: 
1.  When adjacent to a residential zone, a building frontage shall not be less than that required for the residential zone; 
2.  When parcels are fifty feet or over in width, thirty percent of the building frontage shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the existing right-of-way; 
3.  When an unsafe sight-distance for motorists would result. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by adopted specific plans shall be measured from the adopted plan line(s) or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 596 §§ 1, 2, 1988; Ord. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.060, 1977).  
17.50.080 - Zone location restriction. 
The C-4 zone is restricted to certain specified areas for the purposes specified in Section 17.50.010. 
(Ords. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.070, 1977).  
17.50.090 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking regulations in the C-4 zone: 
A.  One on-site parking space shall be provided for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area. 
B.  In lieu of the requirements of subsection A, a fee, as set by resolution of the council, based on the number of square feet of gross floor area may be paid to the city parking lot fund to establish off-street parking for the C-4 zone. All such city parking lots funded by the fees received pursuant to this section shall be located within or immediately adjacent to the C-4 zone. 
(Ord. 376 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.21A.080, 1977).  
Chapter 17.52 - C-H ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.52.010 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-H zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Hotel; 
B.  Motel; 
C.  Restaurant-bar combination; 
D.  Restaurant; 
E.  Retail store incidental to any other use authorized by this section; 
F.  Refreshment stand; 
G.  Commercial recreation use; 
H.  Gasoline station; 
I.  Public utility buildings and uses not included equipment or storage yard, warehouse, or shop; 
J.  Auto sales and service; 
K.  Convenience store; 
L.  Commercial cluster complex; 
M.  Automobile repair shop (light); 
N.  Automobile service station; 
O.  Mobile pushcart vending facility. 
(Ord. 674 § 7, 1993; Ord. 640 § 9, 1991: Ord. 581 § 31, 1988; Ord. 362 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.22.010, 1977).  
17.52.020 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the C-H zone: 
The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet, and the maximum number of stories shall be two, with the following exception: 
With a use permit the maximum allowable height may be increased up to fifty feet, and the maximum number of stories may be increased up to four. 
(Ord. 555 § 6, 1986: Ord. 336 § 6.22.020, 1977).  
17.52.030 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the C-H zone shall be twenty thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.22.030, 1977).  
17.52.040 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the C-H zone shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.22.040, 1977).  
17.52.050 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the C-H zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than ten feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.22.050, 1977).  
17.52.060 - Zone size minimums. 
No area shall be zoned to the C-H highway commercial zone unless the following minimum area, depth and width requirements of the total zone are provided: 
A.  Minimum zone area: one acre; 
B.  Minimum zone depth: two hundred feet; 
C.  Minimum zone width: two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.22.060, 1977).  
17.52.070 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.22.070, 1977).  
Chapter 17.54 - M-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.54.010 - Permitted uses. 
The following are permitted in the M-1 zone provided there is no appreciable offensive or objectionable odor, dust, noise, bright lighting, vibration or other nuisance factor, and further provided that the use is conducted within a building, or, where the activity is outside, it is wholly surrounded by a solid masonry wall: 
A.  Building materials; 
B.  Cabinet shop; 
C.  Contractor's yard; 
D.  Food processing; 
E.  Machine shop; 
F.  Outdoor storage and sales; 
G.  Public utility service yard; 
H.  Warehousing or mini-storage; 
I.  Light manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, component manufacturing, small parts processing. 
(Ord. 916 § 2, 2007: Ord. 362 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.23.000, 1977).  
17.54.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the M-1 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Retail sales and personal service establishments appurtenant to permitted uses; 
B.  Any use specified in Section 17.54.010 which in the opinion of the community development director does not qualify as a permitted use because of the potential for objectionable odor, dust, noise, bright lighting, vibration or other nuisance factors; 
C.  Industrial cluster complex; 
D.  Auto body and paint shop; 
E.  Automobile repair shop (light); 
F.  Automobile repair shop (heavy); 
G.  Mobile pushcart vending facility; 
H.  Automotive dealership; 
I.  Car wash; 
J.  Automotive rentals. 
(Ord. 916 § 3, 2007: Ord. 674 § 8, 1993; Ord. 669 § 3, 1992; Ord. 650 § 10, 1991: Ord. 581 § 32, 1988; Ord. 391: Ord. 336 § 6.23.010, 1977).  
17.54.025 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in the M-1 zone: 
A.  Places of assembly (lodges, clubs, religious facilities, community centers, theaters, etc.); 
(Ord. 916 § 4, 2007). 
(Ord. No. 946, § 5, 4-14-2009)  
17.54.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the M-1 zone: 
The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet, and the maximum number of stories shall be two, with the following exception: 
With a use permit the maximum allowable height may be increased up to fifty feet, and the maximum number of stories may be increased up to four. 
(Ord. 555 § 7, 1986: Ord. 336 § 6.23.020, 1977).  
17.54.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the M-1 zone shall be twenty thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.23.030, 1977).  
17.54.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the M-1 zone shall not exceed fifty percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 543 § 1, 1986: Ord. 336 § 6.23.040, 1977).  
17.54.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the M-1 zone shall be two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.23.050, 1977).  
17.54.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the M-1 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty-five feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
F.  Parking lots and vehicle display areas shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet from all public rights-of-way and five feet from interior property lines. 
(Ord. 916 § 5, 2007: Ord. 336 § 6.23.060, 1977).  
17.54.080 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the M-1 zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 916 § 6, 2007: Ord. 336 § 6.23.070, 1977).  
Chapter 17.56 - M-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.56.010 - Permitted uses. 
The following are permitted in the M-2 zone provided in the opinion of planning department staff, there is no appreciable offensive or objectionable odor, dust, noise, bright lights, vibration, or other nuisance factors: 
A.  Industrial uses as authorized and regulated in the M-1 zone; 
B.  Wholesale stores and storage; 
C.  Service establishments; 
D.  Manufacturing and fabrication; 
E.  Processing and assembly uses; 
F.  Mini-storage. 
(Ord. 362 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.24.000, 1977).  
17.56.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the M-2 zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Any use specified in Section 17.54.010 or 17.56.010 which in the opinion of planning department staff does not qualify as a permitted use because of some objectional factor; 
B.  Auto dismantling; 
C.  Bituminous paving plants; 
D.  Batch plants, concrete; 
E.  Flammable liquid storage; 
F.  Storage of petroleum; 
G.  Retail sales and personal service establishments appurtenant to permitted or conditional uses; 
H.  Industrial cluster complex; 
I.  Auto body and paint shops; 
J.  Automobile repair shop (light); 
K.  Automobile repair shop (heavy); 
L.  Churches; 
M.  Mobile pushcart vending facility. 
(Ord. 674 § 9, 1993; Ord. 669 § 4, 1992; Ord. 650 § 11, 1991: Ord. 581 § 33, 1988; Ord. 391 (part): Ord. 336 § 6.24.010, 1977).  
17.56.030 - Height regulations. 
Height regulations in the M-2 zone: 
The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty feet, and the maximum number of stories shall be two, with the following exception: 
With a use permit the maximum allowable height may be increased up to fifty feet, and the maximum number of stories may be increased up to four. 
(Ord. 555 § 8, 1986: Ord. 336 § 6.24.020, 1977).  
17.56.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the M-2 zone shall be one acre. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.24.030, 1977).  
17.56.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the M-2 zone shall not exceed fifty percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 543 § 2, 1986: Ord. 336 § 6.24.040, 1977).  
17.56.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the M-2 zone shall be two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.24.050, 1977).  
17.56.070 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the M-2 zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty-five feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than five feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.24.060, 1977).  
17.56.080 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the M-2 zone subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.24.070, 1977).  
17.56.090 - Zone size minimums. 
No area shall be zoned to the M-2 heavy industrial zone unless the following minimum area, depth, and width requirements of the zone are provided: 
A.  Minimum zone area: one acre; 
B.  Minimum width: two hundred feet; 
C.  Minimum lot depth: two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.24.080, 1977).  
Chapter 17.57 - AUTOMOTIVE OVERLAY ZONE 
 
17.57.010 - Automotive Overlay zone. 
This chapter establishes the Automotive Overlay zone. The creation of this overlay zone provides a mechanism for a person to propose an automotive related development (including autos, boats, RVs, motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and other vehicles) that is beneficial to the community and implements the city's general plan policy of flexibility and innovation in development and planning techniques. Development of property within the overlay zone is subject to the regulations of Title 17 as modified by this chapter. The properties included within the Automotive Overlay zone shall be indicated on the approved zoning map depicting the Automotive Overlay zone area. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2015)  
17.57.020 - Purpose and intent. 
This Automotive Overlay zone is an opportunity to utilize an alternative zoning tool for those properties that are within the boundaries of the Automotive Overlay zone. The property owner shall have the choice of developing property pursuant to the provisions of the underlying zone, or developing property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It is the intent of the city council to create an Automotive Overlay zone that will provide for the following: 
A.  Implement a streamlined entitlement review and approval process, and eliminate the need for a conditional use permit for outdoor display for automotive related uses within the Automotive Overlay zone area; 
B.  Allow for greater flexibility in the application of the city's approved design guidelines and development standards within the overlay zone in a manner grounded in market realities and working with corporate requirements of automotive brands; 
C.  Encourage new automotive related uses and the expansion or reinvestment of existing automotive uses within the Automotive Overlay zone area making the regulatory process easier for the owners and tenants to negotiate; 
D.  Create a vibrant commercial destination that attracts shoppers locally and from throughout the region, and provides local jobs; 
E.  Allow for flexibility of design, and development of outcome-based design goals rather than specific design standards. The design goals should consider the unique characteristics of automotive uses while emphasizing quality design and development. 
F.  Creation of the Automotive Overlay zone will establish this area of Rocklin as a desirable location for automotive uses and provide a tool by which the city can attract additional automotive uses and encourage partnerships of existing automotive related businesses. This partnership will in turn provide a mechanism for automotive related businesses to market to potential customers. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2015)  
17.57.030 - Applicability; conflicts. 
A.  The provisions of this Chapter 17.57 shall apply to those parcels indicated on the approved zoning map depicting the Automotive Overlay zone area, and in a manner consistent with the identification of boundaries for other zones set forth in Title 17 and prior decisions of the city regarding the actual boundaries of properties within city land use zones. 
B.  Conflict. Should a provision of this Chapter 17.57 conflict with any other provision of Title 17 of the Rocklin Municipal Code, or any other city resolutions, ordinances, or regulations of the city, this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2015)  
17.57.040 - Design review approval; fees. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 17.72.020(C), the city council designates and authorizes the community development director as the approving authority for design review approvals issued in conformance with this chapter. 
B.  The community development director shall have approving authority for design review applications meeting the requirements set forth in subsections 1, 2 and 3 below; 
1.  Modifications to an existing building including façade changes. 
2.  Expansions of an existing building or construction of new buildings that meet the following criteria; 
a.  Compatibility with existing architecture and structures. 
b.  The proposed construction matches or exceeds the level of quality for materials used on the existing buildings. 
c.  For expansions, square footage of addition is less than fifty percent of the existing building size and not more than ten thousand square feet. 
d.  For new building(s), square footage of new structure(s) does not exceed ten thousand square feet and is part of an existing project site that has previously received design review or conditional use permit entitlements from the city. 
e.  Does not negatively affect site circulation or parking or encroach into required setbacks. 
f.  Provides additional parking as required pursuant to the off-street parking standards, Section 17.57.060(H). 
g.  Located on a parcel that is five acres or less in size. 
h.  Does not involve the use of significant amounts of hazardous substances. 
3.  Site modifications that meet the following criteria; 
a.  Surfacing, resurfacing, or layout modification to existing parking areas that does not reduce the number of parking stalls required. 
b.  Additions, enhancements or rehabilitation of existing landscape areas or the removal or reduction of landscape areas for other approved site modifications. 
c.  ADA accessibility upgrades. 
d.  Replacement, repair or modification of fencing or walls. 
4.  Additions or expansions that do not meet the criteria above are subject to the standard design review process set forth in Chapter 17.72. 
C.  The community development director shall review the application for its compliance with the citywide design review guidelines and the conformity of the proposed project with the surrounding properties. The community development director shall have the authority to, and shall take action to grant, grant with conditions, or deny the design review application based on the information contained in the application and any information obtained from the staff review of the project. 
D.  Notwithstanding other provisions for fees adopted by city ordinance or resolution, the fees applicable to review and approval of entitlements issued in conformance with this chapter for projects within the Automotive Overlay zone shall be determined on the fully loaded hourly rate for city staff utilized to review and approve the project development entitlements, up to a maximum fee as follows: 
1.  Design review approvals that meet criteria as set forth in Section 17.57.050(B)       $3,500.00 
2.  Environmental review (if applicable)       $3,000.00 
E.  The community development director shall prescribe the forms and documents to be filed for a permit under the provisions of the Automotive Overlay zone. 
F.  The community development director may act on the application without a formally noticed public hearing. Notice of a pending application pursuant to the Automotive Overlay zone regulations shall be posted on the proposed project site and on the city of Rocklin website. Such notice shall include a project description; specify that any interested person may view the application materials at the city of Rocklin offices during business hours; the ten-day time period when the public may submit written comments on the proposed project to the city; the date whereon the community development director is expected to take action on the proposed project; and the date by which anyone may appeal the final action of the community development director in the manner provided by Chapter 17.86. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2015)  
17.57.050 - Permitted uses. 
In addition to the permitted uses allowed by the existing underlying zone of each parcel, the following uses shall be permitted uses in any commercial zone in the Automotive Overlay zone area: 
A.  Automotive dealership, including dealers selling cars, boats, RVs, motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles or any other automotive related uses sold by a dealer as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 285 including outdoor display of such product. 
B.  Automobile repair shop (light or heavy); when incidental to an automotive dealership and located within the same structure or on the same property as an automotive dealership; or as a stand-alone use when the repair shop meets the following minimum standards: 
1.  Building is a minimum of ten thousand square feet. 
2.  The use is fully enclosed within the building with no outdoor repairs or storage of equipment or materials related to the automobile repair, or outdoor storage of vehicles that are in visible disrepair or dirty, unless fully screened from view. Vehicles ready for customer pick up may be parked outside of the building in designated areas, subject to the review and approval of the parking plan and designated area by the community development director. 
3.  Hours of operation are limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
4.  A noise study may be required if in the opinion of the community development director there may be potential conflicts with sensitive receptors. If the noise study demonstrates that potential conflicts may occur, additional mitigation measures may be required. 
C.  Automobile body and paint shop when incidental to and located within the same structure or on the same property as an automotive dealership or an automobile repair shop meeting the criteria set forth in Section 17.57.060(B). 
1.  Auto body shop operations shall be in conformance with all Placer County Air Pollution Control District's rule[s] and regulations. 
D.  Automobile car wash when incidental to an automotive dealership, automobile repair shop or automobile body and paint shop and located within the same structure or on the same property. 
1.  The car wash must be fully enclosed within a building or screened from public view. 
2.  All runoff must be directed into the sanitary sewer system. 
E.  Automotive rentals, excluding commercial truck rentals, when incidental to an automotive dealership and located within the same structure or on the same parcel as an automotive dealership and comprising less than twenty-five percent of the total building square footage and less than twenty-five percent of the total outdoor display area. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2015)  
17.57.060 - Conditional uses. 
Conditional Uses. In addition to the conditional uses allowed by the existing underlying zone of each parcel, the following uses shall be conditional uses in any commercial zone in the Automotive Overlay zone area: 
A.  Automobile repair shop (light or heavy); when it does not meet the criteria set forth in Section 17.57.060(B). 
B.  Automobile body and paint shop when it does not meet the criteria set forth in Section 17.57.060(C). 
C.  Automotive Rentals. Except those incidental to an automotive dealership and meeting the criteria of Section 17.57.060(E). 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2015)  
17.57.070 - Special standards. 
To encourage economic development, reinvestment, and enhancement of the properties within the boundaries of the district the following special standards shall apply to all projects authorized under this chapter: 
A.  Height Restrictions. The maximum height for principal buildings and structures shall be thirty-five feet and the maximum number of stories shall be two, however, the maximum allowable height and the maximum number of stories may be increased upon approval of a conditional use permit. 
B.  Setbacks. Shall be the same as set forth in the underlying zone of the parcel, except that there shall be a minimum of thirty-foot setback required for all buildings from the property line adjacent to Interstate 80. Parking, landscaping, signs, vehicle displays, and similar features shall be allowed within the setback area only as approved as part of a design review permit. 
C.  Off-street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided subject to the regulations of Chapter 17.66 of the Rocklin Municipal Code. Vehicle parking spaces used or set aside for display of automobiles for sale need not conform to standard parking space dimensions. Such areas shall be included as part of the design review permit application, and shall be subject to review as part of the design review process. 
D.  Exterior Lighting. 
1.  Lighting should be used to provide illumination for the security and safety of on-site areas such as parking, loading, shipping, and receiving, pathways, and working areas as well as contribute to the overall design of the building. 
2.  Exterior lighting shall be designed to avoid adverse off-site glare on adjacent properties or public roadways and to provide adequate security. The lighting design, including type, style and mounting system shall ensure no off-site glare. 
3.  Maximum height for building and freestanding lighting shall not exceed twenty feet unless integrated as part of the architectural features of the building, signs or other design features and it can be effectively demonstrated that the lighting will not produce off-site glare. 
E.  Noise. Any uses allowed within the Automotive Overlay zone shall not use a public address system or an amplified sound system which can be heard outside of the building other than sound systems used for emergency purposes only. The design and layout of automotive uses that have service components shall be designed so that noise is directed away from any adjacent sensitive uses. 
F.  Dealership Test Driving. There shall be no test driving of automobiles, motorcycles or other vehicles within any residential subdivision. 
G.  Elevated Display Areas. Special display areas that are integrated with the overall project design and use quality materials coordinated with the building style are encouraged and will be subject to review as part of the design review process. The use of portable automobile ramps or metal scaffolding style ramps is prohibited. 
H.  Use of Portable Canopy Structures. The use of portable canopy structures shall be prohibited unless approved for temporary use as part of a special event permit. 
I.  Maintenance. The project, including but not limited to paving, landscaping, structures and improvements shall be maintained by the property owner(s) to the satisfaction of the community development director. 
J.  Deliveries. Delivery and off-loading of vehicles to any project site shall occur outside of the public right-of-way when possible. Automobile dealerships shall provide designated off-loading areas on the project site unless otherwise approved as part of the design review process and to the satisfaction of the public services director. The off-loading areas and path of travel shall be kept clear during expected delivery times. 
K.  Special Advertising Devices. Temporary signs and special advertising devices shall be regulated as set forth in the Rocklin Municipal Code, Section 17.75.070. 
L.  Inventory Maintenance. The use of a waterless washing/cleaning process is recommended. Washing or cleaning of vehicles using water shall be done in such a way as to minimize overspray and maximize water conservation. Runoff shall be kept to a minimum and every effort should be made to avoid runoff on sidewalks in the public right of way. All runoff must be directed into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2015)  
17.57.080 - Appeal. 
Any person dissatisfied by an act or determination of the community development director relating to the approval or denial of a project application under this chapter, or the interpretation or enforcement of this chapter, may appeal such act or determination to the planning commission as provided in Chapter 17.86. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2015)  
Chapter 17.58 - OA ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.58.010 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the OA zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Parks; 
B.  Playgrounds; 
C.  Golf courses; 
D.  Swimming pools; 
E.  Country clubs; 
F.  Equestrian facilities; 
G.  Museums; 
H.  Art galleries; 
I.  Public buildings; 
J.  Public utility substations; 
K.  Commercial uses accessory to permitted or conditional uses, such as refreshment stands, restaurants, sports equipment rental and sales, marinas. 
(Ord. 581 § 34, 1988; Ord. 336 § 6.25.000, 1977).  
17.58.020 - Height regulations. 
The maximum height for buildings and structures in the OA zone shall be thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.25.010, 1977).  
17.58.030 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the OA zone shall be one net acre. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.25.020, 1977).  
17.58.040 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the OA zone shall not exceed fifty percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.25.030, 1977).  
17.58.050 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the OA zone shall be two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.25.040, 1977).  
17.58.060 - Setbacks. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or enlarged in the OA zone unless the following setbacks are provided and maintained: 
A.  Front. There shall be a front setback of not less than twenty feet. 
B.  Rear. There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten feet. 
C.  Interior Side. There shall be an interior side setback of not less than ten feet. 
D.  Street Side. There shall be a street side setback of not less than ten feet. 
E.  Specified Streets. Front, side, street side, or rear setbacks required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be measured from the adopted plan line or the property line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.25.050, 1977).  
17.58.070 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking in the OA zone shall be provided subject to the regulations in Chapter 17.66. 
(Ord. 336 § 6.25.060, 1977).  
Chapter 17.59 - BUSINESS ATTRACTION, RETENTION, AND REVITALIZATION OVERLAY ZONE 
 
17.59.010 - Business Attraction, Retention, and Revitalization Overlay zone. 
This chapter establishes the Business Attraction, Retention, and Revitalization Overlay zone (the "BARRO zone"). The creation of this overlay zone provides a mechanism for a person to propose a commercial, residential or residential—nonresidential—mixed-use development that is beneficial to the community and implements the city's general plan policy of flexibility and innovation in development and planning techniques. Development of property within the overlay zone is subject to the regulations of Title 17 as modified by this chapter. The properties included within the Business Attraction, Retention, and Revitalization Overlay zone shall be indicated on the official zoning maps of the city by distinct shading over the affected properties. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
17.59.020 - Findings. 
In approving this chapter, the city council of the city of Rocklin finds and determines that: 
A.  The continued vitality of older commercial areas is essential to the economic well-being of the city and to the needs of citizens. 
B.  Fees, project entitlement processes, and development standards created primarily for the development of raw land have the unintended consequence of discouraging the improvement and renovation of older developments; especially those that consist of a single building, a small commercial cluster, and/or undersized and underutilized lots. 
C.  Many of the properties located within the Business Attraction, Retention, and Revitalization Overlay zone are characterized by structures that are sixty to one hundred plus years old, small lots, and/or outdated development patterns. As a result the strict application of the development standards found in this title effectively act to discourage the use, redevelopment, and enhancement of individual properties and clusters of properties within the BARRO zone area. 
D.  Providing a process for revitalization of older commercial areas focused on flexible development standards, streamlined approval processes, and reduced application fees, will benefit the city by improving their appearance and economic vitality, providing opportunities for pedestrian friendly amenities, and when appropriate, allowing for small scale residential development. 
E.  The BARRO zone district currently contains a mix of residential and commercial structures and uses. The creation and implementation of the BARRO zone creates a bridge tool for development in the BARRO zone district. The city council finds that inclusion of both commercial and residential uses in the BARRO zone is consistent with and implements the Rocklin General Plan including the following land use goals and policies: 
1.  Goal for Commercial Land Use: To retain and renew existing commercial land uses and designate sufficient new commercial areas to meet future city needs. 
2.  Policies for Commercial Land Use: 
a.  To promote and renew as needed, the Pacific Street, Rocklin Road, Sunset Boulevard, and Granite Drive business districts in order to provide diversified business opportunities. 
b.  To approve designation of sufficient commercial land to meet the future needs of the city. 
c.  To ensure that adequate parking and access are included in approved commercial development plans. 
d.  To avoid "strip commercial" land uses in newly developing areas by encouraging the "village concept" of grouping commercial land use in village core areas. 
e.  To minimize conflicts between new commercial land uses and other land uses, especially residential, park, and recreational uses. 
To promote flexibility and innovation in commercial land use through the use of planned unit developments, developer agreements, specific plans and other innovative development and planning techniques. 
f.  To maintain development standards and develop new standards, including off-site parking provisions, unique to the central commercial area of Rocklin along Pacific Street from Midas to Farron Streets. 
g.  To encourage use of the Rocklin Downtown Revitalization Plan and Design Guidelines when considering projects in the area generally abutting Rocklin Road and Pacific Street from Midas Avenue to Farron Street. 
3.  Goal for Residential Land Use: To designate, protect, and provide land to ensure sufficient residential development to meet community needs. 
4.  Policies for Existing Residential Land Use: 
a.  To protect existing residential areas from the intrusion of incompatible land uses. 
b.  To preserve and enhance the quality of existing residential areas by continuing to provide high-quality public services, by rehabilitating useful structures and by removing substandard units. 
c.  To continue programs for the prevention of blight, considering all public and private resources available, including: enforcement of all codes, neighborhood rehabilitation programs, and redevelopment agency actions. 
d.  To encourage active involvement by individuals and citizen organizations in maintaining and upgrading existing residential neighborhoods. 
e.  To encourage preservation and adaptive reuse of significant historic structures and sites. 
f.  To require that new development in or near existing residential areas be compatible with those existing neighborhoods. 
g.  To promote flexibility and innovation in residential land use through the use of planned unit developments, developer agreements, specific plans, mixed use projects, and other innovative development and planning techniques. 
h.  To maintain development standards unique to Old Town Rocklin that encourage residential development on small lots. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
17.59.030 - Purpose and intent. 
This Business Attraction, Retention, and Revitalization Overlay zone concept is an opportunity to utilize an alternative zoning tool for those properties that are within the boundaries of the BARRO zone. The property owner shall have the choice of developing property pursuant to the provisions of the underlying zone, or developing property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It is the intent of the city council to create an overlay zone district in Title 17, Zoning of the Rocklin Municipal Code that will provide for the following: 
A.  Implement a streamlined entitlement review and approval process, and a reduced fee structure, for in-fill development projects within the BARRO zone area; 
B.  Allow for reduced infrastructure development standards and greater flexibility in the application of the city's approved design guidelines and development standards within the overlay zone in a manner grounded in market realities; 
C.  Improve the appearance and economic vitality of small and/or older commercial structures and developments and thereby contribute to the overall improvement of older commercial areas by making the regulatory process easier for the owners and tenants to negotiate; 
D.  Create a vibrant commercial destination with an active street life that would attract travelers and commuters who use Pacific Street as a regional transportation corridor, and where local residents have services, shops, and jobs; 
E.  Protect, preserve and maintain the integrity of the existing single-family residential neighborhoods immediately adjacent to the BARRO zone area through innovative and thoughtful design techniques; 
F.  Allow for the use of varying architectural design themes, but require that each design is thoughtfully blended and is compatible with adjoining and adjacent development; 
G.  Maintain land use and development options so as individual properties become available for development, there are choices between commercial, residential or mixed use projects which are appropriate for current market conditions; 
H.  Encourage compatibility between residential and commercial uses in areas where residential zones directly abut commercial zones, by permitting greater design flexibility across the existing boundaries of the two zones; and 
I.  Encourage within the BARRO zone the inclusion of a public open space amenity, or some form of physical interface for the pedestrian. Such features may include: 
1.  Formal Plazas. A formal plaza would be a publicly accessible open space which has a design that is influenced by classical urban planning design. A formal plaza would typically include some sort of central water fountain and/or symmetrical landscaping. 
2.  Urban Gardens. An urban garden can be located on the ground level, or on upper levels of a structure. Urban gardens include ornamental landscaping arranged in raised or at-grade planters or planting areas, potted plants and trees. Many times there are sculptures or other forms of public art that are included within the urban garden. 
3.  Covered Colonnades. Colonnades are linear in design and generous in depth. The intent is to provide a comfortably wide, covered pathway that is adjacent to the openings of a building. Sometimes the second floor of a building is utilized to create the "covered" element of the colonnade. 
4.  Sidewalk Dining. Sidewalk dining may occur wherever a sidewalk space is ample enough to accommodate dining furniture without impeding pedestrian access of the sidewalk. Sidewalk dining may be defined with a railing or planters, or be open and accessible. 
5.  Pedestrian Alleys and Walkways. A pedestrian alley or walkway is typically a "lane" that does not follow the alignment of a vehicular street, but provides a pedestrian access to either a public space or some other feature within the interior of a development. Pedestrian alleys or walkways must be designed in such a manner so as to be inviting to pedestrians. Therefore, issues such as lighting, security, line of sight, cleanliness and visual appeal are important considerations to a well designed pedestrian alley or walkway. Sometimes public art, street furniture and access to shops and public spaces are features of pedestrian alleys and walkways. 
J.  Ensure that the appearance and effects of buildings and uses are harmonious with the character of the area in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
17.59.040 - Applicability; conflicts. 
A.  The provisions of this Chapter 17.59 shall apply to those areas indicted on the zoning map of the city of Rocklin by distinct shading or other identification, and in a manner consistent with the identification of boundaries for other zones set forth in Title 17, shown on the zoning map of the city of Rocklin, and prior decisions of the city regarding the actual boundaries of properties within city land use zones. 
B.  Conflict. Should a provision of this Chapter 17.59 conflict with any other provision of Title 17 of the Rocklin Municipal Code, or any other city resolutions, ordinances, or regulations of the city, this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
17.59.050 - Authority for approvals; determination; fees. 
A.  Pursuant to Chapter 17.72.020.C, the city council designates and authorizes the community development director as the approving authority for design review approvals issued in conformance with this chapter for projects within those areas affected by the Business Attraction, Retention, and Revitalization Overlay zone. 
B.  Notwithstanding Section 17.70.020, the city council designates the community development director as the approving authority for conditional use permits issued in conformance with this chapter for projects within those areas affected by the Business Attraction, Retention, and Revitalization Overlay zone. 
C.  The community development director shall review the application for its compliance with the citywide design review guidelines and the Rocklin Downtown Revitalization Plan and Design Guidelines and the conformity of the proposed project with the surrounding properties. The community development director shall have the authority to, and shall take action to grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application based on the information contained in the application and any information obtained from the staff review of the project. 
D.  Notwithstanding other provisions for fees adopted by city ordinance or resolution, the fees applicable to review and approval of entitlements issued in conformance with this chapter for projects within the BARRO zone shall be determined on the fully loaded hourly rate for city staff utilized to review and approve the project development entitlements, up to a maximum fee as follows: 
1.  Design review approvals       $3,500.00 
2.  Conditional use permits       $2,000.00 
3.  Environmental review       $3,000.00 
E.  The community development director shall prescribe the forms and documents to be filed for a permit under the provisions of the BARRO zone. 
F.  When a project subject to design review also requires a discretionary permit, or modification thereof, under Chapter 17.70, the design review application shall be made, processed and heard simultaneously with the other discretionary permit, unless this requirement is waived by the community development director. 
G.  The community development director may act on the application without a formally noticed public hearing. Notice of a pending application pursuant to the BARRO zone regulations shall be posted on the proposed project site and on the city of Rocklin website. Such notice shall specify that any interested person may view the application materials at the city of Rocklin offices during business hours; the ten-day time period when the public may submit written comments on the proposed project to the city; the date whereon the community development director is expected to take action on the proposed project; and the date by which anyone may appeal of the final action of the community development director in the manner provided by Chapter 17.86 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
17.59.060 - Special standards. 
To encourage economic development, reinvestment, and enhancement of the properties within the boundaries of the district the following special standards shall apply: 
A.  Nonconforming Standards. Properties located within the Business Attraction, Retention, and Revitalization Overlay zone shall be exempted from the following specific provisions of Title 17, Chapter 17.62, Nonconforming Uses and Structures of the Rocklin Municipal Code: 
17.08.080—Commerce or Industry Abutting Residential zone. 
17.62.050—Off-street parking deficiency. 
17.62.080—Nonconforming use—Conforming structure. 
17.62.090—Conforming use—Nonconforming building—Repair and maintenance. 
17.62.100—Conforming use—Nonconforming building—Enlargements. 
17.62.120—Conforming use—Nonconforming building—Restoration. 
17.62.130—Nonconforming use and building—Termination of use. 
17.62.140—Nonconforming use and building—Additions, enlargements, repairs. 
17.75.070.C.2.—Permit requirements and procedures (signs). 
B.  Design Guidelines. The community development director is hereby authorized to exercise wide latitude and significant discretion in determining if, when, and how to apply specific provisions of the Rocklin Downtown Revitalization Plan and Design Guidelines and Design Review Guidelines (Feb. 2008, as amended) applicable to a particular project site based upon the unique characteristics of the project site and the immediately surrounding properties in order to achieve the best possible project consistent with the over all goal of promoting the development of economically viable, cohesive, and attractive neighborhoods. 
C.  Parking. Parking is typically one of the most challenging development standards to meet when attempting to develop older in-fill sites. By its very nature, parking requires a significant dedication of land which cannot be translated into leasable sales area or saleable square footage. However, adequate and easily accessible parking is critical to the long term success and viability of any development. 
1.  Parking requirements shall be determined on a project specific basis by the community development director after consideration of the on-site parking standards listed in the Rocklin Zoning Code for the type of development proposed, the physical constraints of the property in question, the availability of nearby on-street parking and public parking facilities, and other potential mitigating factors. 
2.  The Old Town area has a series of public parking lots that can be used to assume some or all of the required off-street parking for new development within the BARRO zone district. 
3.  Residential uses will be required to provide on-site parking for each residential unit; however, the guest parking requirements may be a candidate for transfer to nearby public parking lots. Commercial uses may propose to transfer up to their entire on-site parking obligation to public parking lots, however, they will be encouraged to maintain handicapped accessible parking on their property, as well as loading areas. 
D.  Performance Standards for Neighborhood Compatibility. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that uses in the BARRO zone are not adversely impacted by the adjacent uses, both on-site and off-site, including, but not limited to traffic, noise, and safety impacts. In the interests of both the residents and the businesses, no project entitlement shall be approved for a project combining residential and commercial uses on the same site, unless the project is designed to meet the following performance standards, in addition to all other applicable regulations of this chapter. 
1.  Noise. 
a.  Residential units shall be constructed so that interior noise levels do not exceed an Ldn of 45 dB(A) in any habitable room. 
b.  Commercial uses shall be designed and operated, and hours of operation limited where appropriate, so that neighboring residents are not exposed to offensive noise, especially from traffic or late-night activity. 
c.  Common walls between residential and nonresidential uses shall be constructed to minimize the transmission of noise and vibration. 
2.  Security. 
a.  The residential units shall be designed with specific consideration towards the security of residents, including, but not limited to, the provision of separate and secured entrances. 
b.  Nonresidential and residential uses located on the same floor of the same building shall not have common entrance hallways or common balconies. 
c.  Parking spaces for nonresidential and residential uses shall be specifically designated by posting, pavement marking, and/or physical separation. 
3.  Lighting. 
a.  All outdoor lighting associated with commercial uses shall be designed so as not to substantially and adversely impact surrounding residential uses, while also providing a sufficient level of illumination for access and security purposes. Such lighting shall not blink, flash, occilate, or be of unusually high intensity of brightness. 
b.  Parking areas shall be illuminated so as to provide appropriate visibility and security during hours of darkness. 
4.  Odors, Dust, Vibration. No commercial use shall be designed or operated so as to expose residents to offensive odors, dust, electrical interference, and/or vibration. 
5.  Refuse Storage and Location. The residential units shall maintain a separate refuse storage container from that used by the commercial uses. It shall be clearly marked for residential use only, and use by commercial uses is prohibited. 
6.  To the extent feasible, the five factors listed above shall be considered and incorporated into the design of all nonresidential projects abutting existing residential zones. Residential projects abutting existing nonresidential projects shall be designed to incorporate as many design features as necessary to mitigate for the five factors listed above. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
17.59.070 - Limitations on approval authority. 
The administrative approval authority set forth in this chapter shall be limited to projects of a size and scope which are consistent with the standards for in-fill development set forth in the California Environmental Quality Act Guidelines CCR Section 15332—In-Fill Development Projects and the further restrictions set forth in this section. Those standards are as follows: 
A.  The project is consistent with the applicable general plan designation and the general plan policies set forth in subsection 17.59.020E. above, as well as the zoning designation and regulations stated in this chapter. 
B.  The proposed development is on a project site of no more than three acres substantially surrounded by urban uses. 
C.  The project site has no value as habitat for endangered, rare, or threatened species. 
D.  Approval of the project would not result in any significant effects relating to traffic, noise, air quality, greenhouse gas emissions, or water quality. 
E.  The site is adequately served by all required utilities and public services. 
F.  A project proposing additional story on buildings originally approved by the city council are ineligible for administrative review and approval under this chapter and shall be subject to design review as set forth in Chapter 17.72. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
17.59.080 - Permitted uses. 
All permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the underlying zone are permitted uses unless the community development director determines that the proposed use warrants the application of operational conditions. In those cases where operational conditions of approval are necessary to make the proposed use compatible with the surrounding uses, a conditional use permit shall be required. In addition, to promote an active street life, enhance the vitality of businesses, and reduce vehicular traffic, residential structures and uses are permitted in the BARRO zone district. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
17.59.090 - Appeal. 
Any person dissatisfied by an act or determination of the community development director relating to the approval or denial of a project application under this chapter, or the interpretation or enforcement of this chapter, may appeal such act or determination to the planning commission as provided in Chapter 17.86. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 2(Exh. B), 8-14-2012)  
Chapter 17.60 - PD ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The planned development (PD) zone provides the means for greater creativity and flexibility in environmental design than is provided under the strict application of the zoning and subdivision ordinances, while at the same time protecting the public health, safety and welfare and property values. Various land uses may be combined in a planned development zone including combinations of residential, commercial, industrial, utility, institutional, educational, cultural, recreational and other uses, provided the combination of uses results in a balanced and stable environment. 
B.  The specific purposes of the planned development zone are to: 
1.  Promote and encourage cluster development on large sites to avoid sensitive areas of property; 
2.  Encourage creative and innovative design on large sites by allowing flexibility in property development standards; 
3.  Encourage the preservation of open space; 
4.  Accommodate various types of large scale, complex and phased developments; 
5.  Establish a procedure for the development of large tracts of land in order to reduce or eliminate the rigidity, delays, and conflicts that otherwise would result from application of zoning standards designed primarily for small lots. 
(Ord. 832 § 1 (part), 2000).  
17.60.020 - Size. 
PD zone, or a unit thereof, shall be of sufficient size that its construction, marketing and operation is feasible as a complete unit independent of any subsequent unit. 
(Ord. 832 § 1 (part), 2000).  
17.60.030 - Planned development—Required plans and materials. 
A.  An application for a PD zone shall be submitted in the form of a general development plan and shall contain the following: 
1.  A statement of the purpose of the PD zone; 
2.  A map showing the proposed PD zone boundaries and existing and proposed uses on all adjoining properties to the PD zone; 
3.  A map showing the proposed pattern of land uses, including acreage for each category of land use, residential density, and land use intensity for nonresidential uses; 
4.  A list of proposed land uses, including permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses; 
5.  Development standards for all development within the PD zone, including minimum lot dimensions, setbacks, building height, lot coverage and parking; 
6.  Description of the differences between the development standards applicable to the proposed uses under this title (zoning ordinance) and the proposed plan; 
7.  Proposed circulation system showing the location of arterial and collector streets and interconnections with adjoining streets; 
8.  Public uses including schools, parks, recreational areas and other open space areas; 
9.  Preliminary grading plan (if required by the city engineer); 
10.  Phasing of development; 
11.  Other information as may be prescribed by the planning director. 
(Ord. 832 § 1 (part), 2000).  
17.60.040 - Establishment of a PD zone. 
A.  After review by the planning director, the proposed general development plan shall be submitted to the planning commission as a proposed rezoning of the property to the PD zone. The commission shall act thereon as in any rezoning, and shall have full authority to recommend altering or modifying the proposed general development plan. 
B.  The proposed general development plan shall be considered by the council as in other rezoning matters. The council may alter or modify the proposed general development plan. If the rezoning is approved, the general development plan shall constitute the development restrictions for the PD zone covered by the plan. Any provision contained in any section of this title not addressed by the general development plan shall apply within the PD zone. 
(Ord. 881 § 33, 2004; Ord. 832 § 1 (part), 2000).  
17.60.045 - Public noticing. 
Noticing shall be consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 4, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1072, § 4, 6-13-2017)  
17.60.050 - Content of PD zoning approval. 
PD zoning approvals shall include maps and text containing the information outlined in Section 17.60.030. 
(Ord. 832 § 1 (part), 2000).  
17.60.060 - Zoning map designation. 
A PD zone shall be noted by the designation "PD," followed by the ordinance number approving the PD on the zoning map. 
(Ord. 832 § 1 (part), 2000).  
17.60.070 - Development in the PD zone. 
Upon the establishment of a PD zone, development within the zone may commence provided all other applicable regulations, including design review under Rocklin Municipal Code Chapter 17.72, have been satisfied. 
(Ord. 832 § 1 (part), 2000).  
17.60.080 - Preexisting PD zones. 
All development within PD zones or under general development plans which were adopted prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 832 shall require design review pursuant to Chapter 17.72 instead of approval of a specific plan use permit. 
(Ord. 832 § 1 (part), 2000).  
Chapter 17.61 - H-D ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.61.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The H-D zone is established and is intended to enhance the value and distinctive character of the city of Rocklin's historic Front Street area that exists along First Street, between Rocklin Road and Farron Street. The area to which the H-D zone shall apply shall be known as the "Front Street historic district." 
The development of land within the Front Street historic district should be controlled so as to create an exciting and visible community, capitalizing on the area's proud heritage. To achieve this purpose, it is necessary to impose reasonable restrictions upon the use and erection of new buildings and structures and the alteration of existing and relocated buildings and structures. The revitalization of the Front Street historic district is in keeping with the objectives and proposals of the general plan for the city. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 14.01.000, 1977).  
17.61.020 - Applicability. 
The regulations as defined in this chapter shall apply in the Front Street historic district of the city. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 14.02.000, 1977).  
17.61.030 - Boundaries. 
The Front Street historic district boundaries are as designated on certain City Zoning Maps No. 11-7-19N and No. 11-7-191S. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 14.02.010, 1977).  
17.61.040 - Historic committee established. 
The Front Street historic committee is established to consider any plans for construction in the H-D district, and to advise on all matters related thereto. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 14.03.000, 1977).  
17.61.050 - Front Street historic committee designated. 
The planning commission shall act as the Front Street historic committee and exercise all of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 2, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1010, adopted April 8, 2014, changed the title of § 17.61.050 from "Interim committee designated" to "Front Street historic committee designated."  
17.61.060 - Committee powers and duties. 
A.  It is the duty of the committee to administer and ensure compliance with the regulations and procedures contained within this chapter, in the manner prescribed herein. It is its responsibility to recommend to the planning commission any changes to regulations applicable to the district, provided such changes are necessary for the proper execution of the adopted plan, and to adopt rules of procedure to supplement those contained within this chapter. 
B.  The committee shall adopt, subject to the review and approval of the city council, architectural criteria and standards to be used in evaluating the appropriateness of any development for which a permit is applied under the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The architectural criteria and standards shall insure that all applications for approval of exterior work are treated uniformly and fairly and promote consistency. Architectural criteria and standards shall be used to assure: 
1.  That rehabilitation work shall not destroy the distinguishing qualities or character of the structure and its environment. The removal or alteration of any historic material or architectural features should be held to a minimum; 
2.  That deteriorated architectural features are repaired rather than replaced wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in the composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of original features, substantiated by physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural features from other buildings; 
3.  That distinctive, stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize historic structures and often predate the mass production of building materials be treated with sensitivity; 
4.  That changes which may have taken place in the course of time and which have acquired significance in their own right be recognized and respected; 
5.  That all structures be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged; 
6.  That contemporary design for additions to existing structures or landscaping shall not be discouraged if such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the neighborhood, structures, or its environment; 
7.  That wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures be done in such a manner that if they were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the original structure would be unimpaired; 
8.  That new construction not necessarily mimic historic structures, but assure that new construction be compatible with traditional buildings within the historic area; 
9.  That alterations or new construction of storefronts, windows, doors, cornices, roofs, masonry materials, colors, and signs be compatible with a uniform design and construction theme established for the Front Street historic district by the city. 
D.  The committee may approve, modify, or disapprove any application for a building permit for which review by the committee is required under Chapter 17.72, based upon compliance or noncompliance with the adopted regulations and approved architectural criteria and standards. 
E.  It shall not be the responsibility of the committee to prepare or adopt precise area or community plans. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 14.03.050, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1010, adopted April 8, 2014, repealed former § 17.61.060, which pertained to committee membership, and derived from Ord. No. 336, § 14.03.020, adopted in 1977; and Ord. No. 480, § 1(part), adopted in 1982. Section 4 of said ordinance renumbered former § 17.61.090 as § 17.61.060.  
17.61.070 - Building permit application. 
Any application for a building permit for the erection of any new building or structure, or for exterior work involving remodeling, repair, alteration, addition to, or demolition of any existing building or structure, where such work is subject to public view from streets or alleys, within the Front Street historic district, or for the relocation of any building or structure into the district, shall be subject to the review of the committee and/or the planning director as provided under this chapter. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 14.04.000, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1010, adopted April 8, 2014, repealed former § 17.61.070, which pertained to terms of committee members, and derived from Ord. No. 336, § 14.08.030, adopted in 1977; Ord. No. 480, § 1(part), adopted in 1982; and Ord. No. 708, § 5, adopted in 1994. Section 4 of said ordinance renumbered former § 17.61.100 as § 17.61.070.  
17.61.080 - Application—Information required. 
The application for the building permit shall include the following, in addition to all other information required for building permit applications under any other regulation or ordinance of the city: 
A.  The purpose for which the proposed building, structure, or improvement is intended to be used; 
B.  Adequate plans and specifications indicating dwelling unit density, lot area, lot coverage and off-street parking; 
C.  Adequate plans and specifications for the building and improvements showing the exterior appearance, color, and texture of materials and architectural design of the exterior; 
D.  Adequate plans and specifications for any outbuildings, party walls, courtyards, fences, setbacks, landscaping, signs, lighting, traffic safety, or other dependency thereof; 
E.  A Preliminary Grading Plan. When the grading plan is revised after the building permit application and preliminary grading plan have been considered and approved by the committee, the revised plan shall be filed with the director and shall be subject to the same decision making process and findings requirements as the original application, except that the subsequent review shall be limited to the revised grading plan and the effects of the revisions on the originally approved project; 
F.  Any other information deemed necessary by the committee, the planning director, or the building inspector to judge compliance with the regulations contained herein and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 633 § 4, 1990; Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.04.010, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1010, adopted April 8, 2014, repealed former § 17.61.080, which pertained to secretary of the committee, and derived from Ord. No. 336, § 14.08.030, adopted in 1977; and Ord. No. 480, § 1(part), adopted in 1982. Section 4 of said ordinance renumbered former § 17.61.110 as § 17.61.080.  
17.61.090 - Application—Referral. 
A.  The building inspector shall refer all applications submitted under the provisions of Section 17.61.100 to the planning director. 
B.  The planning director may approve signs, reroofing, and any addition to or alteration of any structure which the director determines to be minor in scope, providing the director can conclude that the application conforms to the regulations contained herein and the approved architectural standards and criteria. The planning director may refer these types of items to the committee for its action. All other applications shall be referred to the committee. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.04.020, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.120.  
17.61.100 - Application—Committee decision. 
The committee may approve, modify or disapprove any application for a building permit referred to it by the planning director. Approval or disapproval shall be by a majority vote of all the members of the committee at any meeting where the vote is taken, and shall include a statement that the committee finds that the building, structure, or improvement for which the permit was applied does or does not conform to the regulations contained herein and the approved architectural standards and criteria. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.04.030, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.130.  
17.61.110 - Application—Time limitation on decision. 
Within forty-five days after the submission of a complete application to the building inspector as required in this chapter, the committee or planning director shall send their decision in writing to the building inspector with the application and documents, except when the applicant requests or agrees to an extension of time. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.04.040, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.140.  
17.61.120 - Issuance of permit. 
If the committee or planning director approves the application, and the building inspector finds that the application conforms to all other regulations and ordinances of the city, the building inspector shall then issue the permit for the work. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.04.050, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.150.  
17.61.130 - Applications not subject to chapter. 
All other applications for building permits under the building code and not subject to this chapter shall be processed in the normal manner, without referral to or approval by the committee or the planning director, unless this would be done in the normal processing of the permit. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.04.050, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.160.  
17.61.140 - Uses permitted with a use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the H-D zone subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
1.  All uses permitted in the C-1 zone; 
2.  Tourist shops, including the sale of souvenirs, sporting goods, and sportswear; 
3.  Antique shops; 
4.  Hotels, motels, lodges and associated uses; 
5.  Furniture and appliance stores; 
6.  General merchandise stores or department stores; 
7.  Theaters; 
8.  Convenience stores; 
9.  Retail plant nursery; 
10.  Churches; 
11.  Dry-cleaning establishments; 
12.  Shopping centers and commercial cluster complexes; 
13.  Public and private parking lots; 
14.  Residential dwellings including apartments and condominiums; 
15.  Outside storage or sales; 
16.  Outside businesses (i.e., cafes, food marts, gift shops, etc.); 
17.  Commercial recreational uses; 
18.  Any other use which the planning commission may find to be similar in character to the uses listed in this section. 
(Ord. 581 § 36, 1988; Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.05.010, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.170.  
17.61.150 - Lot size, width, and setback requirements. 
The approval of a conditional use permit by the commission for any use in the H-D zone shall be conditioned on and shall specify lot size, lot width, and setback requirements for the project, which requirements shall be based on a recommendation from the committee. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.04.050, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.180. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.04.030, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014)  
17.61.160 - Height regulation. 
A.  The maximum height for buildings and structures shall be thirty feet. 
B.  The maximum number of stories on any building or structure shall be two. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.06.000, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1010, adopted April 8, 2014, repealed former § 17.61.190, which pertained to review of uses by the Front Street historic committee, and derived from Ord. No. 366, § 14.04.030, adopted in 1977; and Ord. No. 480, § 1(part), adopted in 1982. Section 4 of said ordinance renumbered former § 17.61.200 as § 17.61.160.  
17.61.170 - Lot area. 
The lot area shall be established by conditions on the conditional use permit by the planning commission, with a recommendation by the committee. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.06.010, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.210.  
17.61.180 - Lot width. 
The lot width shall be established by conditions on the conditional use permit by the planning commission, with a recommendation by the committee. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.06.020, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.220.  
17.61.190 - Setbacks. 
The setbacks shall be established by conditions on the conditional use permit by the planning commission, with a recommendation by the committee. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.06.030, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.230.  
17.61.200 - Off-street parking. 
A.  Residential uses as set forth in Sections 17.66.020, 17.66.100 and 17.66.130 shall provide on-site parking space as required by Chapter 17.66. 
B.  All other uses shall provide one on-site parking space for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area. 
C.  In lieu of the requirements of subsection B of this section, a fee, as set by resolution of the council, based on the number of square feet of gross floor area may be paid to the city parking lot fund to establish off-street parking for the Front Street historic district. All such city parking lots funded by the fees received pursuant to this section shall be located within or immediately adjacent to the Front Street historic district. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.06.040, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.240.  
17.61.210 - Appeals. 
Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Front Street historic committee to the planning commission and the city council in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.86. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.07.000, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.250.  
17.61.220 - Existing uses. 
Any use existing on the effective date of this title, which is listed as a conditional use in the H-D zone, shall not be deemed nonconforming because a conditional use permit has not been obtained as provided for in this title. 
(Ord. 480 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 366 § 14.08.000, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 4, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Former § 17.61.260.  
Chapter 17.62 - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
 
17.62.010 - Intent. 
Within the zones established by this title or by amendments which may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land or any combination thereof which were lawful before the ordinance codified in this title was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this title. The council declares that nonconforming uses and structures are incompatible with permitted uses and structures in the zones involved and shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended. Further, nonconforming uses and structures are intended to be eliminated as soon as practical. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.01.000, 1977).  
17.62.020 - Old nonconforming remain so. 
The passage and adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be construed to make conforming a use of land, building, or structure which was nonconforming as determined by the regulations of any prior zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.01.010, 1977).  
17.62.030 - Conditional uses without permit. 
Any use existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, which is listed as a conditional use in the zone wherein located, and for which a conditional use permit has not been granted, shall be and remain a nonconforming use until a conditional use permit is obtained as provided in Chapter 17.70. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.01.020, 1977).  
17.62.040 - Conditional use permit issuance. 
The council may, after a hearing before the planning commission on the subject, cause a nonconforming use to become a conforming use upon the issuance of a conditional use permit generally as provided in Chapter 17.70. The council shall require such conditions as to make the use as nearly conforming to the zone as possible. In addition thereto, the council shall make a finding in writing that the nonconforming use as conditioned will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the use, or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or of the general welfare of the city. In no instance can the council grant such a use permit unless the use is in conformity with the general plan. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.01.030, 1977).  
17.62.050 - Off-street parking deficiency. 
If the automobile parking space maintained on a lot in connection with a building or other structure at the time the ordinance codified in this title was adopted was insufficient to meet the requirements of this title, or where no parking space has been provided, the building or structure shall not be altered or enlarged to create additional dwelling use, seating capacity, floor area or guestrooms, as the case may be, unless additional automobile parking space is supplied and maintained to meet the requirements of this title for such additional dwelling units, seating capacity, floor area or guestrooms. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.01.040, 1977).  
17.62.060 - Setback insufficiency. 
In any residential zone, an existing structure used for residential purposes (and any accessory building) shall not be deemed nonconforming solely on the basis that one or more setbacks is insufficient; provided, however, that the insufficiency of any one setback does not exceed twenty-five percent of the setback as required by this title. 
(Ord. 369: Ord. 336 § 8.01.050, 1977).  
17.62.070 - Nonconforming use—No structure. 
The nonconforming use of land where there are not structures may be continued, provided, however: 
A.  Such use shall not be expanded or extended in any way either on the same or adjoining land; 
B.  Such use shall not be changed, except to a use which conforms to the regulations of the zone in which such land is located; 
C.  If such use is discontinued for a period of ninety days or more, whether or not there was the intent to abandon such use [, it may not be continued]. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.02.000, 1977).  
17.62.080 - Nonconforming use—Conforming structure. 
The nonconforming use of land, where the structures are conforming, may be continued until: 
A.  The use is declared a nuisance by the council or a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
B.  The use is abandoned for ninety days, whether or not there was the intent to abandon such use. 
(Ord. 347 (part): Ord. 336 § 8.03.000, 1977).  
17.62.090 - Conforming use—Nonconforming building—Repair and maintenance. 
A nonconforming building or structure, where the use of land is conforming, may be maintained or repaired; provided, that for any period of twelve consecutive months such repair and maintenance shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the current replacement costs of the nonconforming building or structure. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.04.000, 1977).  
17.62.100 - Conforming use—Nonconforming building—Enlargements. 
A building or structure which is nonconforming because of its location on the lot shall not be added to or enlarged unless such nonconforming building or structure and the addition and enlargements thereto are all made to conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.04.010, 1977).  
17.62.110 - Conforming use—Nonconforming building—Relocation. 
A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved to any other lot or to any other portion of the lot in which it is presently located unless, as a result of the move, the building or structure conforms to the regulations of the zone in which it will be located after the move. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.04.020, 1977).  
17.62.120 - Conforming use—Nonconforming building—Restoration. 
A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or partially destroyed by any reason to the extent of not more than fifty percent of its value at that time, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such building, structure or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction, may be continued or resumed; provided, that the total cost of such restoration does not exceed fifty percent of the value of the building or structure at the time of such damage and that such restoration is started within a period of one year and is diligently prosecuted to completion. In the event such damage or destruction exceeds fifty percent of the value of such nonconforming building or structure, no repairs or construction shall be made unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all regulations for new buildings in the zone in which it is located. The value shall be determined by the building inspector in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.04.030, 1977).  
17.62.130 - Nonconforming use and building—Termination of use. 
A nonconforming use of land, with nonconforming buildings, shall terminate as follows: 
A.  When declared a public nuisance by the council or a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
B.  When abandoned for a period of ninety days, whether or not there was the intent to abandon such use. 
(Ord. 347 (part): Ord. 336 § 8.05.000, 1977).  
17.62.140 - Nonconforming use and building—Additions, enlargements, repairs. 
Except where ordered by the building inspector to protect the health and safety of the occupant, there shall be no addition, alteration, or repair of any building or structure where the use of land and the structure are both nonconforming. 
(Ord. 336 § 8.05.010, 1977).  
17.62.150 - Existing second unit. 
Grandfathering Clause. All units within the definition of "secondary residential unit" in Section 17.04.515 existing on the effective date of this section shall be deemed legal uses for purposes of Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 514 § 17, 1984).  
Chapter 17.63 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.63.010 - Special event—Exemptions. 
The following special events are exempt from the regulations and requirements of this chapter: 
A.  Garage sales; 
B.  Wedding receptions; 
C.  Car washes; 
D.  Other special events determined by the planning director to have no impacts in surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
17.63.020 - Special event—Administrative review. 
A.  "Special event—administrative review" means a special event whose impacts on surrounding properties and rights-of-way are minimal, as determined by the planning director under Section 17.63.060. 
B.  Examples of special event—administrative review uses include the following: 
1  Christmas tree sales; 
2.  Pumpkin sales; 
3.  Arts or crafts exhibitions; 
4.  Private sidewalk/parking lot sales. 
5.  Temporary parking lots for community events on public or private property. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 3-8-2016)  
17.63.030 - Special event—City council review. 
A.  "Special event—city council review" means a special event whose impacts on surrounding properties and rights-of-way may be substantial, as determined by the planning director under Section 17.63.060. 
B.  Examples of special event—city council review uses include the following: 
1.  Flea markets; 
2.  Athletic events; 
3.  Rodeos; 
4.  Carnivals; 
5.  Festivals; 
6.  Outdoor dances; 
7.  Fairs; 
8.  Circuses. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
17.63.040 - Permit required. 
A special event, as regulated by this chapter, may be allowed in any zone upon first obtaining a special event permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
17.63.050 - Application. 
The planning director shall prescribe the forms and documents to be filed for a special event permit. The forms and documents shall be filed with the planning director and accompanied, as required, by the following: 
A.  A description of the site which may include a map drawn to scale showing lot lines and dimensions, ingress and egress points, improved areas, grading plans, parking, traffic control locations and a description, including location, of all signs; 
B.  A fee as specified in the current city council fee resolution; 
C.  Written authorization of the subject property owner or his/her designated representative agreeing to the special event; 
D.  The names and mailing addresses of the property owners as shown on the last county equalized assessment roll for properties within three hundred feet of the special event site; 
E.  A written explanation of the nature and duration of the special event; 
F.  Such additional information as the planning director may require. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
17.63.060 - Classification of special event use. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed application for a special event permit, the planning director shall determine if the proposed use requires "administrative review" or "city council review." The following criteria shall be considered by the planning director for such a determination: 
1.  Parking (e.g., adequacy of number, location, circulation design, safety, etc.); 
2.  Frequency (e.g., possible conflicts with other activities within the community); 
3.  Nuisance issues (e.g., dust, noise, odor, etc.); 
4.  Circulation (e.g., assurance of pedestrian and vehicular circulation safety); 
5.  Public safety (e.g., assurance of providing and maintaining open fire lanes, providing on-site security personnel and on-site emergency care service); 
6.  Lighting (e.g., assurance of adequate on-site lighting and limiting off-site light and glare); 
7.  Attendance (e.g., number of attendees will affect public safety requirements, adequate number of restroom facilities, as well as many of the other listed criteria); 
8.  Clean-up (e.g., assure removal of temporary structures, equipment, debris, etc.); 
9.  Duration (e.g., assure appropriate hours of operation and length of the event); 
10.  Location (e.g., assure compatibility with surrounding land uses and adequacy of pedestrian and vehicular access); 
11.  Signage (e.g., assure size and location that does not obstruct required visibility at driveway locations); 
12.  Public notice (e.g., assure standard public noticing of the event where wider impacts to the community may be involved); 
13.  Other (e.g., criteria that may be unique to the proposed special event). 
B.  The director shall notify the applicant of his/her determination within five working days of receiving a completed application. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
17.63.070 - Decisions. 
A.  Upon determination that the application will be processed as administrative review, the planning director shall review the application for its compliance with Section 17.63.060. The planning director shall have the authority to, and shall take action to grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application based on the information contained in the application and any information obtained from the staff review of the project. The planning director shall render his/her decision in writing, setting forth the findings of fact supporting the decision, and shall serve the applicant with the written decision within ten days of the planning director's determination. The decision is subject to a ten-day appeal period, and shall not become final until such time has expired. 
The planning director may act on the application without initial prior notice to adjoining owners of property affected by the special event permit and without a hearing. If the planning director grants or conditionally grants the special event permit, he/she shall give notice of the action to those persons who would have received notice of a hearing before the planning commission had the application been for a conditional use permit under Article III of Chapter 17.70. Such notice shall specify that any interested person, other than the applicant, may appeal the action of the planning director in the manner provided by Chapter 17.86. 
B.  For special events determined by the planning director to require city council review, a noticed public hearing shall be held by the city council. Noticing shall be consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. The notice shall include a description of the proposed use and its location, and the date, hour and place of the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application. The decisions of the city council shall be in writing, setting forth the findings of facts supporting the decision, and shall be served on the applicant within ten days. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993). 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 5, 6-13-2017)  
17.63.080 - Findings. 
The decision to grant a special event permit shall be based on a finding by the decision-making body that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood, or to the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
17.63.090 - Conditions. 
The decision-making body may condition the granting of a special event permit, as necessary, to protect the public health and safety and to effect the purpose of this title. Such conditions may include but are not limited to the following: 
A.  Regulation of the placement of the use or equipment associated with the special event; 
B.  Regulation of the height of equipment associated with the special event; 
C.  Regulation of the nature, hours of operation, or extent of the special event; 
D.  Noise attenuation measures; 
E.  Expiration date; 
F.  Liability insurance; 
G.  Bonding; 
H.  Cleaning deposit. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
17.63.100 - Revocation and modification. 
The provisions of Sections 17.70.070, 17.70.080, 17.70.090 and 17.70.100 of this title relating to the expiration for failure to exercise the permit, revocation and modification, and new applications, shall apply to special event permits. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
17.63.110 - Permit denial—Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by an action of the planning director may appeal the action directly to the city council. All other provisions of Chapter 17.86 shall govern the appeal of a decision or special event permit. 
(Ord. 688 § 3 (part), 1993).  
Chapter 17.64 - SPECIAL AND PROHIBITED USES 
Sections: 
 
17.64.010 - Special uses—Designated. 
Special uses are as follows: 
A.  Airport and landing fields; 
B.  Cemeteries; 
C.  Establishment of enterprises involving large assemblies of people or automobiles on a permanent basis, including: 
1.  Amusement parks and race tracks; 
2.  Recreational facilities privately operated; 
D.  Hospitals, sanitariums; 
E.  Institutions of charitable nature; 
F.  Removal or deposit of earth other than in connection with construction of buildings, roadways, or home or public improvements on the site. 
(Ord. 688 § 2, 1993: Ord. 336 § 7.01.010, 1977).  
17.64.020 - Special uses—Use permit—Criteria. 
A.  All of the uses listed in Section 17.64.010 and all matters directly related thereto, are declared to be uses possessing characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their inclusion in any class of use set forth in the zones defined in this title. Therefore, the authority for the location or the operation of any of the uses designated in this chapter shall be subject to the issuance of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.70. 
B.  In addition to the criteria set forth in Chapter 17.70 for determining whether or not a conditional use permit should be issued, the hearing body shall consider the following additional factors in determining whether the uses listed in this chapter will be incompatible with other uses permitted in the zone and surrounding areas. Such factors are: 
1.  Damage or nuisance from noise, smoke, odor, dust, vibrations or water pollution; 
2.  Hazard from explosion, contamination or fire; 
3.  Hazard occasioned by unusual volume or character of traffic, or the congregating of a large number of people or vehicles. 
(Ord. 581 § 37, 1988; Ord. 336 § 7.01.000, 1977).  
17.64.030 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in all zones, and no conditional use permit shall be issued therefor: 
A.  Kennels for purposes of breeding and raising animals for sale; 
B.  Junkyard; 
C.  Refuse disposal site. 
(Ord. 890 § 3, 2004; Ord. 889 § 3, 2004; Ord. 568 § 2, 1987; Ord. 336 § 7.01.020, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 7, 11-14-2017; Ord. No. 1099, § 4, 6-26-2018)  
17.64.060 - Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities. 
A.  Subject to the approval of a conditional use permit single room occupancy (SRO) facilities may be permitted in the following zone districts: 
1.  Commercial Highway (C-H). 
2.  Retail Business Commercial (C-2). 
3.  General Service Commercial (C-3). 
4.  General Retail Service Commercial (C-4). 
5.  Planned development districts: Subject to the approval of a conditional use permit SRO facilities may be permitted in any planned development (PD) district that would also allow hotels or motels. 
B.  Criteria in General. The following are the minimum criteria applicable to all new single room occupancy (SRO) facilities: 
1.  All SRO facilities are subject to approval of conditional use permit and design review entitlements. 
2.  Occupancy. 
(a)  SRO rooms shall be occupied by no more than two persons. 
(b)  SRO rooms shall be occupied as the primary residence of the tenant. Transient occupancy of SRO rooms shall not be allowed. For purposes of this section "transient" shall be as defined in RMC Section 5.24.020. 
3.  Proximity to transit and alternative transportation modality shall be considered and encouraged in the siting of all SRO facilities. 
4.  Unit Size. SRO rooms shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty square feet in area and a maximum of four hundred square feet in area. 
5.  Facilities. 
(a)  Kitchen. No kitchen facilities are required to be provided. Full or partial individual kitchen facilities may be provide for each room, or one common (shared) kitchen/dining area may be provided if the developer/operator so desires. 
(b)  Bathrooms. Private bathroom facilities shall be provided within each unit to include, at a minimum, a toilet and wash basin. Bathtubs and/or shower facilities shall be provided but may be provided within individual rooms, or may be shared. 
(c)  Laundry Facilities. A common laundry area shall be provided at a rate of not less than one washer and one dryer for the first ten rooms, with one additional washer and one additional dryer provided for every five additional rooms or fraction thereof. 
(d)  Accessibility. Any and all common facilities shall be provided as fully accessible, to the satisfaction of the building official. 
6.  Manager's Office or Unit. An on-site management office or manager's unit shall be provided. "House rules" shall be submitted as a part of the use permit application. 
7.  Parking. Parking for SRO facilities shall be provided one space for every two SRO rooms, plus one space for the management unit or office and one space for each employee, if any, on maximum shift. 
8.  Storage for Residents. A private, secured storage space of not less than fifty cubic feet per resident shall be provided. Storage space may be provided in private closet(s) accessible from individual SRO rooms; and/or as individually locked areas accessible from a common room; and/or within a separate on-site storage structure. Where storage space is provided within a separate structure, such structure shall provide for separate, locking storage spaces for each SRO room, and shall be of sufficient construction to protect stored items from weather. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A7., 10-11-2011)  
17.64.070 - Kennels. 
A.  Kennels, for boarding of animals for commercial or noncommercial purposes, except as specified in Section 17.64.030.A, are permitted in the following zone districts subject to issuance of an administrative permit by the economic and community development director and compliance with the criteria set forth in Section 17.64.070.B: 
1.  C-1: neighborhood commercial zone; 
2.  C-2: retail business zone; 
3.  C-3: general and service commercial zone; 
4.  C-4: limited general retail and service commercial zone; 
5.  C-H: highway commercial zone; 
6.  M-1: manufacturing zone; 
7.  M-2: heavy industrial zone; 
8.  Planned development zone districts equivalent to the above. 
B.  Permit Approval/Modification/Revocation. 
1.  Consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the economic and community development director shall issue an administrative permit to operate a kennel if, in the opinion of the economic and community development director, the premises on which the kennel will be located has been improved and is of sufficient size to accommodate the number of animals which the owner of such kennel anticipates will be on the premises, without causing any disturbance or annoyance to persons in the surrounding area subject to ongoing compliance with the criteria set forth in this chapter and any special conditions of approval deemed necessary by the economic and community development director. 
2.  A permit to operate a kennel may be modified or revoked by the economic and community development director when he/she determines any of the following: 
(a)  That the animals in the kennel are causing continual annoyance and disturbance to persons in the surrounding area; 
(b)  That the animals within the kennel are not being given proper care; 
(c)  That circumstances have changed since the issuance of the kennel license, and in view of such circumstances, the premises are no longer suitable for the operation of a kennel. 
3.  Any person whose license to operate a kennel is denied, modified or revoked by the economic and community development director may appeal such determination, in accordance with the procedures specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
C.  All kennels shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  The premises and surroundings are maintained in a clean and sanitary state; 
2.  All animals housed in the facility are kept in good health, well fed, watered, and receive adequate care and exercise; 
3.  The building or tenant space in which the kennel is located shall be improved and maintained such that animals housed therein do not cause regular annoyance and disturbance to persons in the surrounding area, including but not limited to noise, odor, waste disposal, etc.; 
4.  The use shall be conducted entirely within a building with no outside activities or storage; 
5.  The facility shall comply with all applicable regulations and requirements of county and state agencies; 
6.  The economic and community development director may place such conditions on the permit as may be necessary to protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1084, § 8, 11-14-2017)  
Chapter 17.65 - SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION 
Sections: 
 
17.65.011 - Findings. 
The city council of the city finds and determines that: 
A.  The extraction of minerals is essential to the continued economic well-being of the city and to the needs of the society, and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety; 
B.  The reclamation of mined lands as provided for in this chapter will permit the continued mining of minerals and will provide for the protection and subsequent beneficial use of the mined and reclaimed land; 
C.  Surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different and that the reclamation operations and specifications therefore may vary accordingly. 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.012 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, Chapter 9, Public Resources Code, Sections 2710 et seq. 
B.  It is the intent of the city council to create and maintain an effective and comprehensive surface mining and reclamation policy with regulation of surface mining operations so as to assure that: 
1.  Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a useable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses; 
2.  The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment; 
3.  Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated. 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.013 - Surface mining combining zone. 
There is created the surface mining combining zone which may be combined with any other zone. Development of the property within the combining zone is subject to regulations of this chapter. The director of community development shall indicate the approval on the official zoning maps of the city by placing after the zoning designation on the property the symbol "SM." 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.014 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the incorporated area of the city. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following activities provided all the necessary permits, such as grading permits are obtained. 
1.  Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster; 
2.  Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amount of less than one thousand cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less; 
3.  Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim if such operations are conducted solely for that purpose; 
4.  Any surface mining operation that does not involve either the removal of a total of more than one thousand cubic yards of minerals, ores, and overburden, or involve more than one acre in any one location; 
5.  Such other surface mining operations which the city council determines to be of an infrequent nature and which involve only minor surface disturbances. 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.015 - Definitions. 
A.  "The Act" means the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, Public Resources Code Section 2710 et seq. 
B.  "Exploration" or "prospecting" means the search for minerals by geological, geophysical, geochemical or other techniques, including, but not limited to, sampling, assaying, drilling or any surface or underground works needed to determine the type, extent, or quantity of minerals present. 
C.  "Mined lands" means, the surface, subsurface and groundwater of any area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, all other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located. 
D.  "Minerals" means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas and petroleum. 
E.  "Mining waste" includes the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment machines, tools, or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations. 
F.  "Operator" means any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, himself, or who contracts with others to conduct operations with others to conduct operations on his behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his sole compensation. 
G.  "Overburden" means soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between mineral deposits, before or after their removal by surface mining operations. 
H.  "Permit" means any formal authorization from or approval by the city, the absence of which would preclude surface mining operations. 
I.  "Person" means any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization or partnership or any city, county, district, or the state or any department or agency thereof. 
J.  "Reclamation" means the combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects, incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures. 
K.  "State Board" means the State Mining and Geology Board, in the Department of Conservation, state of California. 
L.  "State Geologist" means the individual holding office as structured in Section 677 of Article 3, Chapter 2 of Division 1 of the Public Resources Code. 
M.  "Surface mining operations" means all, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall include, but are not limited to: 
1.  In place distillation or retorting or leaching; 
2.  Production and disposal of mining waste; 
3.  Prospecting and exploratory activities; 
4.  Borrow pitting, streambed skimming, segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same). 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.016 - Permit and reclamation plan requirement. 
A.  Any person, except as provided in Section 2776, California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, who proposes to engage in surface mining operations as defined in this chapter shall, prior to the commencement of such operations obtain: 
1.  A permit to mine; 
2.  Approval of a reclamation plan, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter and as further provided in Article 5, of the Act. A fee as established by city council resolution shall be paid to the city at the time of filing. 
B.  Vested Rights. 
1.  No person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as long as such vested right continues; provided, however, that no substantial changes may be made in any such operation except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A person shall be deemed to have such vested rights if, prior to January 1, 1976, he has in good faith and in reliance upon a permit or other authorization, if such permit or other authorization was required, diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial liabilities for work and materials necessary therefore. Expenses incurred in obtaining the enactment of an ordinance in relation to a particular operation or the issuance of a permit shall not be deemed liabilities for work or materials. 
2.  A person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall submit to the granting authority and receive, within a reasonable period of time, approval of a reclamation plan for operations to be conducted after January 1, 1976, unless a reclamation plan was approved by the city prior to January 1, 1976, and the person submitting the plan has accepted responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with reclamation plan. 
3.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the filing of a reclamation plan for, or reclamation of, mined lands on which surface mining operations were commenced and terminated prior to January 1, 1976. 
C.  The State Geologist shall be notified of the filing of all permit applications. 
D.  This chapter shall be continuously reviewed and revised, as necessary, in order to ensure that it is in accordance with the state policy for mined lands reclamation. 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.017 - Reclamation plan. 
A.  The permit to mine and reclamation plan shall be applicable to a specific piece of property or properties, and shall be based upon the character of the surrounding area and such characteristics of the property as type of overburdened, soil stability, topography, geology, climate, stream characteristics, and principal commodities. 
B.  The reclamation plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Names and addresses of property owners, owners of surface rights, owners of mineral rights, lessees, operators and agents; 
2.  Location, including legal description, of the mined lands (to be) involved by the operation, including: 
a.  Geologic description, including brief, general geologic setting, more detailed geologic description of the mineral deposit to be mined and principal minerals or rock types present, 
b.  Access route(s), 
c.  Location and vicinity map; 
3.  Quantity and type of mineral commodities to be mined: 
a.  Geologic description including brief general geologic setting, more detailed geologic description of the mineral deposit to be mined and principal minerals or rock types present, 
b.  Brief description of environmental setting of the site and surrounding areas. Describe existing area land use, soil, vegetation, groundwater elevation and surface water characteristics, average annual rainfall and/or other factors pertaining to environmental impacts and their mitigation and reclamation; 
4.  Surface mining operation—Proposed or existing: 
a.  Starting date, estimated life of operation, phasing duration of first phase, whether the operation will be seasonal, continuous or intermittent, 
b.  The estimated volume in cubic yards per year, 
c.  The total anticipated production of mineral commodities to be removed, waste retained on the site, waste disposed off-site and the maximum anticipated depth, 
d.  Mining method, 
e.  If processing of ores and/or minerals mined is planned at or adjacent to the site, the nature of processing and the disposal method of tailings and waste, 
f.  Geologic, soil and water data: 
i.  Soil types and erosion potential of same on subject property, 
ii.  Existing drainage patterns, 
iii.  Existing surface water quality, 
iv.  Anticipated water demand, 
v.  Location of any sewage facilities on subject property and/or within three hundred feet adjacent to project site, 
vi.  Source and volume type of fill to be used, if any, 
vii.  A description of the manner in which contaminates will be controlled, 
viii.  A plan for waste disposal, both solid and liquid, that is generated on-site, 
ix.  A description of the manner in which rehabilitation of affected streambanks to a condition minimizing erosion and sedimentation will occur, 
x.  A plan for review and approval detailing proposed solutions for final drainage patterns upon completion of excavation, 
g.  The operation shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Placer County air pollution control district, 
h.  If the nature of the deposit and mining method permit, describe and show steps or phases of the mining operation that allow concurrent reclamation, and include a proposed time schedule for such concurrent activities, 
i.  Attach a map of mined lands and/or suitable aerial photograph showing: 
i.  Boundaries and topographic details of the site, 
ii.  Location of all streams, roads, railroads water wells, and utility facilities within five hundred feet of the site, 
iii.  Location of all currently proposed access roads to be constructed in conducting the surface mining operation(s), 
iv.  Location of areas (to be) mined, and of waste dumps and tailings ponds, 
v.  By use of overlay symbol or color, depiction of separate mining phases if applicable (see Section 17.65.017(B)(4)(h)), 
vi.  The source of map base, orientation (north arrow), and scale (e.g., 1? = 100', etc.) of the map, 
vii.  Traffic haul routes along with anticipated frequency of trips, 
viii.  Setbacks which are a minimum of twenty-five feet from public right-of-way and ten feet from side and rear property lines in which no disturbance of existing terrain shall occur, 
ix.  Location of equipment storage area settling ponds and drainage solutions, 
x.  Noise contours around the property which will result with project implementation may be required depending upon type and location of the operation, 
j.  Fencing requirements to insure public safety shall be as specified in the conditional use permit, 
k.  A visual buffer or screen shall be provided along any road right-of-way and along any property lines where adjacent incompatible uses exist (i.e., schools, parks, residential offices, etc.) as specified in the conditional use permit; 
5.  Reclamation plan: 
a.  Indicate on an overlay map areas to be covered on the reclamation plan including acreage, 
b.  Describe the ultimate physical condition of the site and specify proposed uses(s) or potential use(s) of the mined lands as reclaimed, 
c.  Relationship of the interim uses other than mining and the ultimate physical condition to zoning regulations and general plan and plan elements, 
d.  Evidence that all owners of a possessory interest in the land have been notified of the proposed uses(s) or potential uses identified above, 
e.  Describe soil conditions and proposed soil salvage plan, 
f.  An assessment of the effect of implementation of the reclamation plan on future mining in the area, 
g.  Describe the methods, their sequence and timing, to be used in bringing the reclamation of the land to its end state. Indicate on map or diagram as necessary. Include discussion of the pertinent items listed below: 
i.  Backfilling and grading, 
ii.  Stabilization of slopes, 
iii.  Stabilization of permanent waste dumps, tailings, etc., 
iv.  Rehabilitation of premining drainage, 
v.  Removal, disposal, or utilization of residual equipment, structures, refuse, etc., 
vi.  Control of contaminants, especially with regard to surface runoff and groundwater, 
viii.  Treatment of streambeds and streambanks to control erosion and sedimentation, 
viii.  Removal or minimization of residual hazards, 
ix.  Resoiling, revegetation with evidence that selected plants can survive the site's topography, soil and climate; 
h.  If the applicant has selected a short-term phasing plan, describe in detail the specific reclamation to be accomplished in the first phase, 
i.  A description of how the reclamation of this site may affect further mining at this site and in the surrounding area, 
j.  An analysis of cost to restore the site in accordance with the proposed reclamation plan. A cost shall be associated to each phase of development. 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.018 - Procedures for conditional use permit. 
A.  An application for a surface mining permit and/or a reclamation plan shall be on forms developed and procedures adopted for a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.70 of this title. In addition to the information required by Chapter 17.70, the information listed in Section 17.65.016 and any additional information may be required when deemed necessary for evaluation of the proposal shall be required with the application. 
B.  The community development department shall review the permit application and the reclamation plan and shall schedule each for a public hearing, provided the filing is complete. 
C.  If an application for a mining permit and reclamation plan is submitted by the same applicant on the same piece of property or properties, the granting authority may, in its discretion, combine both the application and the review into one public hearing. 
D.  The public hearing shall be held to consider the issuance of a permit for the proposed surface mining operation. Such public hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 17.70.040 and 17.70.045. 
(Ord. 581 §§ 38, 39, 1988; Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.019 - Performance bond. 
Upon a finding by the council that a supplemental guarantee for the reclamation of the mined land is necessary, the following procedure shall be followed: 
A.  Each year, prior to a specified date, the mine operator shall submit a map or verbal description of the approximate area to be disturbed during the following year, as well as an estimate of the cost for the reclamation of that area in accordance with the approved or amended reclamation plan. The estimate of cost shall be subject to review and confirmation by the community development department. 
B.  A surety bond, lien, or other security guarantee conditioned upon the faithful performance of the following year's reclamation, in a form approved by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city. Such surety shall be executed in favor of the city, and shall be maintained in an amount equal to the confirmed cost estimate. 
C.  Prior to acceptance of the surety, the community development department shall determine whether the prior year's reclamation has been accomplished in accordance with the approved or amended reclamation plan. Consideration shall be given to the phasing of reclamation in an area where operations are to extend beyond year. 
D.  Upon certification that the prior year's reclamation has been accomplished, the surety posted for that work shall be released and the new surety shall be initiated. 
(Ord. 581 § 40, 1988; Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.020 - Periodic review. 
A.  As a condition of approval for the permit or reclamation plan on both, a schedule for periodic inspections of the site shall be established to evaluate continuing compliance with the permit and reclamation plan. 
B.  Failure by the permittee to allow such inspection shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.021 - Amendments. 
A.  Amendments to an approved reclamation plan may be submitted detailing proposed changes from the original plan. Substantial deviations from the original plan shall not be undertaken until such amendment has been filed with, and approved by the council. 
B.  The procedure for amendments shall be the same procedure for processing the reclamation plan in the first instance. 
(Ord. 581 § 41, 1988; Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
17.65.022 - Public records. 
A.  Reclamation plans, reports, applications and other documents submitted pursuant to this chapter are public records unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information, or part thereof, would reveal production, reserves, or rate of depletion entitled to protection as proprietary information. 
B.  A copy of all permits, reclamation plans, reports, applications and other documents submitted pursuant to this chapter, including proprietary information, shall be furnished to the District Geologist of the State Division of Mines and Geology by the city. 
C.  Proprietary information shall be made available to persons other than the State Geologist only when authorized by the mine operator and by the mine owner in accordance with Section 2778 of the Act. 
(Ord. 568 § 1 (part), 1987).  
Chapter 17.66 - OFF-STREET PARKING 
Sections: 
 
17.66.010 - Required. 
Accessible off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in this chapter for the uses specified in this title. This chapter establishes minimum off-street parking standards; nothing shall preclude the property owner from the installation of more spaces than provided in this chapter. As special circumstances require, the city council, planning commission or the community development director (when there is no use permit or design review required) may require additional off-street parking as set forth in Section 17.66.210. 
(Ord. 917 § 4, 2007: Ord. 336 § 7.06.000, 1977).  
17.66.020 - Apartments, triplexes, townhouses and condominiums. 
A.  Apartments and triplexes shall provide one and one-half paved parking spaces for each one-bedroom unit, and two paved parking spaces for each unit with two or more bedrooms, plus twenty-five percent paved visitor parking spaces. At least one parking space per unit shall be covered. 
The requirement for one covered parking space per unit, and the required visitor parking, shall be waived for all units that are made affordable, as defined by the Rocklin Housing Element, to households with incomes at or below eighty percent of median-family income, as defined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the Sacramento Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA). 
B.  Townhouses and condominiums shall provide paved, accessible off-street parking as set forth in this paragraph. 
1.  Parking for studio and one bedroom units shall be a total of 1.75 spaces, of which one space shall be in an enclosed garage, and at least .25 spaces shall be reserved for visitors. 
2.  Units with two or more bedrooms shall each have one of the following: 
a.  A total of 2.45 spaces per unit, of which one is in an enclosed garage, and at least .45 is reserved for visitor parking; or 
b.  A total of 2.5 spaces, of which two are in enclosed garages, and .5 is reserved for visitor parking; 
3.  The spaces not in enclosed garages may be either covered or uncovered. 
4.  Design criteria for townhouse and condominium parking shall be as follows: 
a.  All assigned uncovered and covered spaces shall be at least nine feet by nineteen feet. 
b.  All garages shall be at least ten feet by twenty-feet. 
c.  Thirty percent of uncovered visitor spaces may be compact spaces, measuring eight feet by sixteen-feet. 
d.  The site shall be designed to discourage on-street parking by residents and visitors. Fencing and access restrictions that make street parking less convenient than on-site parking, appropriate signage requiring visitors to park on-site, and clearly labelled visitor parking spaces conveniently dispersed throughout the project shall be provided. 
e.  All uncovered parking areas shall be designed to provide tree shading coverage. Trees shall 
be placed in a landscaped area every five parking spaces, except where covered parking or garage spaces are used. 
f.  Parking space locations, aisle widths, and private street widths shall meet standards established by the commission. 
g.  Garages or carports shall be conveniently located to assigned units. 
h.  Where assigned parking spaces include one- or two-car garages, the developer shall implement a parking enforcement plan to be incorporated into the leases or covenants, conditions and restrictions. The plan shall be approved by the commission. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following. 
i.  Adequate guarantees that the garages shall be used for the parking of automobiles; 
ii.  Roll-up garage doors, with automatic garage door openers; 
iii.  Garages located no more than four feet from the driveway aisle, or no less than twenty feet from the driveway aisle if tandem parking is provided. 
5.  For all units that are made affordable, as defined by the Rocklin Housing Element, to households with incomes at or below eighty percent of median-family income, as defined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the Sacramento Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA), the requirement for one covered space per unit, at the request of the applicant, shall be waived. Where a waiver is granted, the uncovered parking requirement shall be 2.16 spaces per unit. There shall be required a guarantee that the designated units shall remain affordable over a specified time. 
(Ord. 643 § 2, 1991; Ord. 506 § 2, 1983: Ord. 336 § 7.06.010(b), 1977).  
17.66.030 - Assembly places—Dancehalls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, churches. 
A.  Dancehalls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, churches and similar places of public assembly shall provide one parking space for each four seats of fixed seating in the main auditorium, sanctuary, or each theater. Where there is space for setup (temporary) seating or where there is no fixed seating, one parking space shall be provided for each thirty square feet of net floor area designated as the place or places of assembly. 
B.  The off-street parking requirement may be satisfied in whole or in part by shared parking agreements between the assembly use and other tenants or property owners in the immediate vicinity, subject to approval by the city council, planning commission, or the community development director when there is no use permit or design review required. Shared parking agreements shall only be considered where the peak parking demand between the tenants or properties in question do not occur at the same time. Such shared parking agreements must be recorded and run with the land, and the agreement must provide that the city be notified of any modification to the agreement. 
(Ord. 917 § 5, 2007: Ord. 336 § 7.06.110, 1977).  
17.66.032 - Auto body and paint shops. 
Auto body and paint shops shall provide a minimum of four parking spaces or one parking space for every one hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 650 § 13, 1991).  
17.66.034 - Automobile repair shops (light/heavy). 
Automobile repair shops (light/heavy) shall provide a minimum of five parking spaces for zero up to one thousand square feet of gross floor area plus one additional space for every two hundred square feet of gross floor area over one thousand square feet. 
(Ord. 650 § 14, 1991).  
17.66.036 - Automobile service stations. 
Automobile service stations shall provide one parking space for every two hundred square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. 650 § 15, 1991).  
17.66.040 - Commercial, business and professional office and personal service establishments. 
This section sets forth the general parking standards applicable to commercial, business professional office, and personal service establishments except as may be specifically set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
A.  Commercial, business professional office (except as set forth in subsection B below), and personal service establishment uses, including medical offices, shall provide a minimum of five parking spaces for zero up to one thousand square feet of gross floor area plus one additional space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area where such uses are conducted exclusively within a building. 
B.  Business and professional offices (excluding medical offices) when located in a structure that is designed exclusively for office uses (typically characterized by common building entrances and interior corridors to access office suites) shall provide four parking spaces for zero up to one thousand square feet of gross floor area plus one space for each additional two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area. 
C.  Shopping centers and commercial cluster developments shall provide for a minimum of five parking spaces for zero up to one thousand square feet of gross floor area plus one additional space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor area. Parking in shopping centers and commercial cluster developments shall be common to all businesses. 
(Ord. 917 § 7, 2007: Ord. 588 § 1, 1988: Ord. 336 § 7.06.030, 1977).  
17.66.055 - Gasoline station. 
Gasoline stations shall provide a minimum of four parking spaces or one parking space for every two hundred square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 650 § 12, 1991).  
17.66.060 - Hospitals. 
Hospitals (including convalescent hospitals) shall provide at least two parking spaces for each bed. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.06.020(c), 1977).  
17.66.070 - Hotels, motels. 
Hotels, motels shall provide at least one parking space per each sleeping room, suite of rooms, or housekeeping unit. If the hotel or motel is combined with other uses such as a restaurant or bar, the parking shall be determined by requiring at least one hundred percent of the required parking for the principal use and the other uses shall provide an addition thereto not less than seventy percent of the parking spaces which would otherwise be required if the uses were by themselves. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.06.020(b), 1977).  
17.66.080 - Industrial uses. 
Industrial uses shall provide parking spaces as determined by the city council or planning commission. 
(Ord. 917 § 9, 2007: Ord. 336 § 7.06.080, 1977).  
17.66.100 - Residential uses. 
A.  Single-family dwellings, duplexes, half-plexes, mobile homes on individual lots, and accessory single-family dwellings for agricultural uses shall provide a minimum of two paved parking spaces per dwelling unit, which shall be located within the buildable portion of the lot, excluding all required front, side and rear yard setbacks. 
B.  The required two parking spaces per unit shall be provided as follows: 
1.  A two-car garage at least four hundred square feet in area shall be provided. The two-car garage shall be at least twenty feet in width and twenty feet in length. A driveway pad at least twenty feet in length immediately contiguous to the front of the garage opening shall also be provided. 
2.  As an alternative to subdivision 1 of this subsection, a one-car garage at least two hundred forty feet in area and a carport or uncovered parking space may be provided. The one-car garage shall be at least twelve feet in width and twenty feet in length. The carport or uncovered parking space shall be paved and at least ten feet in width and twenty feet in length. Both the garage and the carport or parking space shall be located within the buildable portion of the lot, excluding all required front, side and rear setbacks. A driveway pad the width of the garage door and carport opening and immediately contiguous to the garage door and carport shall be provided. The driveway shall be at least twenty feet in length. 
(Ord. 506 § 1, 1983: Ord. 336 § 7.06.010(a), 1977).  
17.66.110 - Restaurants and bars, theaters. 
One parking space shall be provided for each three seats in theaters, bars and restaurants. In establishments where there is no fixed seating, the parking requirement shall be based on the number of seats possible based on the occupancy allowance of the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 498 § 1, 1983: Ord. 336 § 7.06.060, 1977).  
17.66.120 - Rest homes. 
Rest homes shall provide one parking space per each bed in the rest home. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.06.020(a), 1977).  
17.66.130 - Roominghouses, boardinghouses. 
Roominghouses, boardinghouses shall provide one parking space per guestroom, plus an additional one space for every four guestrooms or fraction thereof for guest or recreational vehicle parking. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.06.010(c), 1977).  
17.66.140 - Uncovered sales areas. 
Uncovered sales areas used for display and sales of recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers, lumber or building materials yards, plant nurseries or similar uses (excluding new or used automobile sales) shall provide a minimum of ten customer parking spaces for the first five thousand square feet of uncovered sales area and one customer parking space for each additional one thousand square feet of uncovered area up to a required maximum of twenty customer parking spaces. At no time shall the required off-street parking spaces be utilized as a product display area for product parking, or for service parking. 
(Ord. 917 § 11, 2007: Ord. 336 § 7.06.100, 1977).  
17.66.145 - Automotive dealerships. 
Automotive dealerships shall provide parking as follows: 
Sales: one space per one thousand square feet of indoor and outdoor display areas; 
Service Area: one space per four hundred square feet of automobile service area (i.e., parts warehouse and sales area, customer waiting area, etc., but excluding square footage for bays); plus 
One space per bay; plus 
One space for each company vehicle. 
Vehicle parking spaces used or set aside for display of automobiles for sale need not conform to standard parking space dimensions. Such areas shall be included as part of the design review application, and shall be subject to review as part of the design review process. 
(Ord. 917 § 12, 2007).  
17.66.150 - Schools. 
Schools shall provide parking and loading spaces as follows: 
A.  Elementary schools shall provide loading space for at least four school buses. 
B.  Junior high schools shall provide at least one parking space for every three seats in the main auditorium or multi-purpose room plus off-street loading space for school buses. 
C.  High schools shall provide the greater of the following: 
1.  At least one parking space for each three students in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grades; or 
2.  At least one parking space for each three seats in the main auditorium or stadium, whichever is the greater. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.06.120, 1977).  
17.66.155 - Secondary residential units. 
Secondary residential units shall provide one parking space per each one-bedroom unit. The parking space shall be within a garage, a carport, or a paved, uncovered space located within the buildable portion of the lot, excluding required setbacks. Units with two or more bedrooms shall provide two parking spaces. The parking spaces shall be within a garage, a carport, or two paved, uncovered spaces located within the buildable portion of the lot, excluding required setbacks. 
(Ord. 514 § 16, 1984).  
17.66.180 - Warehouses and storage buildings. 
Warehouses and storage buildings shall provide one parking space for each two thousand square feet of gross floor area, but not less than three spaces. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.06.090, 1977).  
17.66.185 - Emergency residential shelters. 
Emergency residential shelters shall provide a minimum of one off-street parking space for every ten adult beds, plus one parking space designated exclusively for the manager and one parking space for each employee on the site. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A2., 10-11-2011)  
17.66.190 - Uses not listed. 
For uses not listed in this chapter, off-street parking shall be provided as determined by the city council, planning commission, or the community development director when there is no use permit or design review required based on the requirements for the use which is most closely analogous to the use in question. 
(Ord. 917 § 14, 2007: Ord. 336 § 7.06.140, 1977).  
17.66.200 - Handicapped parking. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided to all projects as required by the applicable standards and regulations of the state of California. Nothing shall preclude the city council or planning commission from requiring the location and designation of additional stalls for handicapped parking when, in the opinion of that body, the development is of a size and nature to so warrant. 
(Ord. 917 § 15, 2007: Ord. 336 § 7.06.150, 1977).  
17.66.210 - Additional parking. 
The city council, planning commission, or the community development director (when there is no use permit or design review required) may require additional parking when it is determined that the anticipated volume of traffic for a particular development or business will be such as to so warrant. 
(Ord. 917 § 16, 2007: Ord. 336 § 7.06.160, 1977).  
Chapter 17.68 - HOME BUSINESS 
Sections: 
 
17.68.010 - Permitted—Chapter compliance. 
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a person within a residential zone may conduct a business within his residence. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 336 § 9.01.000, 1977).  
17.68.020 - Permitted uses. 
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the conduct of the following business are permitted within a residence: 
1.  Accountant; 
2.  Architect; 
3.  Artist (can conduct art restoration); 
4.  Assembly/manufacture, using equipment which shall not interfere with TV or radio reception, nor create noise, odor or visual impacts discernable beyond the site. Permitted assembly could include circuit boards, while prohibited assembly could include gasoline powered engines; 
5.  Author; 
6.  Beauty/barber shops, manicurist (limited to one operator); 
7.  Catering service (provided all other state and county requirements are met); 
8.  Consulting service; 
9.  Contracting service (office only, with no outside storage of vehicles or equipment); 
10.  Data processing, computer programming; 
11.  Direct sale product distribution (e.g., cosmetics, household items); 
12.  Draftsman; 
13.  Dress designer/dress making/alterations (limited to one operator); 
14.  Flower arrangement; 
15.  Gardening, lawn maintenance; 
16.  Home crafts. Ceramic kilns must meet building code requirements; 
17.  House cleaning; 
18.  Ice cream truck: conforming to the provisions of Section 17.68.040 (E)(1) of this chapter; 
19.  Interior design consultant; 
20.  Ironing; 
21.  Massage therapist (certified), physical therapist (limited to one operator and one client on site, by appointment); 
22.  Photographer; 
23.  Pool maintenance; 
24.  Private lessons (including outdoor swimming lessons); 
25.  Real estate or insurance sales agent or broker (limited to one operator); 
26.  Sale of product or service by mail, telephone, with off-premises (direct) product delivery; 
27.  Taxicab, limousine service (one vehicle); 
28.  Telephone answering, switchboard, call forwarding; 
29.  Typing, word processing, secretarial services; 
30.  Other uses found to have a similar impact, as determined by the community development director. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 336 § 9.01.010, 1977).  
17.68.030 - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited as home businesses: 
1.  Ambulance or hearse service; 
2.  Ammunition sales, reloading; 
3.  Animal hospital or grooming facility; 
4.  Auto and other vehicle repair, including auto painting; 
5.  Bathhouse; 
6.  Bed and breakfasts; 
7.  Carpentry/cabinet makers/woodworking/ furniture repair; 
8.  Funeral parlor or mortuary; 
9.  Laundry; 
10.  Medical, chiropractic (using X-rays or other equipment not normally found in a residence), or dental clinics or hospitals; 
11.  Photo development; 
12.  Repair or fix-it shops, including: 
A.  Repair or reconditioning or storage of boats and RV's, 
B.  Repair or reconditioning or storage of major household appliances; 
C.  Repair or reconditioning or storage of motorized vehicles or large equipment on-site; 
13.  Restaurants or taverns; 
14.  Retail sales not associated with permitted uses; 
15.  Upholstery shop; 
16.  Veterinary services, including boarding; 
17.  Welding. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 336 § 9.02.000, 1977).  
17.68.040 - Conduct of home business—Regulations. 
The conduct of all home businesses shall comply with the following regulations: 
A.  Appearance of Residence. The home business shall be restricted to the dwelling unit, accessory structure and garage, and shall not be conducted in the yard, except for private swimming lessons, and as provided for in subsection (B)(3) of this section. 
B.  Storage. 
1.  Outside storage is prohibited. 
2.  On-site storage of hazardous materials (including toxic, explosive, combustible or flammable) beyond that normally incidental to residential use is prohibited. 
3.  Storage of inventory or products and all other equipment, fixtures and activities associated with the business shall be allowed in the dwelling. Notwithstanding parking spaces for specified residential uses, storage of inventory or products and all other equipment, fixtures and activities associated with the business shall be allowed in the garage without compliance with Section 17.66.100 of this title; provided that such shall not encroach into or interfere with the use of an area not less than ten feet aide and twenty feet in length for nonbusiness, incidental residential uses. 
C.  Employees. 
1.  Only one individual not living in the residence is allowed to be present at the home business at any one time. 
2.  Additional individuals may be employed by or associated with the home business, so long as they do not report to work at the home. 
D.  Advertising and Signage. 
1.  No signs are permitted either on or off the premises to identify the business or solicit customers, except a building mounted nonilluminated identification sign of two inches by ten inches in size or less. 
2.  No display of products and or equipment produced or used by the home business may be displayed so as to be visible from outside home. 
E.  Vehicles, Parking and Traffic. 
1.  One commercial vehicle primarily associated with the business is allowed, not to exceed one ton capacity, ten feet in height, and to be of a size that would not overhang a sidewalk were it parked on a typical twenty-foot driveway pad. No vehicles connected with a home business may park in such a way as to overhang a sidewalk or to create any safety hazard. 
2.  There shall be no commercial vehicle deliveries from or to the home business premises beyond what is normally incidental to residential uses. Normal residential deliveries can be defined as typically being no more than one per day, during normal business hours of eight a.m. to six p.m. 
3.  No more than three vehicles can be parked at any one time at the residence in conjunction with the home business. 
F.  Nuisance Issues. 
1.  No activity which produces radio or TV interference, noise, glare, vibration or odor discernable beyond the site is allowed. 
2.  No use of utilities or community facilities, including the material and volume of trash disposal, beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes is allowed. 
3.  Issuance of a home business permit under this chapter shall not relieve the applicant from the duty and responsibility to comply with all other rules, regulations, ordinances or other laws governing the use of the premises and structures thereon, including, but not limited to, the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code or any private restrictions relative to the property. 
G.  Clients or customers are permitted at the home business from seven a.m. to ten p.m. 
H.  The community development director or designee may visit and inspect the site of a home business permitted in this chapter periodically to insure compliance with all regulations and conditions to which the permit is subject, during normal business hours, and upon giving reasonable notice. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 336 § 9.02.010 (a), 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 7, 1-28-2014)  
17.68.050 - Permit—Required—Application. 
A.  No person shall conduct a home business without first obtaining a permit from the community development director or designee and a valid business license certificate under Title 5 of this code. 
B.  The community development director may require of the applicant for a permit such information as is necessary to determine the location and type of such business, and the manner in which it will be conducted. 
C.  The home business permit is personal to the permittee named on the permit and for the business to be conducted at the location stated on the permit. The permit is not transferrable. 
D.  The applicant for a home business permit must be the owner and occupant of the home, or, if a tenant occupying the home, must have the written authorization of the owner or owner's designee. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 336 § 9.02.010, 1977).  
17.68.060 - Permit—Issuance—Conditions. 
If the community development director determines that the business is of the type specified in Section 17.68.020 of this chapter, and can be conducted in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section 17.68.040 of this chapter, the director shall issue the permit. Additional conditions may be attached thereto such as may be necessary to ensure that such business will not become a nuisance or annoyance to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 336 § 9.02.020, 1977).  
17.68.070 - Permit—Denial. 
If the community development director determines the proposed business may be an annoyance or a detriment to the surrounding neighborhood, or that the business cannot be conducted in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section 16.68.040 of this chapter, the permit may be denied. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 336 § 9.03.000, 1977).  
17.68.080 - Violation—Cessation order—Other action. 
A.  Based on one or more complaints, the community development director or designee shall investigate any home business to ascertain if the conduct thereof violates regulations bet forth in this chapter or the conditions of the permit. If the determination is made that a violation exists, the permittee hall be notified in writing of the alleged violation and the evidence supporting the determination that a violation exists, and given an opportunity to respond to the allegation. After considering the permittee's response, the director shall issue a final determination and serve a copy of the determination on the permittee and any complaining parties. If the final determination is that a violation exists, the director shall order that the home business cease. A continuation of the home occupation thereafter shall constitute a violation of this title. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be read to permit the conduct of a home occupation in violation of the conditions of the permit or to limit the right of the city to bring any action for a violation thereof, notwithstanding the acquiescence of surrounding neighbors to the manner in which the home business is conducted. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 336 § 9.04.000, 1977).  
Chapter 17.69 - RESTRICTIONS ON TOBACCO RETAILERS 
 
17.69.010 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to discourage the use of tobacco products by children by limiting the potential adverse direct and secondary effects of a tobacco retailer operating in close proximity to schools. The adverse health effects of smoking and secondhand smoke are well documented by numerous public health agencies, including the United States Food and Drug Administration, the World Health Organization, and the Tobacco Related Disease Research Program. These same organizations have published studies on smoking by youth under the age of eighteen including these statistics: 
• Eighty-eight percent of adult daily smokers smoked their first cigarette before the age of eighteen. 
• Each day in the United States three thousand two hundred youth under eighteen smoke their first cigarette. 
• Each day in the United States seven hundred youth under eighteen become daily cigarette users. 
B.  Electronic/vapor inhalation of substances ("vaping"), with or without nicotine, is a rapidly growing trend, especially among youth pursuant to recent studies by public health agencies. Most local, state and federal laws only address traditional tobacco smoking. Although state law prohibits the sale of electronic cigarettes to minors (California Health and Safety Code Section 119405), it does not prohibit minors from possessing or using e-cigarettes. Public health research is ongoing and there is growing concern and some evidence that this type of behavior is unhealthy. Additionally, the effects of secondhand vapor are not fully understood and are dependent on the chemical makeup of the substance being inhaled. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 2, 9-8-2015)  
17.69.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be ascribed the following meanings: 
A.  "Electronic smoking device" means an electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such electronic smoking device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. "Electronic smoking device" includes any component, part, or paraphernalia of such a product, including but not limited to cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tips, atomizers, ESD batteries, and ESD chargers, whether or not it is sold separately. 
B.  "Smoking room" or "smoking lounge" means a room which is specifically provided and furnished for smoking, generally in buildings where smoking is otherwise prohibited. 
C.  "Tobacco product" means any product containing, made or derived from tobacco or contains nicotine from any source that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means. "Tobacco product" includes, but is not limited to cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, creamy snuff, dipping/chewing tobacco, flavored tobacco, tobacco water, tobacco paste, gutka, kretek, shisha, roll-your-own cigarettes, cigarette or cigar rolling papers, pipes, or electronic smoking devices. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
D.  "Tobacco retailer" means any person, retail establishment, or any other legal entity who sells, distributes, or delivers to any person(s), for any form of consideration, tobacco products, including electronic smoking devices as defined in this section, and 1) tobacco products sales, distribution or delivery accounts for more than fifty percent of the business income, or 2) the business is advertised as a tobacco shop, smoke shop, or has a similar business identification relating to a tobacco retailer. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 2, 9-8-2015)  
17.69.030 - Location of tobacco retailer. 
A tobacco retailer is allowed as otherwise permitted in this title provided that the tobacco retailer complies with all other locational regulations of this section. No tobacco retailer shall be located, established nor operated within one thousand feet of any developed or designated public, private or charter school providing primary or secondary education, or within one thousand feet of any preexisting tobacco retailer. For purposes of this subsection, "designated" means a parcel that is general plan designated, zoned, or that has been conditionally permitted to conduct such use. The separation distances required by this chapter shall be measured from parcel line to parcel line. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 2, 9-8-2015)  
17.69.040 - Preexisting nonconforming use. 
Existing tobacco retailers that were lawfully operating at the time of the effective date of this chapter which do not meet the locational requirements of Section 17.69.030 may continue as a legal nonconforming use until such time as the use is abandoned for a period of ninety continuous days, whether or not there was the intent to abandon such use. Such nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 2, 9-8-2015)  
17.69.050 - Ventilation. 
Any smoking room or smoking lounge shall provide ventilation and filtration in accordance with all requirements imposed by the Rocklin Building and Fire Safety Regulations, or as otherwise required by state or federal law, or as required to ensure the ventilated secondhand smoke is sufficiently neutralized at the property line of adjacent parcels so that a person of normal sensitivity would not detect the secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 2, 9-8-2015)  
Chapter 17.70 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
17.70.010 - Applicability. 
The provisions in this article apply equally to applications for conditional use permits, and variances. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.020 - Authority. 
A.  Except as provided in subsections B and C of this section, the planning commission is authorized to grant conditional use permits, and variances pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The planning commission shall recommend to the council and the council shall take final action on any application for a conditional use permit, variance or adult entertainment waiver for the following: 
1.  Nonresidential buildings or groups of buildings on one parcel in any zone with gross square footage of one hundred fifty thousand square feet or more; 
2.  Residential buildings with a height of greater than thirty feet, or with more than two stories; 
3.  Nonresidential buildings or structures with a height of greater than forty feet, or with more than three stories; 
4.  All uses listed as M-2 zone conditional uses in Section 17.56.020, except retail sales and personal service establishments and service stations; 
5.  Surface mining and quarrying operations; 
6.  Special uses listed in Section 17.64.010; 
7.  Waiver of locational provisions for adult entertainment businesses under Section 17.79.040; and 
8.  Any application for a conditional use permit or variance, which is filed and/or is to be heard contemporaneously with another application for a land use entitlement for which the council is the final decision making body. 
C.  The community development director is authorized to grant conditional use permits for mobile pushcart vending facilities in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.030 - Application. 
A.  Applications for a variance or conditional use permit shall include those items specified in Section 17.82.030, except subsection G thereof, and, in addition: 
1.  A complete site plan drawn to a scale prescribed by the community development director showing existing and proposed structures and their intended use; 
2.  Applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a written statement indicating the unusual or special circumstances or conditions applicable to the property or class of use in the same zone, and stating the reasons why a variance should be granted; 
3.  The tenant of the property who holds a lease thereon may apply for a conditional use permit or variance without complying with subsection E of Section 17.82.030; provided, that the planning commission determines that the required change will not detrimentally nor permanently affect the property or its use at the termination of the lease. The property owners are to be notified of the application as per Section 17.70.040. 
4.  A Preliminary Grading Plan. When the grading plan is revised after the variance or conditional use permit and preliminary grading plan have been considered and approved at a public hearing, the revised plan shall be filed with the director and shall be subject to the same hearing process and findings requirements as the original application, except that the subsequent hearings and decisions shall be limited to the revised grading plan and the effects of the revisions on the originally approved project. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.040 - Public noticing. 
Noticing shall be consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011; Ord. No. 1061, § 5, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1072, § 6, 6-13-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1061, § 5, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, changed the title of § 17.70.040 from "Public hearing—Notice" to read as herein set out.  
17.70.045 - Decision. 
A.  At the close of the hearing, the planning commission shall take action to grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application for a conditional use permit, or variance, except for those applications described in Section 17.70.020B. 
B  For those applications described in Section 17.70.020B, the planning commission, at the close of the hearing, shall render its decision in the form of a written report and recommendation to the council. The report shall be transmitted to the council by memorandum. 
C.  Upon receipt of a recommendation to grant or grant with conditions from the planning commission under subsection B of this section, the council shall hold a public hearing on the application. If the planning commission has recommended denial of the application, no hearing and no further action shall be taken by the council unless an appeal is timely filed under Chapter 17.86 of this code. The hearing shall be noticed in the manner described in Section 17.70.040. At the close of the hearing, the council shall take action to grant, grant with conditions or deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.050 - Conditions. 
The decision making body may condition the granting of a variance, or conditional use permit as it deems necessary to effect the purpose of this code. Such conditions may include but are not limited to: 
A.  Dedications of rights-of-way; 
B.  Improvements of vehicle access to the subject property to city standards; 
C.  Regulation of the placement of the use or building on the subject property; 
D.  Regulation of the height and the number of stories of a building; 
E.  Regulation of the nature, hours of operation, or extent of use; 
F.  Regulation of landscaping for the protection of adjoining and nearby property; 
G.  Noise attenuation measures; 
H.  Expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.060 - Grant—Notice—Effective date—Appeal. 
Upon the grant of the variance, conditional use permit, or mobile home certificate of compatibility, the decision making body shall prepare and deliver to the applicant within five days a written statement thereof stating the fact of the grant and any conditions attached thereto. A copy shall also be delivered to the building inspector and other concerned city officials. The decision on an application for a variance, conditional use permit, or mobile home certificate of compatibility shall not become final, nor shall a permit or license of any kind be issued, until the time in which an appeal may be filed has elapsed. The finaling of an appeal shall stay the issuance of a variance, or a conditional use permit until the appeal is finally determined. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.070 - Expiration for failure to exercise, disuse. 
A.  Unless a different time period is prescribed by the decision making body, a conditional use permit, or variance shall expire two years after the effective date of the approval, unless the rights conferred thereby have commenced to be exercised within that period. 
B.  Where the rights conferred by a conditional use permit or a variance are not exercised for a continuous period of six months or more, such permit or variance shall become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.080 - Revocation and modification—Public hearing. 
The original decision making body shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of either modifying or revoking any variance, or conditional use permit which has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance superseded by this code. Public hearings shall be held and notice given in accordance with the provisions of this article for the grant of conditional use permits, or variances. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.090 - Revocation and modification—Grounds. 
After the public hearing as provided above, the decision making body may revoke or modify a conditional use permit, or variance for any one or more of the following reasons: 
A.  That such approval was obtained by fraud; 
B.  That any person making use of or relying upon the conditional use permit, or variance is violating or has violated any condition of such conditional use permit, or variance, or that the use for which the conditional use permit, or variance was granted is being or has been exercised contrary to the terms and conditions of such approval, or that the use for which the approval was granted is so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.100 - Revocation and modification—New applications. 
An application for a variance, or conditional use permit shall not be accepted for a period of one year following the denial or revocation of substantially the same conditional use permit, or variance for the same premises. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
17.70.110 - Withdrawal of application. 
The planning commission may permit the withdrawal of an application for a conditional use permit, or variance. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A4., 10-11-2011)  
Article II. - Variances 
 
17.70.120 - Grounds—Limitation—Written findings. 
A.  A variance may be granted when it is determined by the decisionmaking body that; 
1.  The applicant has shown that because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of the requirements of this title is found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classifications; and 
2.  The decisionmaking body has found that the grant of the variance would not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated. 
B.  The decisionmaking body shall not grant a variance which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning regulation governing the parcel of property for which the variance is requested. 
C.  Whether or not the decisionmaking body grants the variance, the decisionmaking body shall set forth in writing the findings of fact upon which it based its decision. 
(Ord. 581 § 8, 1988: Ord. 336 § 3.02.000, 1977).  
Article III. - Conditional Use Permits 
 
17.70.140 - Grounds—Requirement—Written findings. 
A.  Conditional use permits may be issued for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this title. Because of their unusual characteristics, conditional uses require special consideration so that they may be located and developed properly with respect to the objectives of this title and with respect to their effect on surrounding property. 
B.  The grant of a conditional use permit shall be based on a finding by the decisionmaking body that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use, building or structure applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood, or to the general welfare of the city. 
C.  Whether or not it approves the conditional use permit, the decisionmaking body shall set forth in writing the findings of fact upon which it based its decision. 
(Ord. 581 § 9, 1988: Ord. 336 § 3.03.000, 1977).  
17.70.150 - Substantially similar uses. 
From time to time persons in possession of property desire to use property for purposes which are not specifically provided for in this chapter. In order to carry out the intent of this chapter to promote the general welfare of the community, a conditional use permit may be granted for uses which are not provided for in the zoning classification, subject to the following: 
A.  A finding that the use is substantially similar in character to a use or uses within the zoning classification applicable to the property; 
B.  A finding that the use would be appropriate in the zoning classification applicable to the property as a conditional use; 
C.  A finding that the proposed use, with the appropriate conditions, will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use, or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 581 § 10, 1988: Ord. 336 § 3.03.010, 1977).  
Article IV. - Minor Deviations and Administrative Variances 
 
17.70.160 - Intent. 
Certain situations occur in which the precise requirements of this title may be varied to accommodate the needs of a particular lot or parcel without substantially affecting adjoining properties or injuring the public health, safety or welfare. It is the intent of this article to provide a mechanism for the administrative approval of minor deviations from the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 399 (part): Ord. 336 § 3.04.000, 1977).  
17.70.170 - Scope of authority. 
In accordance with the provisions of this article, the planning director may administratively grant a variance from the requirements of this title as follows: 
A.  He may decrease the required lot depth, lot width or lot area for a lot in a particular zone by not more than ten percent; provided, that the lot cannot reasonably be combined with other property to create a lot of sufficient size. This section shall not be used solely for the purpose of permitting a subdivider to increase the number of lots in a subdivision. 
B.  He may decrease any front setback, interior or street side setback or rear yard setback by not more than ten percent. 
C.  He may increase the permitted height of any building or structure (including any fence, hedge or wall) by not more than ten percent. 
D.  He may increase the permitted lot coverage by not more than ten percent. 
(Ord. 399 (part): Ord. 336 § 3.04.010, 1977).  
17.70.180 - Application. 
An application for a variance of the type permitted by Section 17.70.170 shall be made in writing to the planning director. The application shall contain the information required by the planning director. 
(Ord. 399 (part): Ord. 336 § 3.04.020, 1977).  
17.70.190 - Decision—Notice—Appeal by interested party. 
A.  The planning director may grant, conditionally grant, or deny the application. He shall make findings in support of his decision. 
B.  The planning director may act on the application without notice to adjoining owners of property affected by the variance and without a hearing. If he grants or conditionally grants the variance, he shall give notice of his action to those persons who would have received notice of a hearing before the planning commission had the application been for a variance under Article II. Such notice shall specify that any interested person (other than the applicant) may appeal the action of the planning director in the manner provided by Chapter 17.86. 
(Ord. 399 (part): Ord. 336 § 3.04.030, 1977).  
17.70.200 - Appeal by applicant. 
A.  The action of the planning director on the application shall be binding on the applicant and he shall have no appeal therefrom. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall prevent an applicant whose application has been denied, or who objects to the condition(s) of approval, from initiating an application for a variance under the provisions of Article II. 
(Ord. 399 (part): Ord. 336 § 3.04.040, 1977).  
17.70.210 - Records—Report to planning commission. 
A.  The planning director shall maintain a record of his actions, including the findings made, on all applications submitted under this article. 
B.  The planning director shall periodically advise the planning commission, in writing, of his actions on all applications submitted. 
(Ord. 399 (part): Ord 336 § 3.04.050, 1977).  
Article V. - Reserved 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 977, Exh. A A4. adopted Oct. 11, 2011, deleted Art. V, which pertained to mobile home certificate of compatibility and derived from Ord. 336, 1977; Ord. 457, 1981.  
Article VI. - Mobile Pushcart Vending 
 
17.70.310 - Decision—Grounds. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for a mobile pushcart vending facility, the planning director may grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application. The decision will be in writing, setting forth the findings of fact supporting the decision, and shall be served on the applicant within five days. The decision is subject to a ten-day appeal period and shall not become final until such time as this period expires. 
B.  The planning director may act on the application without prior notice to adjoining owners of property affected by the conditional use permit and without a hearing. If the planning director grants or conditionally grants the conditional use permit, he/she shall give notice of the action to those persons who would have received notice of a hearing before the planning commission had the application been for a conditional use permit under Article III. Such notice shall specify that any interested person may appeal the action of the planning director in the manner provided by Chapter 17.86. 
C.  The grant or conditional grant of a conditional use permit for a mobile pushcart vending facility shall be based on a finding by the director that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use and facility will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use, or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood, or to the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 674 § 12 (part), 1993).  
17.70.320 - Exemptions. 
The following mobile pushcart vending uses are exempt from the regulations and requirements of this chapter: 
A.  Mobile pushcart vending facilities not visible from the public right-of-way and located on or adjacent to interior walkways within an open, as opposed to an enclosed, shopping center comprised of two or more buildings; 
B.  Mobile pushcart vending facilities located within enclosed retail buildings, shopping centers and malls; 
C.  Mobile pushcart vending facilities operating in conjunction with special event uses as governed by Chapters 17.63 and 17.64 of this title. 
(Ord. 674 § 12 (part), 1993).  
17.70.330 - Application. 
The planning director shall prescribe the forms and documents to be filed for a mobile pushcart vending permit. The forms and documents shall be filed with the planning director and accompanied by the following: 
A.  A description of the site which may include a map drawn to scale showing lot lines and dimensions, ingress and egress points, improved areas, grading plans, parking and traffic control locations. In addition, a description and location of the mobile pushcart vending facility, its signs and equipment, such as tables, chairs, etc., may also be required; 
B.  A fee as specified in the current city council fee resolution; 
C.  Written authorization of the subject property owner or his/her designated representative agreeing to the placement and operation of the mobile pushcart vending facility; 
D.  A written letter describing the mobile pushcart vending facility's nature of business and hours of operation; 
E.  Such additional information as the planning director deems as necessary. 
(Ord. 674 § 12 (part), 1993).  
17.70.340 - Term. 
A conditional use permit for a mobile pushcart vending facility shall be valid for one year. 
(Ord. 674 § 12 (part), 1993).  
17.70.350 - Development standards. 
A mobile pushcart vending facility shall comply with the following development standards: 
A.  The use is to be on improved private property; 
B.  The use shall not be within two hundred feet of another mobile pushcart vending facility; 
C.  The use shall not be within fifteen feet of any fire hydrant; 
D.  The use shall not occupy more than ten percent of the subject property's existing parking area, or more than four hundred square feet, whichever is less. Such area shall be identified on the mobile pushcart vending facility application materials; 
E.  The use shall be sited with consideration given to the triangular visibility area of an intersection so as not to obstruct the visibility of motorists, pedestrians and bicyclists to assure the public's health and safety; 
F.  The use shall include trash receptacle(s). Such receptacles shall be maintained so as to not create an offending odor or visual nuisance; 
G.  The area on which the mobile pushcart vending facility is located shall be kept free of debris; 
H.  The use shall not reflect undesirable light and glare from the designated premises; 
I.  The use shall not use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, radio or any other instrument or device for the production of sound in connection with the promotion of a mobile pushcart vending facility; 
J.  The permittee shall maintain a written agreement giving the permittee and his/her agents the right to use permanent sanitary facilities located no more than three hundred feet from the approved location; 
K.  The pushcart shall not be used to sell any merchandise to any person who is in a motor vehicle within a travel lane at the time of a sale. Merchandise may be sold to a person in a motor vehicle within a designated parking area; 
L.  The pushcart shall not be greater than ten feet in height; 
M.  Signage shall not exceed a total of thirty square feet. The signage shall be limited to the signs which may be single- or double-sided. The signage shall not exceed ten feet in height and be located on the pushcart site; 
N.  Sale of product shall be from the approved mobile pushcart vending facility and not from additional accessory stands, tables, chairs or other devices other than those permitted as indicated on the application; 
O.  The use shall be located on a generally level portion of a site and an adequate breaking system be provided for, as necessary. 
(Ord. 674 § 12 (part), 1993).  
17.70.360 - Permit denial—Appeal procedure. 
An appeal of a decision shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
(Ord. 674 § 12 (part), 1993).  
Chapter 17.71 - PARK AND RECREATION FEES 
Sections: 
 
17.71.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds and declares that: 
A.  The principles and standards for park and recreation facilities and development have been designated in the recreation element of the Rocklin general plan. 
B.  New residential uses permitted as conditional uses within the city place an additional burden on the city's park and recreation facilities. 
C.  Those residential uses permitted as conditional uses within the city require additional park and recreation facilities to serve their needs. 
D.  Park and recreational facilities contribute to and improve the quality of life within the city. Adequate park and recreational facilities are essential to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.500, 1977).  
17.71.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide and maintain park and recreational facilities to benefit residential uses permitted as conditional uses within the city and to provide a means of financing these park and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.501, 1977).  
17.71.030 - Fees—Established. 
Conditional use permits for residential uses shall be conditioned on the payment of a park and recreation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council and in the manner set forth in this chapter. The amount of such fee shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the residential use for which the conditional use permit is granted. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.502, 1977).  
17.71.040 - Fees—Use. 
Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used only for the purpose of providing and maintaining park and recreational facilities to serve the use for which the conditional use permit is granted. If the city council determines that there is sufficient land available for park and recreational purposes, such fees may be used to improve and maintain existing park and recreational facilities serving the use for which the conditional use permit is granted. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.503, 1977).  
17.71.050 - Fees—Return when. 
Any fees collected under this chapter shall be committed within five years after the payment of such fees or the issuance of a building permit(s) for the use authorized by the conditional use permit, whichever occurs last. If such fees are not committed within this five-year period, the fees shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.504, 1977).  
17.71.060 - Schedule of projects. 
Prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule specifying the projected use of funds collected under this chapter. The council may amend this schedule from time to time. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.505, 1977).  
17.71.070 - Credits and exemptions. 
A.  If the project for which the conditional use permit is granted has or is required to dedicate land and/or pay fees pursuant to the Chapter 16.28, such subdivision fees shall be credited against the total amount of the park and recreation fee assessed under this chapter. 
B.  If the property for which the conditional use permit is granted has been assessed a park and recreation fee pursuant to Chapter 3.16, as amended, and this fee has been paid, the applicant shall be credited for the amount of the fee paid. If the project for which the conditional use permit is granted will be assessed a park and recreation fee under Chapter 3.16, as amended, but this fee has not yet been assessed or paid, the applicant shall pay the entire fee assessed pursuant to this chapter and be exempt from the park and recreation fee assessed under Chapter 3.16, as amended. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to conditional use permits issued for industrial or commercial uses, lodges, rest homes, community care facilities, day care centers, and residential facilities as defined in Section 17.04.480. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 333 § 3.03.506, 1977).  
17.71.080 - Credit for private open space. 
No credit shall be given for private open space planned for the use for which the conditional use permit is granted, except whenever any conditional use permit is granted for a residential use containing fifty or more units to be developed as an apartment project or stock cooperative for which no subdivision map is required, and private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in the proposed plans and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the use, partial credit, not to exceed fifty percent, may be given against the requirement of payment of fees if the planning commission upon the recommendation of the parks and recreation commission, finds that it is in the public interest to do so and all of the following standards are met: 
A.  Yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; and 
B.  The private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written instrument, conveyance or restrictions; and 
C.  The use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor; and 
D.  The proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location; and 
E.  The facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational elements of the general plan. Before credit is given, the commission shall make written findings that the above standards are met. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.507, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-27-2010)  
17.71.090 - Payment procedure. 
At the time of the approval of the conditional use permit, the commission shall determine the fees to be paid by the applicant and whether or not any credit shall be given or any exemption applied. The applicant shall pay the fee no later than six months after final city approval of the conditional use permit or prior to any application for a building permit, whichever occurs first unless the commission designates a later time for payment. 
In the event credit was established, the amount of the credit shall be reimbursed upon the determination of the planning director that the open space and related facilities that qualified the project for credit have been completed per the approved plans. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.508, 1977).  
17.71.100 - Refund. 
A.  If the applicant fails to commence the use for which the conditional use permit was issued and the applicant paid park fees pursuant to this chapter, the applicant may file for a refund of such fee upon the expiration and lapse of the conditional use permit. The application for refund shall be filed with the planning director. 
B.  Failure to claim such refund within one year of the expiration of the conditional use permit shall be a waiver of any right to such refund. 
C.  Upon satisfactory proof that the conditional use permit has not been exercised, and upon approval by the planning commission, the city shall refund any such park fee. 
D.  This section shall not apply to permits which have been exercised and have lapsed under the provisions of subsection B of Section 17.70.070. 
(Ord. 466 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 3.03.509, 1977).  
Chapter 17.72 - DESIGN REVIEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1078, § 4, adopted Aug. 22, 2017, amended Ch. 17.72 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.72, §§ 17.72.010—17.72.080 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 831, § 1(part), adopted in 2000; Ord. No. 927 § 2, adopted in 2008; Ord. No. 948, § 3, adopted April 14, 2009; Ord. No. 960, §§ 3, 4, adopted May 25, 2010; Ord. No. 976, §§ 4, 5, adopted June 28, 2011; Ord. No. 987, §§ 4, 5, adopted Aug. 28, 2012; Ord. No. 1006, § 6, adopted Jan. 28, 2014; Ord. No. 1061, § 6, adopted Dec. 13, 2016; and Ord. No. 1072, § 7, adopted June 13, 2017. 
 
17.72.010 - Findings. 
The council finds that due to the size, bulk and height of many multiple-family residential and nonresidential developments, and certain residential developments, it is necessary to ensure that the designs thereof make the most efficient use of available resources and harmonize with existing and proposed residential development, as well as with existing development of like character. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.020 - Design review—When required. 
A.  Design review shall be required as provided herein and no building permit or improvement plan shall be issued without design review approval of the proposed construction, alteration, or remodeling pursuant to this chapter: 
1.  All new construction of multifamily structures (two or more units), and non-residential structures, including permanent signs or sign relocation, and all site improvements (including but not limited to; walls/fencing, trash enclosures, landscaping, and other special features) that are associated with multifamily residential and non-residential projects. 
2.  All new construction of single-family residential units on lots less than six thousand square feet in area. 
3.  All new construction of single-family residential units which are identified as requiring design review in entitlements approved by the planning commission and/or city council. 
4.  All new single-family residential units, regardless of lot size, within the University, Quarry, Granite, and College Architectural Districts, of which the district boundaries have been established by resolution of the city council. 
5.  Relocation of any multifamily residential or non-residential building or structure. 
6.  Permanent stand-alone parking lots and parking structures. 
7.  Modifications to projects that have received design review approval (including single-family as applicable) or modifications to existing multifamily and non-residential development projects. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A, the following shall not be subject to design review unless otherwise specified by the city council: 
1.  All new single-family residential units on lots greater than six thousand square feet in area that are not located within the University, Quarry, Granite, and College Architectural Districts. 
2.  All new single-family residential units on lots less than six thousand square feet in area that are located in the R1-5 zone district and are not located within the University, Quarry, Granite, and College Architectural Districts, regardless of lot size. 
3.  General maintenance of existing structures, parking lots, and landscaping which do not require permits or substantively deviate from a prior design review approval. 
4.  Repainting where the color of the paint substantially complies with the approved paint color, unless specifically stated in the design review approval. 
5.  Repair, cleaning, or refurbishing of an existing permanent building, structure, or sign. 
6.  Temporary signs. 
7.  Resurfacing and/or re-striping of existing paved parking lot areas. However, property owners are urged to ensure that such activities are completed in a manner that conforms to all applicable accessibility requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.030 - Design review board—Created—Members. 
A.  There is created the design review board of the city. 
B.  The planning commission is designated the design review board of the city, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.035 - Architectural review committee—Created—Members. 
A.  There is created a five-member architectural review committee which has design review authority as provided by this chapter. 
B.  Members of the architectural review committee shall be appointed by the city council upon the recommendation of the mayor, and shall consist of two members of the planning commission, two members of the city council, and the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.040 - Authority. 
A.  The duties and authority of the design review board shall be as provided herein, except as provided in subjections B and C. 
1.  Conduct hearings and take action on design review applications in accordance with this chapter, the general plan, and all other applicable rules, regulations and policies enacted by the council; 
2.  Recommend design guidelines for multiple-family residential and nonresidential development consistent with this chapter, the general plan, and all other applicable rules, regulations, and policies enacted by the council; 
3.  Recommend the creation of special districts or areas within the city for the purpose of maintaining and enhancing the character thereof, and recommending architectural standards to be applied therein; 
4.  Perform such other duties as the council may prescribe from time to time. 
B.  Within architectural districts established by the city council, the architectural review committee shall take the following action on the following design review applications: 
1.  Consider and make recommendations to the planning commission on design review applications consistent with the design guidelines established by resolution to the city council. 
2.  Consider and make recommendations to the planning commission on major additions and remodels. 
C.  The community development director may take action on the following design review applications: 
1.  Within architectural districts established by the city council, the community development director may take final action on design review applications for small additions, accessory structures, and maintenance projects. 
2.  Repainting, reroofing, residing, and modifications to existing buildings, signage, landscaping, walls, fencing, trash enclosures, and other special features where the colors, materials, and design deviate from what is existing and/or was formally approved by the city, but substantially complies with the approved paint color and materials, or a reasonable range of standards used in the community, may be approved by the community development director, unless specifically stated otherwise in the original design review approval. Depending on the scope of magnitude of the modifications, the community development director has discretion to refer such design review applications for determination by the planning commission or architectural review committee, as applicable. 
3.  Within architectural districts established by the city council, the community development director may consider and take final action on design review applications on infill lots, which are defined as projects with no more than four single-family lots which are not part of a larger residential subdivision. 
D.  Design review approval may be determined as otherwise indicated in other provisions of this title, including, but not limited to, the business attraction, retention, and revitalization overlay zone and the automotive overlay zone. For parcels that are located in one of the specified overlay zones for which the community development director has the authority to make final design review decisions and if the parcel is located in an architectural district, the architectural review committee shall make recommendations to the community development director, regardless of design review approval. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.050 - Application. 
A.  Application for design review approval shall be made to the community development director. Such application shall include the following information: 
1.  Existing topography, structures, trees and other features of the land to be developed; 
2.  A preliminary grading and drainage plan. When the grading plan is revised after the building permit and grading plan have been considered and approved by the design review board, the revised plan shall be filed with the community development director and shall be subject to the same decision making process and findings and requirements as the original application, except that the subsequent consideration and decision shall be limited to the revised grading plan and the effects of the revisions on the originally approved project; 
3.  A site plan which shows: 
a.  Location of proposed building(s), adjoining streets; 
b.  The size and location of all public utility easements; 
c.  The exact location and width of all streets, sidewalks, bike trails, pedestrian paths or other areas used for the conveyance of vehicular, pedestrian, bicycles, equestrian or other traffic; 
d.  The location of parking areas; 
e.  The number of units per gross acre; 
f.  The location and size of private parks or recreation area; 
g.  Location of light poles; 
h.  Location of all freestanding signs; 
i.  The location and screening of refuse disposal area; 
j.  Location of driveways; 
k.  The location and size of all fencing or screening; 
l.  A designation of the use of all open space (whether publicly or privately owned) and the person or group responsible for its maintenance; 
m.  Contour lines at intervals designated by the city engineer. 
4.  Architectural elevations and renditions of all buildings, signs, walls and fences and other structures, including materials to be used and color schemes; 
5.  Project signage, including the location, dimensions, illumination and lettering style of all signs; 
6.  A landscape plan, including the location, type, quantity and size of plant materials to be used; 
7.  Such other information as the director may require. 
B.  When a project subject to design review also requires a discretionary permit, or modification thereof, under Chapter 17.70, the design review application shall be made, processed and heard simultaneously with the other discretionary permit, unless this requirement is waived by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.060 - Public noticing. 
Noticing for matters to be considered by the design review board shall be consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. Matters to be considered by the architectural review committee or community development director are not subject to the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.070 - Decision. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B below, at the conclusion of the hearing the design review board shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. 
B.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the design review board shall make a recommendation to the council, and the council shall thereafter conduct a hearing on and approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for design review for the following: 
1.  Nonresidential buildings or groups of buildings on one parcel in any zone with gross square footage of one hundred fifty thousand square feet or more; 
2.  Residential buildings with a height of greater than thirty feet, or with more than two stories; 
3.  Nonresidential buildings or structures with a height of greater than forty feet, or with more than three stories; 
4.  All uses listed as M-2 zone conditional uses in Section 17.56.020, except retail sales and personal service establishments and service stations; 
5.  Surface mining and quarrying operations; 
6.  Special uses listed in Section 17.64.010; 
7.  Waiver of locational provisions for adult entertainment businesses under Section 17.79.040; and 
8.  Any application for a design review which is filed and/or is to be heard contemporaneously with another application for a land use entitlement for which the council is the final decision making body. 
C.  Any decision by the design review board or the council on a design review application shall be based on consideration of the following: 
1.  Relationship between the site design and the surrounding development, natural features and constraints and traffic flow; 
2.  Height, bulk and area; 
3.  Orientation of buildings and structures (with emphasis on energy consumption for heating, cooling, lighting); 
4.  Color scheme and materials; 
5.  Style, type and orientation of lighting; 
6.  Dimensions and placement of signs and graphics; 
7.  Landscaping (with emphasis on aesthetics, use of water and maintenance needs); 
8.  Parking design, including ingress and egress patterns; 
9.  Other design review criteria, which may be adopted from time to time by resolution of the council. 
D.  The design review board and council shall set forth in writing the findings of fact upon which its respective decision is based. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.075 - Appeals. 
Appeals of any design review action shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.86. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
17.72.080 - Expiration. 
Unless a different time period is prescribed by the board, a design review approval shall expire two years from the effective date of this approval, unless the rights conferred thereby have commenced to be exercised within that period. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 4, 8-22-2017)  
Chapter 17.74 - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.74.010 - Authorized—Scope. 
The planning director, with the approval of the planning commission may promulgate standards for development of property in any zone. These development standards shall include, among other matters, provisions relating to: 
A.  Landscaping (including maintenance and erosion control); 
B.  Parking (including layout, paving, stall sizes, marking, signings); 
C.  Exterior lighting. 
(Ord. 336 § 10.01.000(a), 1977).  
17.74.020 - Conditional uses. 
The planning director shall promulgate, subject to the approval of the planning commission, development standards and criteria for conditional uses. 
(Ord. 336 § 10.01.000(b), 1977).  
Chapter 17.75 - SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 28, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 17.75, §§ 17.75.010—17.75.110, and enacted a new Ch. 17.75 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.75 pertained to sign regulations. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table and the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for a complete derivation. 
 
17.75.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds as follows: 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to encourage signs which are integrated with, and harmonious to, the buildings and sites which they occupy, to eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays, to preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to live and to work and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade, and to restrict signs which increase the probability of accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision. 
B.  In adopting this chapter, the city council finds that excessive and inappropriate signage has an adverse impact on the overall visual appearance of a city, and can increase risks to traffic and pedestrians. Proper sign control will safeguard and preserve the health, property and public welfare of Rocklin residents through prohibiting, regulating and controlling the design, location and maintenance of signs. 
C.  The regulations established by this chapter are intended to appropriately limit the placement, type, size, and number of signs allowed within the city, and to require the proper maintenance of signs. By adopting this chapter the city intends to regulate signs on the basis of location, relationship to land uses, illumination, motion, size, height, orientation, separation, safety of physical structures, and the public need for functional information. 
D.  The purposes of these limitations and requirements are to: 
1.  Safeguard and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, and advance the goals, policies, and strategies of the city of Rocklin General Plan and the city's companion strategic plan; 
2.  Reduce or avoid traffic and/or safety hazards to motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians, caused by visual distractions and obstructions, or to impede their access; 
3.  Protect and enhance the character and setting of the city of Rocklin against visual blight by preventing a proliferation of signs that will detract from, and obscure, the scenic qualities of the city and its individual buildings and neighborhoods: 
4.  Promote the aesthetic and environmental values of the community by providing for signs that do not impair the attractiveness of the city as a place to live, work, and shop; 
5.  Provide for signs as an effective channel of communication, and as a means for members of the public to express themselves by displaying a sign, while ensuring that signs are aesthetically proportioned in relation to adjacent structures and the structures to which they are attached, and appropriate for the context of the neighborhoods where they are located; and 
6.  Preserve the quiet, low-traffic character of residential neighborhoods. 
E.  This chapter sets forth standards and minimum requirements to safeguard life, safety, property and public welfare by regulating the size, height, construction, location, electrification, operation and maintenance of all signs and sign structures exposed to public view within the city. The pleasing visual appearance and traffic safety of the city cannot be preserved and achieved by measures less restrictive than the procedures and standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.020 - Applicability; permit required. 
A.  General. This chapter shall apply to all property and land within the city of Rocklin. 
B.  Permit Requirement. A sign permit is required prior to the installation or display of any sign, except those exempt signs described herein. It is unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation that owns, operates, controls, rents, or leases property or land in the city of Rocklin to construct, maintain, display or alter, or to cause or allow to be constructed, maintained, displayed, or altered, a sign within the city except in conformance with this chapter. In the case of after-the-fact permitting, the otherwise applicable fee shall be doubled. 
C.  Exempt Signs. The city has a compelling interest to exempt certain signs to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter and to allow for the use of signs with minimal aesthetic impact. The following signs, described in Table 1, may be installed without a sign permit; provided, that they meet the stated conditions, but may require a building permit or encroachment permit. 
TABLE 1: Signs Exempt from Permit Requirement
Exempt Sign 	Conditions 
Address signs 	Maximum letter height of 12 inches and maximum area of 4 square feet. 
Ancillary information signs 	Maximum aggregate area of 3 square feet. 
Construction site signs 	See Section 17.75.070. 
Electronic open signs 	Maximum area of 3 square feet 
  
Maximum of one sign per street frontage. 
Government and community signs 
  
See Chapter 17.80 Signs on City Property 	Traffic control signs 
	All signs authorized on city property as provided in Chapter 17.80 
	Transit signs not exceeding 3 square feet 
	Street identification signs 
	Utility signs 
Holiday decorations 	Decorations and displays on property used for residential purposes are exempt. 
	Typical holiday decorations on nonresidential properties are exempt. 
	Displays on nonresidential properties intended to attract viewers to the site who do not routinely visit the property shall be subject to the regulations for special advertising devices or require a special event permit. 
Home occupation signs at the residence of currently permitted and licensed home occupation businesses 	Home occupation signage maximum sign size of 2 inches × 10 inches. 
Interior signs 	Any sign not visible from another lot of record or from a public right-of-way. 
Menu/order board signs 	Two menu/order board signs for each drive-through business; provided, that each sign not exceed a maximum 40 square foot sign area and an 8-foot height limit and be located adjacent to the drive. 
No trespassing/no parking signs 	Must be posted in compliance with federal, state and local laws. 
Parking lot signs 	Maximum area of 3 square feet per sign. 
Project identification signs of current and pending development applications 	Limited to a sign area of 36 square feet and a 6-foot height limit. 
Real estate signs 	Real estate signs as authorized by Civil Code Section 713 et seq. 
	Real estate signs shall comply with the standards set forth in [Section] 17.75.070.A.1. 
	The signs shall be removed within 15 days of the completion of the transaction advertised. 
Signs required by federal or state law 	Signs required for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), California Coastal Act, etc., or legal notices posted pursuant to law or court order. 
Noncommercial temporary signs 	Temporary noncommercial signs in any residential zoning district. 
	Temporary noncommercial signs located in any nonresidential zoning district for the period commencing forty-five days before a general or special election (as defined in the California Election Code) to be conducted within the city of Rocklin, and ending five days after such elections. 
Temporary community activity signs 	Limited to designated banner sign locations throughout the city or as approved by the planning director, for a period not exceeding 30 days in duration. 
Umbrellas 	Shade umbrellas with incidental signage not intended to be primary commercial signage for a business. 
Vehicle signs 	Signs on licensed commercial vehicles, provided such vehicles are not used or intended for use as portable signs or for general advertising for hire. 
Window signs 	Refer to [Section] 17.75.060.H. 
 
D.  Prohibited Signs. The city has a compelling interest to prohibit certain signs to uniformly further the purpose and objectives of this chapter and to enforce local, state and federal law. Unless otherwise permitted by a specific provision of this chapter, the following signs are prohibited in all zones, and are subject to abatement by the city of Rocklin: 
TABLE 2: Prohibited Signs
Advertising statuary. All forms of advertising statuary are prohibited in all zones. 
Moving image signs. Signs designed and erected so as to blink, flash, shimmer, glitter, rotate, oscillate or move, or which give the appearance of blinking, flashing, shimmering, or glittering. 
Animated signs. Animated signs as defined in [Section] 17.75.120 are prohibited in all zones. 
Backlit translucent awning signs. 
Electronic message signs (excludes traffic control signs). 
Ground-mounted signs installed or placed in the public right-of-way (excludes government and community signs and commercial directory programs). 
Highly reflective and fluorescent (day-glow) signs. 
Off-site signs (except for signs placed in compliance with Section 17.75.040.B, or other programs specifically identified in this chapter and Chapter 17.80, i.e. commercial directory programs, the city streetlight banner program, and the digital freeway sign program.) 
Signs posted on trees, utility poles, traffic sign posts, light posts, traffic signals or any other official traffic-control device, in accordance with Section 21464 of the California Vehicle Code (excludes approved decorative streetlight banners). 
Signs placed or maintained so as to interfere with free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or parking lot. 
Signs which simulate or imitate in size, color, lettering or design any traffic sign or signal, or which make use of words, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Signs which are prohibited in a specific plan, master plan, area plan, or similar land use document adopted by the city council. 
Vehicles used only for general signage or parked in a place or manner where the primary purpose is not the use of the vehicle but the primary placement is to display a commercial message. 
 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014) 
_____ 
17.75.030 - Basic policies. 
The policies and principles stated in this section apply to all signs within the regulatory scope of this chapter, and to all procedures set forth in, or invoked by, this chapter. These policies are to prevail over any other provision to the contrary, even if more specific. 
A.  Administration and Enforcement Authority. The planning director is authorized and directed to administer the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police and planning director are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Minor and Major Signs. The city council shall adopt, by resolution, and maintain a list of sign types that are determined minor signs or major signs. The regulatory and design review of these signs shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  Major signs shall be reviewed by the design review board. 
2.  Minor signs shall be reviewed administratively by city planning staff. At the specific request of any interested party or staff, any minor sign application may be referred to the design review board for an administrative decision. 
C.  Message Neutrality. It is the city's policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner that is content neutral as to noncommercial messages which are within the protections of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the corollary provisions of the California Constitution. 
D.  Strict Application of Numerical Standards Not Required. In general, no sign should exceed the number, size, height and location limitations of the district in which it is located. However, as rigid numerical or other design standards may preclude exceptional design that might better achieve the purpose and objectives of this chapter, exceptions to the stated numerical or design standards, including size, shape, and location, may be approved by the approving authority when appropriate, provided any resulting determinations or approvals shall be supported by clear and descriptive findings that are consistent with and which achieve one or more of the purposes and the objectives of this chapter. No design exceptions may be approved for prohibited signs. For any approval of a sign which does not strictly conform to the stated numerical and design standards set forth in this chapter, the applicable general development plan, or an approved sign program for a specific development or district, the approving authority must first make the following findings in writing: 
1.  The proposed sign achieves the purposes and objectives of this sign ordinance; 
2.  The proposed sign exemplifies innovation and creativity and is appropriate and consistent with the architecture and context of the building and the neighborhood where the sign will be located; and 
3.  The proposed sign is consistent with all applicable sign guidelines or has been determined by the approving authority to better achieve the purpose and objectives of this sign ordinance than the strict application of said sign guidelines and standards; 
E.  Regulatory Interpretations. All regulatory interpretations of this chapter are to be exercised in light of the city's message neutrality policy. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a "structure" as defined in the building code, then the approving authority shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this chapter. 
F.  Substitution of Messages. Subject to the property owner's consent, a protected noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly permitted or allowed noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this chapter. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over protected noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or land use; does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted; does not allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; does not allow the substitution of an off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message; and does not allow one particular on-site commercial message to be substituted for another without a permit. 
G.  Rules for Noncommunicative Aspects of Signs. All rules and regulations concerning the noncommunicative aspects of signs, such as location, size, height, illumination, spacing, orientation, etc., stand enforceable independently of any permit or approval process. 
H.  Off-site/On-site Distinction. Within this chapter, the distinction between on-site (or on-premises or point of sale) and off-site or off-premises applies only to commercial speech messages. 
I.  Property Owner's Consent. No sign may be displayed without the consent of the legal owner(s) of the property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. For purposes of this policy, "owner" means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to possession, control or use of the property. 
J.  Legal Nature of Signage Rights and Duties. As to all signs attached to real or personal property, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from this chapter attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. This provision does not modify or affect the law of fixtures, sign-related provisions in private leases regarding signs (so long as they are not in conflict with this chapter), or the ownership of sign structures. 
K.  Sign Programs. Sign programs for specific developments, as well as special sign districts or special sign overlay zones, when approved by the approving authority, may modify the rules stated herein as to sign size, height, illumination, spacing, orientation or other noncommunicative aspects of signs, but may not override or modify any of the basic policies stated in this section. All provisions of this section shall automatically apply to and be deemed a part of any sign program approved after the date on which this provision is initially adopted. 
L.  Severance. If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion or provision of this chapter is held invalid or, unconstitutional, or unenforceable, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or provision of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid portion. In adopting this chapter, the city council affirmatively declares that it would have approved and adopted the chapter even without any portion which may be held invalid or unenforceable. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.040 - Standards. 
All signs shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, and the requirements of all duly adopted sign design guidelines. 
A.  Illumination. 
1.  The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not cause adverse glare to surrounding areas. 
2.  Except where otherwise expressly permitted, no sign shall be equipped with blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other illuminating device which has a changing light intensity, brightness or color. 
B.  Placement of Signs. 
1.  Commercial signs shall be located on or within five hundred feet of the property on which the business product, service, or other commercial activity which is being advertised is located, except that commercial signs for businesses located on Granite Drive shall be located on or within one thousand feet of the property on which the business product, service, or other commercial activity which is being advertised is located. Whenever an off-site sign is placed on another property, the off-site sign shall be deducted from the number and area of signs allowed on the property where the off-site sign is located. 
2.  All signs that project over or into the public right-of-way must conform and are subject to an encroachment permit. 
3.  Building signs shall be placed so as not to project above the roof line, except signs may be placed on a parapet wall, and up to the ridge of a mansard roof. 
4.  At street intersections, no sign exceeding thirty inches in height shall be erected within the "clear view zone" as defined in Section 17.75.120. 
5.  Signs placed at or near driveway entries shall not obstruct the view of drivers entering or leaving driveways. 
6.  Signs shall not be placed on trees, utility poles, benches and fences. 
7.  Signs shall not be placed in such a manner as to obstruct a door, window, or fire escape of any building. 
8.  Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any property line adjacent to a street or the street right-of-way. 
9.  Signs shall not be placed and/or designed in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. Examples of such sign placement and/or design include, but are not limited to, signs which interfere with traffic sight distances, traffic flow or the visual access to a traffic sign; and signs with color, configuration, text or location which cause them to be mistaken for, or otherwise imitate, a traffic sign or signal. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  All signs shall be constructed in accordance with applicable requirements of R.M.C. Chapter 15.04, Uniform Construction Codes. 
2.  Permanent signs shall be constructed of durable materials. 
3.  Use of banner signs as permanent signs is prohibited. 
D.  Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a substantially like new condition. Failure to maintain the sign in its approved condition constitutes a violation of this chapter of the Rocklin Municipal Code. Normal wear and tear of aged signs shall be repaired when they detract from the visible quality of the sign, as determined by the planning director based on the current condition of the sign compared to the appearance of the sign when first installed. Exposed surfaces shall be cleaned and painted if necessary. The structural integrity of signs shall be maintained at all times. Defective parts shall be replaced. Any sign in a state of disrepair is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to Chapter 8.04. When signs are repaired, they must be done so in a manner (paint colors shall match, etc.) that is consistent with the terms of the sign permit. When signs are removed, the wall behind the sign shall be repaired and painted to match the rest of the building wall within thirty days of the date of the removal. 
E.  Abandoned or Unsafe Signs. An abandoned sign, as defined in Section 17.75.120 of this chapter, including its supporting structure, which after a lapse of at least sixty days, no longer identifies the current occupant, or which relates to a time or event which no longer applies, constitutes false advertising/identification and shall be deemed a public nuisance. The abandoned sign, along with any supporting structure, shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the property on which it is located within thirty days' of written notice by the city. Any sign that, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe or insecure, shall be deemed an unsafe sign and a public nuisance, and shall be corrected or removed, together with any supporting structure, by the owner of the sign or the owner of the property on which the sign is located, as directed by the building official. Abandoned and unsafe signs are prohibited and the removal shall be the responsibility of the owner of the sign or the owner of the property on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.050 - Permanent signs. 
Unless otherwise stated, the following regulations apply on a per lot basis. 
Regulations for Permanent Signs 
Type 	Zone/Use 	Number 	Max Height 	Area Limits 
Freestanding 					
	Dev Single Fam. and R2 residence 	Non-comm, real estate, incidental 
No illumination allowed 	1 per frontage in the common area 	6' 	16 SF 
	Developed lots in R3 	Non-comm and commercial 	Greater of 1 per entrance or frontage 	6' 	32 SF 
	2 signs may be allowed at a project entry if the signs are designed as an integral part of the project's entryway wall, as determined by the director. 
	Institutional in Residential 	Non-com or commercial 	Greater of 1 per entrance or frontage 	6' 	32 SF 
	Dev. Comm, BP, Industrial 	Non-com or commercial 	1 per 200 LF of street frontage 	1@15', then 6' 	100 SF and see notes 
Note 1 	Where more than one business is located on the same lot or in the same building, a joint use sign may be erected not to exceed 200 square feet. 
Note 2 	All parcels included in a single conditional use permit shall be considered a single parcel for purposes of calculating the max number of signs allowed. 
	Planned Development 				
	Signage restrictions for planned development (PD) districts shall be based on the requirements of the zoning district most comparable to the PD or land use in question. 
	Mixed Use 				
	Residential uses shall be treated as if they were located where that type of use would be allowed as a matter of right. 
	Nonresidential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where that particular use would be allowed, either as a matter of right or subject to a conditional use permit or similar discretionary process. 
	Commercial uses on the ground floor of a multi-story building where nonretail uses (e.g., office, residential) are located above the retail, regardless of the zoning district of predominant use, shall solely be regulated by the commercial sign standards. 
	Office uses above the first floor of a multi-story building where the ground floor uses are predominantly commercial in character shall be solely regulated by the office sign standards for building-attached signs. 
Freestanding Freeway Oriented 
	Dev. Comm, BP, Industrial 	Non-com or commercial 	1 per sign per parcel or project 	30' see note 	200 SF see note 
	Property must be within 100' of an interchange or I-80 freeway frontage, excluding Stanford Ranch/Hwy 65 interchange. 
	Height may be increased if a view obstruction exists at 30', the verifying procedure shall be as set forth in Section 17.75.060.D. 
	A sign area maximum of two hundred square feet for a single business or three hundred square feet for a joint-use sign. 
	All parcels included in a single conditional use permit shall be considered a single parcel for purposes of calculating the max number of signs allowed. 
Building Sign 					
	Dev Single Fam. and R2 residence 	Non-comm, real estate, incidental 
No home business signs allowed 	1 per residence 
(except for a single 2" × 10" sign as per Section 17.75.020.C.) 		2 SF 
	Developed lots in R3 	Non-comm and commercial 
No home business signs allowed 	2 per street frontage 
(except for a single 2" × 10" sign as per Section 17.75.020.C.) 		32 SF 
	Institutional in Residential 	Non-com or commercial 	2 per street frontage 		32 SF 
	Dev. Comm, BP, Industrial 	Non-com or commercial 	no limit on number, limit on sign area 		2 SF/LF of tenant bldg frontage to 100 SF maximum per building 
	A tenant building frontage which exceeds one hundred linear feet is allowed one additional square foot of sign area for each additional linear foot of tenant building frontage over one hundred feet. 
	Signs for uses in a building occupying a majority of the floor area, but with minimal tenant building frontage, shall be allowed a building sign of up to 100 SF area with design review approval. 
Notwithstanding the 100 SF building max, each tenant is allowed a minimum of 1 sign of up to 16 SF. 
Awning 					
	Dev. Comm, BP and Industrial 	Non-comm or commercial 	Deducted from freestanding or building sign area 		
	Location restricted to at least one foot below the top of parapet, the sill of a second floor window, and/or the lowest point of any cornice or roof overhang. 
Projecting Wall Sign 
	Dev. Comm, BP and Industrial 	Non-comm or commercial 	Deducted from freestanding or building sign area 		
	Location restricted to at least one foot below the top of parapet, the sill of a second floor window, and/or the lowest point of any cornice or roof overhang. 
An encroachment permit must be issued for any sign projecting over a sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
Signs shall be mounted as low as practicable, but with a minimum 8' clearance above a walking surface or 14' clearance to a vehicular roadway. 
The sign may not project more than 42" from the building face. 
Suspended 
	Dev. Comm, BP and Industrial 	Non-comm or commercial 	Deducted from freestanding or building sign area 		4 SF 
	Location below eave or canopy at least 8' above walking surface. 
 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.060 - Standards for specific sign types. 
A.  Awning Signs. The following standards apply to awning signs in all zoning districts where allowed: 
1.  Signs on awnings are limited to ground level or second story occupancies only. 
2.  Awnings shall not be internally illuminated. Direct exterior lighting may be allowed. Translucent awning materials are prohibited. 
B.  Directional/Directory Signs On-Site. The following standards apply to directory and directional signs in all zoning districts: 
1.  Maximum Sign Area. A sign shall not exceed ten square feet; except the director may authorize larger signs based upon special site/project characteristics. 
2.  Maximum Number. The maximum number of freestanding directional signs shall be one per driveway and one per service entrance. The maximum number of wall mounted signs shall be one per building frontage. Additional signs may be permitted if a health and safety need is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director. Directional signs no more than thirty inches in height and four square feet shall not be included when calculating the total number of signs. 
3.  Setback Requirements. A directional/directory shall be set back a minimum of five feet from a public right-of-way, plus one additional foot per foot of sign height over five feet, up to a maximum of ten feet. 
4.  Safety Requirements. A sign shall not project over the public property, vehicular easements, or rights-of-way, and shall not obstruct traffic safety visibility area, as determined by the approving authority. 
C.  Freestanding Signs. The following standards apply to freestanding signs in all zoning districts where allowed: 
1.  Separation. Multiple signs shall be separated by a minimum of seventy-five feet to ensure adequate visibility for all signs. The approving authority may waive this requirement where the locations of existing signs on adjacent properties would make the 75-foot separation impractical, or there is no other alternative. 
2.  Safety Requirements. A sign shall not project over public property, vehicular easements, or rights-of-way, and shall not obstruct a traffic safety sight area, as determined by the approving authority. 
3.  Street Address. To assist emergency response personnel in locating the site, freestanding signs should contain an illuminated street address plate. Numbers shall be a minimum of six inches in height. Street address numbers not exceeding six inches in height shall not be included in calculations of allowed sign area. 
4.  Setback Requirements. A freestanding sign shall be set back a minimum of three feet from a public right-of-way, plus one additional foot per foot of sign height over five feet, up to a maximum setback of twenty-five feet. 
5.  Landscaping. A freestanding sign shall be designed and constructed with accent landscaping at the base of sign to the approval of the approving authority. 
D.  Freeway-Oriented Signs. A freeway-oriented sign may be approved in compliance with the following requirements. 
1.  Permit Requirement. Use permit approval is required for a freeway-oriented sign. 
2.  Where Allowed. A freeway-oriented sign may be approved only on a parcel abutting the Interstate 80 or Highway 65 right-of-way within a nonresidential zoning district. 
3.  Height Limit. No freeway-oriented sign shall exceed a maximum height of thirty feet, unless the use permit allows greater height, as follows: 
a.  Criteria for Approval. A sign with a height greater than thirty feet may be approved only if the commission determines that the applicant has demonstrated that a freeway overcrossing, or its ramps, or trees or vegetation will significantly obstruct the visibility of the proposed sign from freeway travel lanes. 
b.  Procedure for Determining Allowed Height. The commission shall only approve a sign height over thirty feet the minimum increase in height necessary for the message area of the sign to clear the identified visual obstruction. The determination of maximum height by the commission shall be based on the following procedure, which shall occur prior to the public hearing on the use permit. 
(1)  The applicant shall arrange for a boom truck with a sign target to be on the site at the location of the proposed sign, with a tape measure attached to the top of the target so that an accurate ground reading of height can be determined. 
(2)  City staff will go to the site, pick up the applicant or applicant's representative, and drive Interstate 80 or Highway 65 from each direction of the target on the site, to visually verify that the target is set at the minimum height necessary to clear the visual obstruction. Staff will then record the height to the top of the target. 
(3)  City staff will report their findings to the commission in the staff report on the use permit. 
E.  Murals. A mural placed on the wall of a structure may be allowed in any commercial, mixed use, or industrial zoning district subject to design review, and as follows: 
1.  A mural without text visible from a public right-of-way may be approved in addition to (not counted as part of) the sign area allowed under this chapter; a mural with more than de minimus text shall comply with the sign area limitations applicable to the site. 
2.  Murals that illustrate the local setting and history as sources of inspiration are encouraged. 
3.  The approval of a mural shall require that the approving authority first find that the size, colors, and placement of the mural are visually compatible with the structure architecture, and that the mural will serve to enhance the aesthetics of the city. 
4.  The mural shall be provided a graffiti-resistant coating at the time of installation. 
F.  Projecting and Suspended Signs. The following standards apply to projecting signs in all zoning districts where allowed. 
1.  The maximum projection of a sign from a structure wall over a public right-of-way shall not exceed forty-two inches over a sidewalk. Larger projections from the structure wall over private property may be approved by the approving authority. Any projection over a public right-of way shall require an encroachment permit. 
2.  The top of a projecting sign shall not exceed the lesser of fourteen feet, eave height, parapet height, or sill height of a second floor window. No portion of the sign shall project above the eave line of a sloped roof or the top of the parapet on a flat roof. 
3.  A projecting sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet from the bottom of the sign to the finished grade below. 
4.  Icon signs using shapes or symbols uniquely suited to the business, creative shapes, and three-dimensional signs are encouraged. 
5.  Each sign shall be graphically designed for pedestrians, with a maximum area of nine square feet on each sign face, regardless of the length of the building frontage. 
6.  Sign supports shall be well-designed and compatible with the design of the sign. 
G.  Service Station Signs. Service station signs of instructive nature, information or otherwise required by other enforcement agencies are exempt from sign area limitations. The following signs are specifically exempt: telephone booth, gas pump use instructions, instructions for recreational vehicle waste dump station, brake and smog certification, restroom identification, no smoking, propane tank identification, gas pump identification, air and water, drive to forward pump, price signs, special, oil price, service available, and gas pump identification cashier, odd-even sign, hours of operation, required gallon to liter conversion, approved flag identification system, full- and self-service signs at each island not exceeding four square feet, and traffic directory signs as approved by enforcement agencies for necessary traffic control and direction provided that they do not exceed four square feet each and do not exceed thirty inches in height in front or side street yard and no symbol, name, or other message is on the signs. 
H.  Window Signs. 
1.  Except as allowed during the holiday shopping season, window signs shall not cover more than thirty-five percent of the area of each window. Total signage placed on any window may not include unused signage amounts allowable for other windows. 
2.  For the purpose of defining window area, multiple windows separated by mullions or frames of less than four inches are considered a single window. 
3.  Window sign area shall not be considered in computing the maximum allowed building signage. 
4.  During the holiday shopping season, as defined in Section 17.75.120 below, window signs are unrestricted except that, for safety purposes, a clear line of sight view corridor from the exterior of the building to the cash register/checkout area must be established and maintained. 
I.  Flags (noncommercial speech). Flags may be displayed without a permit at all times and in all zones. All poles must comply with applicable Building Code requirements. Flags are limited to the display of noncommercial speech unless specifically allowed as a temporary special advertising sign. Flag display is subject to the following standards: 
1.  Complexes of Commercial, Office and Industrial Uses. Each complex of commercial, office or industrial uses, consisting of three or more uses on a single parcel or contiguous parcels with common off-street parking and access, may display not more than three maximum sixty-square-foot flags on not more than three maximum thirty-five-foot-high poles. If separate poles are used, the distance from one pole to another may not exceed twenty feet. Any illumination shall be oriented and shielded not to glare into adjacent properties. 
2.  Residential Subdivisions and Condominiums. Each residential subdivision or condominium with new, previously unoccupied dwelling units for sale may display one flag, maximum twenty-five-square-foot on a twenty-foot-high pole, per model home in a model home complex. Such poles must be situated not closer than ten feet from the public right-of-way and within twenty feet of the model complex or sales office. A residential subdivision or condominium is considered to be all lots under a parent tract number including all phases. 
3.  Apartments and Mobile Homes. Complexes of four or more apartments or mobile homes sharing common private access and/or parking may display not more than three maximum twenty-five square foot flags on not more than three maximum twenty-foot-high poles. If separate poles are used, the distance from one to another may not exceed ten feet. 
4.  All Other Nonresidential Uses. Each occupied parcel containing a nonresidential use, other than described in [Section] 19.620.120.A, may display not more than three maximum sixty-square-foot flags on not more than three maximum thirty-five-foot-high poles. If separate poles are used, the distance from one pole to another may not exceed ten feet. 
E.  All Other Residential Uses. Each occupied parcel containing a residential use, other than described in paragraphs 19.620.120.B and C, may display one maximum twenty-five-square-foot flag on one maximum twenty-foot-high pole. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.070 - Temporary signs. 
In addition to permanent signs allowed under Section 17.75.050, temporary signs are allowed as provided in this section. Unless otherwise stated, the following regulations apply on a per lot basis: 
A.  Real Estate Signs. For real estate offered for sale, rent or lease (not including transient occupancy). Subject to the regulations and conditions stated in this subsection, the signs described in this subsection may be displayed without permits. The signs allowed under this subsection shall be removed not more than fifteen days after the proposed transaction has closed, or the property is withdrawn from the market. 
1.  Residential Properties. On all properties with a residential principal use, one temporary freestanding unlighted maximum nine-square-foot real estate sign may be displayed per street frontage not to exceed six feet in overall height. Such signs shall be removed within fifteen days following the closing of the proposed transaction, or the withdrawal of the offer or solicitation. 
2.  All Nonresidential Properties. On nonresidential properties, and properties containing both legal residential and nonresidential uses, real estate signs may be displayed, using either of the following options: 
a.  Freestanding Signs. One maximum twenty-four-square-foot, eight-foot-high, double-faced, freestanding for sale, rental or lease sign per street frontage is permitted. On sites having more than one frontage or on interior lots at least two and one-half acres in size, an option of placing the sign faces at a forty-five-degree angle to each other is permitted. Signs shall be located no closer than three feet from public sidewalks and twelve feet from the curbline or from the pavement where curbs are lacking. In no case shall signs be placed in the public right-of-way. In the event a building sign is installed as permitted in paragraph b. of this subsection below, the freestanding sign herein described shall not be permitted. 
b.  Building Signs. In lieu of a permitted freestanding sign, one for sale, rental or lease building sign per frontage, a maximum twenty-four square feet in area, shall be permitted for buildings or occupancies within sixty-three feet from the curbline or from the pavement where curbs are lacking. In the event a freestanding sign or signs are installed as permitted in paragraph a of this subsection, the building sign herein described shall not be permitted. 
c.  Time Limit. Such signs shall be removed within fifteen days following close of escrow or finalization of sale, rental or lease. 
B.  Subdivision Identification and Directional Signs. 
1.  Subdivision Signs, On-Site. On-site subdivision identification signs may be allowed with sign permit approval, in compliance with the following standards: 
a.  A maximum of four on-site signs may be located within the project boundaries; provided, no more than one sign for each street frontage is allowed, and multiple signs shall be separated by a minimum of seventy-five feet; 
b.  The area of each sign shall not exceed twenty-four square feet; 
c.  Sign height shall not exceed six feet; 
d.  The signs shall not be illuminated; and 
e.  The signs may be displayed only during the two years following date of recordation of the final map, or until all of the units have been sold, whichever first occurs. 
2.  Subdivision Directional Signs, Off-Site. Off-site signs providing directions to a new subdivision may be allowed with sign permit approval, and shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  A maximum of two off-site signs may be located on private property (not within any public right-of-way); 
b.  The total area of each sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet; 
c.  The height of each sign shall not exceed eight feet; 
d.  The signs shall not be illuminated; 
e.  The signs may be displayed only during the two years following date of recordation of the final map, or until all of the units have been sold, whichever first occurs; 
f.  The signs shall not affect pedestrian or vehicular safety; 
g.  The signs shall be removed when the last home within the subdivision is sold. Any sign found in violation of any provision herein may be removed by city personnel; and 
h.  Any subdivision sign program found to be in violation of any provision herein may be grounds for the denial of future renewal permits. 
C.  Construction Signs. Construction identification signs may be allowed without a permit in all zoning districts in compliance with the following standards: 
1.  Only one sign, located on-site, shall be allowed; 
2.  The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet; 
3.  Sign height shall not exceed eight feet; 
4.  The sign shall not be illuminated; 
5.  A construction sign shall not be allowed if an on-site subdivision sign is approved; and 
6.  Construction signs shall be removed within thirty days after completion of construction. 
D.  Noncommercial Signs. Noncommercial signs are allowed without a sign permit provided that the signs: 
1.  Are installed with the property owner's consent; 
2.  Do not exceed the maximum area limits set forth in Section 17.75.050 for allowable permanent freestanding signs in each zone and for each type of development, and on any residential single family lot, a cumulative area limit for all signs of fifty square feet; 
3.  Do not exceed a maximum height of six feet, and are not illuminated; 
4.  If freestanding are set back a minimum of five feet from any property line, and are not placed within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant, street sign, or traffic signal, and do not interfere with, confuse, obstruct, or mislead traffic; 
5.  Are not placed unlawfully. The placement of a sign in the public right-of-way in violation of this chapter or any other provisions of the Municipal Code is a nuisance, and any sign so placed may be removed summarily and disposed of by the city; and 
6.  Each sign shall be removed within ten days after the conclusion of the political campaign or event to which they relate. A sign that is not removed may be removed by the city at the expense of the political candidate or organization involved. 
7.  Notwithstanding the above, there shall be no restriction on the number and size of temporary noncommercial signs in all districts for the period commencing forty-five days before a general or special election, as defined in the California Election Code, and ending five days after such elections. 
E.  On Site Project Development Signs. Project identification signs of current and pending development applications with a sign area of thirty-six square feet sign and a six-foot height limit. 
F.  Special Advertising Permits Required. Up to three times per calendar year a special advertising permit may issue for the purpose of publicizing special events, either commercial or noncommercial, including, but not limited to, grand openings, new management, sales, Christmas tree or other holiday oriented lots, parades and fairs that are to take place within the city, subject to the following conditions and including the listed types of signs and devices: 
1.  Each special advertising permit is valid for twenty consecutive days. There is no requirement that the displayed devices remain in place for twenty days. The permits may run concurrently. A permit shall be valid for up to any three of the types of advertising devices listed below in subsection F.5., at any one time. 
2.  An application for a special advertising permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the director and accompanied by a fee in an amount established by city council resolution. The application shall describe the dimensions and location of the proposed advertising display by means of a drawing or sketch and written description, and the proposed display dates. The director, or designee, shall review the request within five working days after receipt and approve, approve with modification, or deny the request in writing; if the application is denied, the reasons shall be stated in the written denial. Applications which conform to all applicable laws, rules, and regulations shall be approved unless such laws, rules and regulations are under consideration for possible revision. 
3.  The director shall maintain a log of special advertising permits approved for each applicant. If the director is notified prior to installation of the temporary signs that the signage will not be used, the application will be canceled and the permit issued will not be deducted from the total number of permits remaining for the calendar year. If a sign is installed without approval of the director, or designee, it shall be deducted from the total number of days available at a rate of two days for every one day that the unapproved signs are displayed. 
4.  Signs and/or advertising devices which are installed or displayed without approval of the director are in violation of this chapter. Each sign shall have the permit number legibly displayed on the sign face or sign structure. 
5.  Standards for specific advertising signs and devices are as follows: 
a.  A-Frames and sidewalk portable signs: 
i.  Sign Size. Each sign shall not exceed a width of thirty inches. Sign height shall be limited to forty-eight inches. Sign height shall be measured perpendicular from the placement surface to the highest point of the A-frame sign. 
ii.  Sign Placement. An A-frame sign shall be placed only on private property within the boundaries of the applicable business' street frontage, and shall be positioned so that it will not: 
a)  Obstruct required ADA sidewalk clearance; 
b)  Impede any line of sight for motorists or bicyclists at public street intersections, as recommended by the city engineer; or 
c)  Interfere with people exiting and entering parked cars. 
iii.  Design and Construction Standards. The approving authority shall approve an A-frame sign only if it first determines that the design and appearance of the sign, including any graphics and/or text, will reflect attractive, professional design, and that the sign will be durable and stable when in place. 
iv.  Stabilization. The sign shall be stabilized to withstand wind gusts or shall be removed during windy conditions. 
v.  Daily Removal. The sign shall be removed at the close of business each day. 
vi.  Maintenance. The sign shall be continuously maintained in good condition with no peeling paint or other deterioration. 
b.  Banners: 
i.  A Banner Sign May be Erected and Maintained On-Site for an Establishment. These signs shall not replace the primary permanent identification sign(s) for the establishment, and the establishment must have a permanent sign application on file with the city. 
ii.  Number and Duration. No more than one such banner sign may be erected per establishment at any one time. This sign shall be required to be kept in a good state of repair and preservation. These signs shall be made of durable material, and shall be subject to the same maintenance provisions as permanent signs. 
iii.  Design. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not contain moving parts. 
iv.  Maximum Total Square Footage. The following standards will be utilized in determining the maximum sign square footage allowed per establishment: 
a)  Buildings or tenant spaces within a building complex having less than fifty linear feet of building frontage are allowed sixty square feet. 
b)  Buildings or tenants spaces within a building complex having more than fifty linear feet of building frontage but less than one hundred feet of building frontage are allowed eighty square feet. 
c)  Buildings or tenant spaces within a building complex having more than one hundred feet of building frontage are allowed one hundred twenty square feet. 
v.  Location. A banner sign shall not be freestanding and shall be affixed to the face of a building or permanent freestanding sign. If attached to a freestanding sign it shall be fully adhered to the face of the existing sign and be restricted to only one sign per center/use. Banner signs shall be restricted to the building areas that front onto a street or parking lot directly adjacent to the establishment for which the sign is posted. Sign locations shall also conform to the location standards established for permanent signs and are allowed to be posted in the areas permitted for permanent signage under the sign ordinance or an approved planned sign permit program. When affixed to a building these signs shall not extend above the roofline or parapet of the structure. 
c.  Balloons. 
i.  Size: not to exceed sixteen inches in diameter. 
ii.  Mounting: A grouping of balloons is limited to no more than five, must be attached to or mounted at one end to a legal structure and securely anchored to survive windy conditions. The length of the mounting string is the lesser of twenty feet or the distance from the face of the building frontage to the right-of-way. May not be attached and/or affixed to trees or shrubbery. 
iii.  Display Time: Must be removed from public view at the close of operations each day. 
iv.  Location: Cannot be placed in, project into, or fly above the right-of-way or pedestrian path of travel. 
v.  Visual Interference: cannot interfere with either pedestrian sight distance or vehicular sight distance, any view corridor or obstruct visibility to any existing business or existing permanent sign. 
d.  Feather Flag Signs. 
i.  No more than three feather type flag signs per business at any one time and shall be placed only on private property within the boundaries of the applicable business' street frontage. 
ii.  Feather flags must be secured and stabilized so as to withstand wind gusts, or be removed during windy conditions. 
iii.  Visual interference: cannot interfere with either pedestrian sight distance or vehicular sight distance, any view corridor or obstruct visibility to any existing business or existing permanent sign. 
iv.  Display time: Must be removed from public view at the close of operations each day. 
e.  Flags or Pennants with Commercial Speech or Logos. 
i.  Flags or pennants with commercial signage or graphics are allowed at residential subdivision model homes, condominium sales offices, and multi-family apartment or condominium complexes provided a special advertising permit has been issued subject to subsection e.ii below. 
ii.  Each residential subdivision or condominium with new, previously unoccupied dwelling units for sale may display one flag, maximum twenty-five-square-foot on a twenty-foot-high pole, per model home in a model home complex, or for multi-family complexes, three flags are allowed. Such poles must be situated not closer than ten feet from the public right-of-way and within twenty feet of the model complex or sales office. A residential subdivision or condominium is considered to be all lots under a parent subdivision number including all phases. 
f.  Inflatable Devices and Ambient Air Balloons. 
i.  No more than one inflatable advertising devices may be displayed at any one site during any allowed time period. 
ii.  Height of the device may not exceed thirty feet from the ground, measured from the ground to the highest point on the inflatable device. 
iii.  No inflatable allowed by this section shall exceed one hundred fifty square feet or exceed fifteen feet in height. 
g.  Commercial Mascots. No more than one commercial mascot may be utilized during any allowed time period per special advertising permit. All sign display activities of commercial mascots must be conducted on private property. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.080 - Whitney Ranch Wayfinding Kiosk Program. 
A.  The purpose of the Whitney Ranch Wayfinding Kiosk Program (the "kiosk program") is to promote development of the Whitney Ranch Project so as to direct the traffic related to new residential subdivisions in a manner that minimizes visual clutter, reduces unnecessary traffic through established neighborhoods, and provides an orderly, attractive, high quality image of the Whitney Ranch Project and the city. 
B.  As used in this section, a wayfinding kiosk is a freestanding sign structure that identifies, and provides directional arrows for, the Whitney Ranch Project generally, new residential subdivisions and their associated sales centers, future land uses of undeveloped parcels, village commercial centers, and community assets such as schools, parks and recreation centers. Also included are nonresidential disclosure signs as required by condition B.7.a.(4)(a) of Subdivision Resolution No. 2004-311 and described in the design review application (DR-2005-12) being processed concurrently. 
C.  The planning commission is hereby designated as the reviewing body for the architecture and design of the wayfinding kiosks for the Whitney Ranch Wayfinding Kiosk Program and may impose conditions of approval on the kiosk program to effectuate the purpose and intent of this section. By resolution of the planning commission, the duties imposed by this part may be delegated to the city manager, community development director or their designee. 
D.  Wayfinding kiosks shall be designed as architecturally enhanced structures, that include features such as a roof element, decorative cap and cornice detail, stone-clad or masonry-clad columns, stone-clad or masonry-clad foundation, carved or sculptured wood construction, or other architectural features as determined by the planning commission. 
E.  Wayfinding kiosks shall be located to eliminate or minimize to the greatest extent feasible, any obstruction to the view of traffic or safety signs, encroach within vision triangles, or otherwise pose a traffic hazard as determined by the city engineer and/or director of public works. 
F.  To further the purposes of the kiosk program, the installation of subdivision kiosks shall be in lieu of installing individual off-site subdivision signs allowed by any other part of this chapter. No sign permits shall be approved for home builders or developers eligible to participate in the kiosk program. However, should the Whitney Ranch master developer fail to implement the Whitney Ranch Wayfinding Kiosk Program in a fair and timely manner, any developer or home builder aggrieved by the failure of the master developer to implement the kiosk program in a fair and timely manner may, upon a showing of substantial evidence of unfairness in implementation, be exempted from this requirement by the community development director, who will consider and act upon sign permit applications from said developers or home builders as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.090 - Digital freeway sign program. 
A.  Digital freeway sign means an off-site sign utilizing digital message technology, capable of changing the static message or copy on the sign electronically. A digital freeway sign may be internally or externally illuminated. Digital freeway signs shall contain static messages only, and shall not have animation, movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the sign. Each static message shall not include flashing, scintillating lighting or the varying of light intensity. A digital freeway sign consists of a digital display area and a sign structure. 
B.  Digital freeway signs shall be in addition to all other signs allowed by Chapter 17.75, the locations and heights of digital freeway signs shall be governed by this section. Heights of digital freeway signs shall be established relative to topography and setting so as to provide the best balance between the signs purpose of effectively communicating a visual message, the setting including topography and surrounding architecture, and freeway traffic safety. However, in no case shall a digital freeway sign exceed a maximum height of sixty-five feet as measured from the center line of the nearest freeway to the top of the digital freeway sign structure. Subject to the limitations of this section, and notwithstanding the provisions of the applicable general development plans, digital freeway signs shall be a permitted use in all PD zones allowing nonresidential uses. 
C.  Digital freeway signs shall only be permitted when the city has entered into an operating agreement with a digital freeway sign owner to allow for digital billboards under certain circumstances; including (i) compensation to the city; (ii) the permanent removal of at least three off-site, pre-existing freeway billboards from within the city; (iii) the provision of access to the city to a portion of the total available display time to allow the city to present messages of community interest and information, and public safety; (iv) the provision of access to the appropriate agencies for the purpose of displaying "Amber Alert" messages and emergency-disaster communications; and (v) to establish quality and maintenance standards. 
D.  No single applicant shall be permitted to seek approval for more than three digital freeway signs. Provided at least three or more existing freeway billboard structures have been removed, up to three digital freeway signs shall be allowed in the city separated as follows: one on the Interstate 80 corridor, one on the State Route 65 By-Pass route, and one on the balance of the State Route 65 corridor. 
E.  All digital freeway signs shall be subject to design review consistent with the Rocklin Municipal Code. 
F.  Minimum distance of a digital freeway sign from residential uses shall be three hundred feet from the base of the sign to a parcel on which a residential use is located, as such use exists on the date the digital freeway sign design review is approved by the city. 
G.  Minimum Display Time. Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds. 
H.  Maximum Face Size. Each face of the sign will be no larger than fourteen feet by forty-eight feet in dimension (total six hundred seventy-two square feet) plus framing. Digital freeway signs are exempt from the area limitations in Section 17.75.050, Permanent Signs. 
I.  Illumination Standards. Digital freeway sign illumination is expressly permitted and when operated within these standards, does not violate Section 17.75.040.A. Digital freeway signs shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.3 foot candles above ambient light, as measured using a foot candle meter at a pre-set distance. Distance to measure the foot candles impact shall be measured from a distance of two hundred fifty feet for a sign with a nominal face size of fourteen feet by forty-eight feet. Each display must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness as ambient light conditions change. 
J.  Future Technologies. The technology currently being deployed for digital freeway signs is LED (light emitting diode), but there may be alternate, preferred or superior technology available in the future. Owners of digital freeway signs are authorized to change the digital freeway signs to any other technology that operates under the maximum brightness standards in subsection J of this section. The city shall expedite any required approvals for technology that is superior in energy efficiency over previous generations or types. 
K.  The digital freeway signs shall be operated with systems and monitoring in place to either turn the display off or show a "full black" image on the display in the event of a malfunction. 
L.  After receiving approval to install a digital freeway sign(s) owners of digital freeway signs may at any time add or remove digital faces to their sign structures. However, the following shall apply: 
1.  Any prior sign removals completed as a part of the operating agreement approval of the digital freeway sign(s) shall not be reinstated. 
2.  The number of physical sign faces shall not be increased. 
3.  The overall size of the sign faces shall not be increased by more than five percent. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.100 - Permit requirements and procedures. 
A.  The planning director or his/her designee shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no sign (permanent or temporary) or special advertising display shall be installed, erected or displayed until the director has determined that its design and placement comply with all requirements of this chapter and has issued a sign permit or special advertising permit to the applicant and proprietor of the sign or display. 
2.  A sign permit is not required to repair, clean, repaint or refurbish any existing sign, unless such activity involves the replacement, reconstruction or relocation of the sign. 
3.  No permit is required for changing the copy of a sign provided: (a) there are no changes to the sign structure or cabinet, and (b) the area of the sign is not being enlarged. 
B.  An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the director and accompanied by a fee in an amount established by city council resolution. In the case of after-the-fact permitting, the otherwise applicable fee shall be doubled. The application shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number and signature of the owner or lessee, or contractor of the property upon which the sign is to be located; 
2.  A plot plan which shows the location of the building or lot, upon which sign is to be placed; 
3.  A dimensioned elevation of the building on which the sign is to be placed with the location of the sign clearly identified; 
4.  A scaled or dimensioned drawing of the sign and its relative location on the building and/or location of freestanding signs on the lot; 
5.  A plan indicating the location, height, and size of all existing signs on the lot and/or tenant building frontage. 
C.  The director shall review a completed sign permit application and shall issue the sign permit upon determination that the sign meets the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  The director's decision may be appealed to the design review board, and the commission's decision may be appealed to the council under Chapter 17.86. 
E.  Issuance of a sign permit shall not relieve the applicant from complying with all other applicable laws relating to displaying or erecting a sign, including, but not limited to, obtaining any required sign or electrical permit under R.M.C. Chapter 15.04, Uniform Construction Codes. 
F.  Duration and Extension. If a building permit has not been granted within two years of the date of approval of the sign permit or if a sign not requiring a building permit has not been installed within two years of the date of approval of the sign permit, the sign permit approval shall be null and void, unless extended by the approving authority. Requests for an extension shall be made in writing a minimum of ten days prior to the expiration date. 
G.  Effective Date and Appeals. Decisions of city planning staff shall become effective on the tenth day after the date of a decision, unless appealed by any interested party under section. 
H.  Permits Issued in Error. Any approval or permit issued in error may be summarily revoked by the city upon written notice, to the permittee, stating the reason for the revocation. "Issued in error" means that the permit should not have been issued in the first place and includes but is not limited to omissions, errors or misrepresentations in the application materials, and oversights or errors in the processing thereof. 
I.  Disqualification. No sign permit application will be approved under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  Uncured Violation of Sign Rules. No sign permit will be approved if the applicant as installed a sign in violation of the provisions of this chapter and, at the time of submission of the application, each illegal sign has not been legalized, removed or a cure included in the application. 
2.  Other Code Violations. No sign permit will be approved if there is any other existing zoning code violation(s) located on the site of the proposed sign(s) (other than an illegal or nonconforming sign that is not owned or controlled by the applicant and is located at a different business location on the site from that for which the approval is sought) which has not been cured at the time of the application, unless the noncompliance is proposed to be cured as part of the proposed new sign. 
3.  Previous Denial. No sign permit will be approved if the sign approval application is substantially the same as an application previously denied, unless either twelve months have elapsed since the date of the last application, or the applicant provides new evidence or proof of materially changed conditions, or the reasons for the earlier denial have been cured or will be cured as part of the new application. 
4.  Failure to Obtain Zoning Permits. No sign permit will be approved if the applicant has not obtained any other applicable required zoning permits. 
5.  Outstanding Unpaid Balance. No sign permit will be approved if the applicant has an outstanding unpaid balance for prior community development department services. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.110 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Nonconforming signs shall be permitted to remain until such time as any of the events listed in subsection B of this section occurs. At such time, the sign must be removed or brought into conformance with this chapter. 
B.  A nonconforming sign shall lose its status as a nonconforming sign if any of the following occurs: 
1.  The sign is relocated or replaced; 
2.  The structure, height or size of the sign is altered in any way except toward compliance with this chapter. Face changes and normal maintenance are allowed; 
3.  The sign structure is damaged or destroyed by more than fifty percent of its value at the time of damage or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.120 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given below: 
"Abandoned sign" means a sign whose message describes the availability of goods or services at a location where such goods or services are no longer available and have ceased to be available for a period of at least sixty days or, in the alternative, a sign which is noncommercial in nature and the content of the sign pertains to a time, event or purpose which has elapsed or expired in the preceding sixty days. Such abandonment shall include negligent or intentional conduct, such as failure to pay taxes or permit fees, or to maintain the sign. 
"Advertising statuary" means a structure or device of any kind or character for outdoor advertising purposes which displays or promotes a particular product or service, but without name identification. 
"Animated sign" means an inanimate structure, statue, mannequin, mechanical device using, carrying, or wearing a sign displaying a commercial message, and which uses mechanical or electrical movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or create visual motion or the appearance of visual motion. 
"Approving authority" means the designated initial approver for the sign review required by this chapter, either the planning director, design review board, the city council, or other body as designated by resolution of the city council. 
"Banner sign" means a temporary sign made of nonrigid material such as fabric, canvas, plastic or paper, and without an enclosing rigid framework. 
"Building sign" means a sign attached to a building and includes, but is not limited to, wall signs, banners, under canopy signs, projecting signs, awning signs, and window signs. 
"Channel letter (internally illuminated)" means a dimensional letter with a back, sides and a translucent front face capable of transmitting light from an internal light source within the letter. 
"Channel letter (reverse)" means a dimensional letter with a face and sides but no back, opposite to an open faced channel letter. A reverse channel letter has an open channel facing the wall or building to which it is affixed. A reverse channel letter may contain a source of illumination designed to project lighting against the surface behind the letter, commonly referred to as a backlit channel letter; also referenced as a halo or silhouette lighted channel letter. The face of a reverse channel letter does not illuminate. 
"Clear view zone" means the area of a corner lot closest to the intersection which must be kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Typically, such an area is established by marking a point at which the two curb lines intersect, measuring back twenty-five feet on each street front, and drawing a line across the two back points to form a triangulated area. 
"Commercial mascot" means a person or animal attired or decorated with commercial insignia, images or symbols, and/or holding signs displaying commercial messages, when a principal purpose is to draw attention to or advertise a commercial enterprise. Includes, but is not limited to, sign spinners and/or twirlers and sign clowns. 
"Commercial sign" means any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that names or advertises a business, location, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
"Common area" means land within or related to a development not individually owned or dedicated for public use, that is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents and their guests of the development and may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate. 
"Developed lot" means a lot or parcel containing a structure intended for occupancy. It also includes all of the area of a nonresidential use included in a single conditional use permit as long as at least one parcel has a structure intended for occupancy. 
"Directional sign" means any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
"Director" means the planning director of the city of Rocklin or his/her designated representative. 
"Electronic message center or sign (EMC)" means an electrically activated changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. Also known as an EMC. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting source. 
"Feather sign," "feather banner," or "feather banner sign" means a flexible pole to which one side of a flexible fabric, generally in the shape of a feather or similar shape, is attached, and which is used for the primary purpose of advertising or attention-getting by the public display of visually communicative images. Such banners are also known and sold under names which include, but are not limited to, "quill sign," "banana banner," "blade banner," "flutter banner," "flutter flag," "bowflag," "teardrop banners," and others. The definition includes functionally similar display devices. 
"Flag" means a piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular, of distinctive design, used as a symbol. Includes, but is not limited to, pennants, which are generally triangular in shape. 
"Flashing sign" means an illuminated sign in which artificial or reflected light is not intended to be maintained in a stationary or constant intensity. This includes a time and temperature recording device and electronic reader board. 
"Freestanding sign" means a sign which is self-supporting in a fixed location or supported on the ground by poles or braces, and not attached to a building or other structure. 
"Freeway interchange" means the right-of-way line of freeway ramps. Where improvements are proposed to the interchange, at the discretion of the city engineer, the right-of-way of the proposed interchange may be used for determining eligibility and location for freeway pole signs. 
"Holiday decorations" means nonpermanent signs or displays, including lighting, celebrating national, state and local holidays or holiday seasons. 
"Holiday shopping season" means that period of time from the third Monday in October through the second Sunday in January of the following year that is the traditional high peak sales period for retail stores. 
"Illegal sign" means a sign which is not a nonconforming sign and does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
"Illuminated sign" means any sign utilizing an artificial source of light (internal or external) to enhance its visibility. 
"Institutional uses" means churches, day care facilities, private schools, community care facilities, nursing homes and clubhouses, or other facilities owned by a homeowners association. 
"Lots along the I-80 freeway" means lots which share a common property boundary with the I-80 freeway or any of its interchanges. 
"Lux" means the SI (metric) unit for illuminance. One lux equals 0.093 foot candles. 
"Mobile messaging sign" means any off-site sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle, the principal purpose of which is general advertising. 
"New business" means the start of operation of a new business at a given location or the relocation of an existing business to a new location. Change in ownership of an existing business in and of itself shall not constitute a new business. 
"Noncommercial sign" means any sign which is not a commercial sign. 
"Nonconforming sign" means a sign which, though lawful when erected, would be prohibited under later-enacted changes to the regulations applicable to it. 
"Off-site" sign means any sign which advertises goods, products, services, establishment or facilities not sold or offered at the property on which the sign is located. 
"Portable sign" means all of the following within this definition: 1) any sign not permanently attached or designed to be permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure; 2) any sign designed to be transported by means of wheels, skids, runners, or moveable frames; 3) "A frame" or "T frame" signs; 4) menu and sandwich board signs, or 5) the functional equivalent of any of these categories. Commercial mascots are not within this definition. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign which uses a building or structure as its main source of support and contains copy that is perpendicular or at an angle to the building face. 
"Real estate sign" means a sign advertising that real property is for sale, lease, or exchange by the owner or his agent, giving directions to the property, and giving the owner's or agent's name, address and telephone number. 
"Roof-line" means the line formed by the junction of the top surface of the roof and the outside wall of any building, excluding any structure constructed solely as an architectural feature to extend height or to screen equipment. 
"Roof sign" means a sign placed upon, projecting from or extending above the eaves of the roof or the roof itself. A sign hanging from and below the eave is not a roof sign. 
"Sign" means a temporary or permanent public display of visible images which, either directly or indirectly, advertises, informs or identifies persons, businesses, commodities, services or ideas by the display of any communicative image or graphic, that attracts attention, when such is visible from any portion of the public right-of-way or from a private right-of-way that is open to public use, or any exterior place which is open to the public. The word "sign" includes, but is not limited to, all writing, trademarks, graphic illustrations and lighting primarily directed at facilitating communication, as well as supporting structures within sign area. Notwithstanding the generality of the foregoing, as applied to this chapter and Chapter 17.80, the following are not within the definition of sign: 
1.  Aerial signs or banners towed behind aircraft; 
2.  Architectural features: Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts), which do not perform a communicative function; 
3.  Fireworks, etc.; 
4.  Foundation stones and cornerstones; 
5.  Grave markers, grave stones, headstones, mausoleums, shrines, and other markers of the deceased; 
6.  Historical plaques; 
7.  Holiday and cultural observance decorations on private property which are on display in season for not more than forty-five calendar days per year (cumulative, per parcel or use) and which do not include commercial advertising messages; 
8.  Inflatable gymnasia. Inflatable, temporary, moveable, gymnasium devices commonly used for children's birthday parties, and similar devices. Also called "party jumps"; 
9.  Interior graphics. Visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof; 
10.  Manufacturers' marks. Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale; 
11.  Mass transit graphics. Graphic images mounted on duly licensed and authorized mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city; 
12.  Newsracks and newsstands; 
13.  Personal appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, wigs, costumes, masks, etc. (but not including commercial mascots or hand-held signs); 
14.  Search lights and klieg lights when used as part of a search and rescue or other emergency service operation; this exclusion does not apply to search lights or klieg lights used as attention attracting devices for commercial or special events; 
15.  Shopping carts, golf carts, horse drawn carriages, and similar devices; any motorized vehicle which may be legally operated upon a public road is not within this exclusion; 
16.  Symbols embedded in architecture. Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal; by way of example and not limitation, such symbols include stained glass windows on churches, carved or bas relief doors or walls, bells, religious statuary, etc.; 
17.  Vehicle and vessel insignia. On street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel; 
18.  Vending machines, automated intake devices and product dispensing devices which do not display offsite commercial messages or general advertising messages; 
19.  Window displays. The display of merchandise in a store window, when such merchandise is offered to the public for sale. 
"Sign area" means the following: The sign area of a sign with borders and/or background, or the total of the individual letters and graphics comprising the sign message, is measured by the use of one or more standard geometric shapes enclosing the exterior limits of the border, background, or letters and graphics. The necessary supports, uprights or base upon which the sign is placed shall be excluded from the sign area. The sign area of an individually lettered sign without background is measured by enclosing the entire sign with a set of parallel vertical and horizontal lines. Individual graphics incorporated into the sign display shall be measured by a single continuous perimeter enclosing the exterior limits of the graphic. In computing the area of double-faced signs less than two feet distance between faces only one side of the sign shall be computed as the total area. 
"Sign face change" means any changes to the letter style, size, color, background or message, but not including a change in the sign's location, height or an increase in the sign area. 
"Sign height" means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign to the upper surface of the grade beneath the sign. For signs which are oriented toward and located within one hundred feet of the freeway, located on parcels contiguous to I-80 or Highway 65, sign height shall be the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign to the upper surface of the center line of the nearest freeway travel lane, excluding freeway ramps. 
"Special advertising devices" means balloons, feather banner sign, mobile messaging sign, pennants and other physical devices used for advertising as approved by the planning director. 
"Special event sign" means any sign which advertises special events and activities including grand openings/closings, carnivals, parades, charitable events, sales including promotional sales, change of business address, change of ownership or lessee, business anniversaries, seasonal events, Christmas tree or other holiday oriented lots, public events that take place in the city, or any sign identifying a single one-time or infrequently occurring event that is outside of the normal activities of the responsible parties. 
"Street frontage" means the horizontal distance of a lot or portion thereof which abuts a public or private street. 
"Temporary sign" means a sign intended to display either commercial or noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature, which by virtue of its construction from lightweight or flimsy materials, and its installation with ordinary hand tools, is not physically suitable or intended for long term display, including, but not limited to pennants, banners, streamers, or similar attention getting devices. 
"Tenant building frontage" means the horizontal distance of a building or portion thereof occupied by a tenant measured along a wall facing a street, parking area, open space or pedestrian walkway. 
"Under canopy sign" or "under marquee sign" means a sign attached to the underside of a canopy or marquee. 
"Useful life" means the period of time over which a sign may reasonably be expected to be useful to the owner of a sign in his or her trade or business or in the production of income. Signs within the scope of Business and Professions Code 5490 are presumed to have a useful life of fifteen years. For all other permanent signs, when a sign manufacturer's estimate of useful life is available, that may be presumed to be accurate, unless there is contrary evidence. 
"Window sign" means a sign attached to, placed or painted upon, or placed within eighteen inches of, the window or glass door of a building, and/or is solely intended for viewing from the exterior of such building. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  It is illegal to use, occupy or maintain property in violation of this chapter. 
B.  Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
C.  If charged as an infraction, the minimum penalty for a first conviction is a fifty-dollar fine. For a second conviction within one year, the minimum penalty is a seventy-five-dollar fine. For a third or subsequent conviction within one year, the minimum penalty is a one-hundred-dollar fine. 
D.  A person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues. 
E.  Violation of this chapter which threatens to be continuing in nature is a public nuisance which may be abated or enjoined as such in accordance with Chapter 8.04 or any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
17.75.140 - Sign contractors. 
A.  Responsibility for Securing Permits. It shall be the duty of the contractor or person who erects, installs, paints, constructs or alters a sign to secure all necessary permits for such work. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or lessee to assure that the contractor is properly licensed and bonded, and that the contractor secures all necessary permits. No sign contractor shall install a sign for which a permit is required unless such permit has been duly issued before construction work begins. A sign permit shall not be issued unless the sign contractor's name and contact information appears on the permit application. 
B.  Identification Label. All permanent signs installed by sign contractors have attached to them an identification label, not over four square inches in size, which lists the following information: installed by (contractor's name), city permit number, electrical current, month and year erected. Said label shall not exceed four square inches. Said label, and all other labels, shall be placed as directed by the planning director. 
C.  Violations by Sign Contractors. Wherever a sign violation has occurred, it shall be the duty of the planning director to determine what sign contractor, if any, performed the sign work. The following procedure shall be followed in pursuing sign contractors installing signs for which a valid permit has not first been secured: 
1.  First Violation. A letter shall be sent by certified mail to the sign contractor setting forth the city's requirements for sign permits and indicating that future violations will result in a complaint being filed with the contractors' state license board and/or legal action being taken against said contractor. 
2.  Second Violation. An administrative citation shall be issued, and a complaint shall be filed with the contractors' state license board and a copy of such complaint shall be sent to the sign contractor with a letter indicating that legal action may be taken if further violations occur. All correspondence shall be by certified mail. 
3.  Third and Subsequent Violations. A second administrative shall issue or other legal action may be taken against the contractor, using any method authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 4(Exh. A), 1-28-2014)  
Chapter 17.76 - FENCES AND WALLS 
Sections: 
 
17.76.010 - Residential zones. 
Fences and walls may be erected in all residential zones as follows: 
A.  Within the required front yard setback area of all residential lots fences and walls may be erected to a height not exceeding thirty inches as measured from finished grade, except as allowed in Section 17.76.030. 
B.  Within the required street side yard setback area of reverse corner lots (as defined in Section 16.08.187) fences and walls may be erected to a height not exceeding thirty inches as measured from finished grade. 
C.  Outside of the required front yard setback area of interior and corner lots fences and walls may be erected along and inside the interior side, street side, and rear property lines to a height not exceeding six feet as measured from finished grade. 
D.  Outside of the required front yard or street side yard setback areas of reverse corner lots (as defined in Section 16.08.187) fences and walls may be erected along and inside the interior side and rear property lines and inside the line that forms the interior boundary of the street side setback to a height not exceeding six feet as measured from finished grade. See Figure 17.76.011.  
17.76.011 - Lot fencing figure. 
  
A STREET
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
17.76.020 - Nonresidential zones. 
Fences and walls may be erected in all nonresidential zones as follows: 
A.  Within the required front yard setback area and the required street side yard setback area, as applicable, of nonresidential lots fences, and walls may be erected to a height not exceeding thirty inches as measured from finished grade, except as allowed in Section 17.76.030. 
B.  Outside of the required front yard setback area and the required street side yard setback area, as applicable, of nonresidential lots fences, and walls may be erected along and inside the interior side and rear property lines and inside the line that forms the interior boundary of the street side setback to a height not exceeding eight feet as measured from finished grade. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
17.76.030 - Exceptions and deviations. 
A.  Within the required front yard setback area and the required street side yard setback area, as applicable, of residential lots located within the Rural Estate (RE), Rural Agricultural (RA), and multi-family residential zone districts, and all lots in nonresidential zone districts a decorative, nonsolid, tubular metal fence that is designed to allow visibility through and between the fence members may be erected to a maximum height of six feet. 
B.  The height limits specified in Sections 17.76.010 and 17.76.020 may be exceeded when authorized by an approved conditional use permit. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of [Section] 17.76.010, a six-foot fence may be located within the street side yard setback of a reverse corner lot, subject to the approval of the planning director, when he/she can make the required findings that the installation of the fence within the setback is not detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the residents of the city of Rocklin, and that the circumstances presented create a traffic/pedestrian interface that is substantially similar to typical residential lots. 
1.  The finding shall be based upon the unique circumstances of the layout of the fences, driveways, and relevant features of the applicant's lot and the lot(s) adjacent to the applicant's lot. Factors which could affect the ability to make the required findings include, but are not limited to: 
The topography of and /or grade differential between the affected lots; 
The existence of retaining walls and/or the need for retaining walls which may affect sight distance; 
The presence of unusual road curvatures; 
The location of the driveway on the lot adjacent to the reverse corner lot fence; 
Other physical circumstances that would create an inability to comply with standard visibility requirements. 
2.  Applications requesting that an administrative variance be issued by the director for a reverse corner lot fence location exception under this section shall be submitted on an application form provided by the city, and shall include at a minimum the name and contact information of the applicant, the site address and assessor's parcel number, a description of the type of fencing to be used and the proposed location. The application shall also include a site plan graphically depicting the proposed location of the fence. 
3.  Findings and final determinations made by the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission as set forth in Chapter 17.86. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011; Ord. No. 998, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
17.76.040 - Intersection height restriction. 
Notwithstanding Sections 17.76.010, 17.76.020 and 17.76.030, no fence, wall, or other structure may be erected that is not consistent with the Visibility Requirements contained in the City of Rocklin, Construction Specifications, Improvement Standards, and Standard Drawings approved by the City Council. (Staff Report Attachment 2) 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
17.76.050 - Materials. 
Fences and walls may be constructed of: 
A.  Wood; 
B.  Masonry; 
C.  Metal; 
D.  Chain link (see Section 17.76.055); 
E.  Wire (including barbed wire), only when used to enclose livestock as defined in the Rocklin Municipal Code § 6.04.130; 
F.  Decorative, tubular metal fencing. All tubular fencing shall be dark colored and have a smooth horizontal rail on top, pointed or open rod topped styles are prohibited; 
G.  Such other material as may be approved by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
17.76.055 - Chain link fencing rules. 
A.  Chain link fencing, with or without slats, may be used in commercial and industrially zoned areas when approved as part of a design review entitlement. 
B.  Chain link fencing, with or without slats, may be used in residential zone districts along interior side or rear lot lines but it may not be used in or along front or street side yards or be visible from the public right-of-way. 
C.  Chain link fencing that existed on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title it shall be treated as follows: 
1.  In a commercial or industrial zone district in where chain link fencing that had not been approved via a design review entitlement but was otherwise permitted may remain and be maintained. 
2.  In a residential zone district in where chain link fencing existed along a front or street side yard or was otherwise visible from the public right of way may remain and be maintained. However, when said chain link fencing is replaced an alternative fencing material as set forth in Section 17.76.050 must be used. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B8., 10-11-2011)  
Chapter 17.77 - OAK TREE PRESERVATION 
Sections: 
 
17.77.010 - Intent and purpose. 
By enacting this chapter of the Rocklin Municipal Code, to be known as the Rocklin Oak Tree Preservation Ordinance the city council finds that oak woodlands constitute a valuable natural resource within the city. They provide habitat for wildlife; they contribute to the city's beauty and varied scenery; they provide shade in parks as well as in developed areas; and they enrich soils and protect watersheds and streams from erosion. Oak woodlands have declined substantially in extent and quality, both locally and regionally. They are continuing to decline under pressures of range forage improvement, flood control, fire suppression and urbanization. The goal of this chapter is to address the decline of oak woodlands due to urbanization through a considered attempt to balance against the social benefits of private property ownership and development. To reach this goal, this chapter implements a comprehensive design review process for new development, offers incentives for oak tree preservation, and provides feasible alternatives and options to removal where practicable. This chapter is enacted in furtherance of Rocklin General Plan/Open Space Conservation and Recreation Element Policies 1 and 4. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.020 - Definitions. 
Within the context of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given below, unless otherwise specifically provided: 
A.  "Developed lot" means the following: 
1.  A lot zoned for single-family, duplex or triplex development, and subdivided down to its ultimate size consistent with the zone, with or without on-site improvements, but with completed subdivision improvements; 
2.  A lot zoned for multifamily, commercial or industrial use for which all discretionary entitlements, as well as design review approval under Chapter 17.72, have been approved and are effective. "Developed lot" shall not mean any lot which otherwise meets the requirements of this paragraph, but for which another discretionary entitlement, or a modification to an existing entitlement is being requested. Such lots shall be treated as undeveloped lots under this chapter. 
B.  "Guidelines" means the oak tree preservation guidelines adopted pursuant to Section 17.77.100 of this chapter. 
C.  "Heritage tree" means any oak tree with TDBH of twenty-four inches or more and which is of good or fair quality in terms of health, vigor of growth and conformity to generally accepted horticultural standards of shape for its species. 
D.  "Oak tree" or "tree" means an oak tree with a TDBH of six inches or more and of a species identified in the oak tree preservation guidelines by resolution of the city council as native to the Rocklin area. 
E.  "Property" means a lot or contiguous or noncontiguous lots, which, taken together, are proposed for development of a single project, whether or not phased. 
F.  "Removed," with reference to an oak tree, means the physical removal of the tree from the ground or the wilful injury, trimming, disfiguring or other harmful action which leads directly to physical removal or creates such a condition that makes disease likely or results in a significant risk of injury to persons or property. 
G.  "Surveyed trees" means all trees which are included in the arborist's tree survey required for a proposed project and are not located within an existing or proposed open space and conservation easement. 
H.  "TDBH" means trunk diameter of an oak tree at breast height, which is a point located four and one-half feet above the root crown. TDBH of multi-trunk trees shall be the TDBH of the largest trunk only. 
I.  "Transplanted trees" means a tree which is moved from a field grown location and replanted in a new location. Transplanted trees are not nursery grown container plants. 
J.  "Undeveloped property" means any property or lot which is not a developed lot. 
(Ord. 746 § 1, 1996; Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.030 - Prohibition. 
No person shall remove an oak tree located wholly or partially within the city unless the requirements of this chapter are fully met and a permit has been obtained from the director. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.040 - Developed lot—Removal of oak tree—Permit. 
A.  No oak tree shall be removed from a developed lot without first obtaining from the director an oak tree removal permit. 
B.  The director shall prepare and issue a form for making application for an oak tree permit. The form shall require the following information: 
1.  Condition of the tree; 
2.  Plot plan of the lot; 
3.  Reason and objective for removal; 
4.  Signature of the owner of the property on which the tree is located requesting or consenting to the removal; 
5.  Any other information as determined by the director to be necessary or convenient to evaluate the request. 
C.  Application for an oak tree removal permit shall be made by filing a completed application form with the director. 
D.  Within ten days of receipt of the application, the director or his authorized representative shall meet with the applicant to discuss the proposed tree removal and investigate alternative means to obtain the objective while minimizing the impact on the tree. One meeting shall be mandatory; additional meetings may be held if mutually agreed. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.045 - Developed lot—Removal of oak tree—Single-family, duplex and triplex. 
A.  With respect to tree removal applications for single-family residential, duplex or triplex developed lots, the director shall issue the permit after conclusion of the meetings described in Section 17.77.040(D), unless the applicant voluntarily withdraws the application. 
B.  If the applicant does not withdraw the application and the permit is to be issued, the applicant shall be required to mitigate the impact of the tree removal as described below: 
1.  If the director determines that the tree is dead or diseased to such an extent, or is in such a manner that the tree poses a risk of injury to person or property, no mitigation shall be required. 
2.  If the director determines that the tree is healthy, the applicant shall mitigate removal of the tree in one or a combination of the following ways, at the applicant's option: 
a.  Replacing each heritage oak tree removed with five trees on site, and each nonheritage tree removed with two trees on site; provided, that the maximum number of replacement trees required to be planted on any one lot shall not exceed five. The species, size and planting location of the replacement trees shall be in accordance with the guidelines; 
b.  Payment of a fee for each tree removed in an amount set by resolution of the city council into the Rocklin oak tree preservation fund. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.047 - Developed lot—Removal of oak tree—Multifamily, commercial and industrial. 
With respect to applications for a tree removal permit for multifamily, commercial or industrial developed lots, the director shall take action on the application at the conclusion of the meeting described in Section 17.77.040(D) in one of the following ways: 
A.  If the director determines that the tree proposed for removal is healthy, the permit shall be denied. 
B.  If the director determines that the tree is dead or diseased to such an extent or in such a manner that the tree poses a risk of injury to persons or property, the permit shall be issued, and the applicant shall be required to mitigate the impact of the tree removal in one or a combination of the following ways, at the option of the director: 
1.  Replacing each tree removed with one tree on site, the species, size and planting location of the replacement tree to be in accordance with the guidelines; 
2.  Payment of the fee for each tree removed in an amount set by resolution of the city council into the Rocklin oak tree preservation fund. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.050 - Undeveloped property—Tree preservation plan permit. 
A.  Preservation and removal of healthy oak trees from undeveloped property shall be addressed in the development application review process, and shall be governed by the guidelines adopted under Section 17.77.100. Removal of oak trees from undeveloped property shall require mitigation. 
B.  No healthy oak tree shall be removed from such property until the review process is completed and a tree preservation plan permit has been issued. 
C.  Application for a tree preservation plan permit shall be made on forms issued by the director. Completed applications shall be filed, processed and acted upon as part of the project development application. 
D.  The body issuing a tree preservation plan permit shall require mitigation for the removal as a condition of the permit and approval of the project. Required mitigation shall be governed by Sections 17.77.070 and 17.77.080 and the guidelines. 
E.  A bond or other security instrument in an amount not less than ten thousand dollars shall be required as a condition of issuance of the permit to protect those trees identified for preservation during the construction period. The form and amount of the security instrument shall be specified by the permit issuing body and approved by the city attorney. No grading or other on-site work shall be permitted until the security is posted. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a property owner may apply for an oak tree removal permit to remove a dead, dying or diseased oak tree from an undeveloped property where no tree preservation plan permit is pending. 
1.  With respect to applications for a tree removal permit for dead, dying or diseased trees on undeveloped lots, the director shall take action on the application at the conclusion of the meeting described in Section 17.77.040(D) in one of the following ways. 
a.  If the director determines the oak tree is dead, dying or diseased to such an extent or in such a manner that the tree poses a risk of injury to persons or property, the oak tree removal permit shall be issued. No mitigation shall be required for removing a dead, dying or diseased tree from an undeveloped property. 
b.  If the director determines that the oak tree is not dead, dying or diseased the application shall be denied. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.065 - Emergency removal of dangerous trees. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the director may authorize the immediate removal of any oak tree upon the written request of the owner or other person in legal possession of the property and upon making a determination that the tree, because it is dead or diseased, poses an immediate risk of injury to persons or property which risks cannot feasibly be removed in any other manner. The owner thereafter shall be required to mitigate the tree removal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.070 - Mitigation—General. 
All required tree mitigation shall conform to the guidelines and the following policies: 
A.  On-site mitigation through native oak tree replacement is the preferred mitigation method. 
B.  The location and condition under which replacement trees are planted must be carefully selected to allow for practicable and feasible future development to minimize the likelihood that future tree removal is not required, and to maximize the likelihood that the replacement trees will survive and thrive. 
C.  The ideal age and size of a replacement tree shall be as specified in the guidelines. 
D.  Transplanted trees, whether from on-site or off-site, may be accepted as replacement trees, but shall be given a discounted value, as specified in the guidelines, based on anticipated survival rates, as compared with nursery stock. The discounted value specified in the guidelines shall be reviewed from time to time. 
E.  Any replacement tree, including a transplanted tree, which dies within five years of being planted must be replaced on a one to one basis. 
F.  Where mitigation formulas use percentages, results will always be rounded up to the next whole number percentage. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.080 - Mitigation—Undeveloped property. 
Tree mitigation for undeveloped property shall conform to the following policies: 
A.  On property zoned B-P; C-1, 2, 3, 4; C-H; M-1, 2 or an equivalent PD zone, no fee payment, tree replacement, or land dedication will be required as mitigation for oak tree removal. In these zones, the following incentives shall be applied, upon request: 
1.  Projects which save twenty-five percent or more of the surveyed oak trees shall receive expedited processing by the community development department. 
2.  Defer city traffic mitigation and capital facilities fees as follows: 
a.  Saving twenty-five percent to forty-nine percent of the surveyed oak trees defers fee payment for three months. 
b.  Saving fifty percent to seventy-four percent of the surveyed oak trees defers fee payment for six months. 
c.  Saving seventy-five percent to ninety-nine percent of the surveyed oak trees defers fee payment for nine months. 
d.  Saving one hundred percent of the surveyed oak trees defers fee payment for twelve months. 
B.  For all zones other than those identified in subsection A, above, the following mitigation requirements shall apply: 
1.  Where not more than twenty percent of the TDBH of all the surveyed oak trees, and not more than twenty percent of the total number of surveyed oak trees on the property are to be removed, each tree shall be replaced on a two-to-one tree replacement ratio (two trees planted on-site for each tree removed). 
2.  Where more than twenty percent of the TDBH of all the surveyed oak trees or more than twenty percent of the total number of surveyed oak trees on the property are to be removed, each inch of TDBH removed in excess of twenty percent of the TDBH of all the surveyed oak trees shall be replaced with an equal number of inches of TDBH of replacement trees, but in no event shall the number of replacement trees be less than twice the number of trees removed (two to one). 
3.  The species, size and planting location of the replacement trees shall be in accordance with the guidelines. 
4.  Where on-site replacement is not feasible, mitigation shall be by off-site replacement, land dedication or payment of a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council into the Rocklin oak tree preservation fund. Where partial mitigation is by on-site or off-site replacement, or land dedication, the fee shall be appropriately prorated. 
(Ord. 763 § 1, 1997; Ord. 746 § 3, 1996: Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.090 - Rocklin oak tree preservation fund. 
A.  There is within the city treasury a separate fund to be known as the Rocklin oak tree preservation fund. 
B.  There shall be deposited in the fund all fees paid in connection with the mitigation of trees removed under this chapter or otherwise, plus any moneys received from bond forfeitures and enforcement actions to the extent allowed by law. 
C.  The council shall transfer from the general fund to the oak tree preservation fund a total amount of thirty thousand dollars. The transfer shall be in three ten thousand dollar increments and shall be made with the adoption of the city budget in each of the three succeeding fiscal years following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, enacting this chapter; provided, that if the council, in its sole discretion, finds that the transfer should not be made in any one or more of those fiscal years due to budgetary constraints, the transfer for that year shall be postponed as directed by the council. 
D.  Expenditures from the fund shall be limited to the following: (1) acquisition of land deemed appropriate for oak tree reforestation; (2) acquisition, planting and maintenance of oak trees; (3) compensation of arborists retained by the city in connection with the administration of this chapter and any related program; (4) oak tree preservation educational programs; (5) administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.100 - Oak tree preservation guidelines. 
A.  The council shall adopt, by resolution, guidelines to aid in the administration and implementation of this chapter, to be known as the Rocklin oak tree preservation guidelines. 
B.  The guidelines shall address each of the following issues: 
1.  A tree removal permit application process for the review of tree removal proposals on developed lots; 
2.  A tree preservation plan permit application process for the review of development proposals of undeveloped property; 
3.  A method of determining the amount of a bond or other security instrument required by Section 17.77.050(C) to guarantee protection of all oak trees designated for preservation during the project construction period; 
4.  Required mitigation for tree removal on undeveloped property consistent with and as more fully described in Sections 17.77.070 and 17.77.080; 
5.  Requirement that special attention be given to the preserving of heritage oak trees; 
6.  A list of native and hybrid oaks recommended as replacement trees; 
7.  Any other issues the council deems appropriate relating to oak tree preservation. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
17.77.110 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the city attorney. 
B.  In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, violation of this chapter for failure to obtain a tree removal or tree preservation plan permit prior to removing a tree shall be punishable by an order for restitution and/or the payment of triple mitigation fees. 
C.  In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, violation of the terms or conditions of a tree removal or tree preservation plan permit shall be punishable by forfeiture of the security provided under Section 17.77.050(D), and order for restitution. 
(Ord. 676 § 8 (part), 1993).  
Chapter 17.78 - LARGE ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
17.78.010 - Generally. 
Large animals (excluding common household pets governed by Sections 6.44.050 and 6.44.060 of this code, which are not regulated by this chapter) are permitted in certain single-family residential zones where there is sufficient space to accommodate them, subject to the provisions of this chapter. In some zones, only horses are permitted. Domestic swine are permitted as household pets as provided in Title 6. No large animals may be kept on property where there is not an occupied single-family residence on the property unless a conditional use permit has been issued by the planning commission, but shall not exceed the number permitted on occupied premises without a conditional use permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, goats and sheep are allowed in any zone of the city for the purpose of temporary grazing, provided, however, a grazing permit has been issued pursuant to Section 6.36.050 and the animals are kept consistent with the city's weed abatement and open space management grazing program. 
(Ord. 663 § 2, 1992: Ord. 370: Ord. 336 § 7.07.000, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1103, § 3, 8-28-2018)  
17.78.020 - Horse-only zones RE-1, RE-2, RE-30. 
Horses, but no other large quadrupeds, are permitted in the following zones in the following numbers: 
A.  RE-30, one horse where the lot is not less than thirty thousand square feet, and two horses where the lot area is one acre net or greater. 
B.  RE-1 acre, one horse where the lot is not less than thirty thousand square feet, and two horses where the lot area is one acre net or greater. 
C.  RE-2 acre, three horses. 
Additional horses may be kept on lots in excess of one acre net, in a number to be determined by the planning commission, where there is an occupied single-family dwelling on the premises. A conditional use permit is required for the keeping of additional horses. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.07.010, 1977).  
17.78.030 - RA-3, RA-5, RA-10 zones. 
Large quadrupeds, including horses, are permitted in the following zones in the following numbers: 
A.  RA-3, four mature animals and their immature offspring (not to exceed twelve animals in total). 
B.  RA-5, five mature animals and their immature offspring (not to exceed fifteen animals in total). 
C.  RA-10, six mature animals and their immature offspring (not to exceed fifteen animals in total). 
Additional animals may be kept, in a number to be determined by the planning commission, where there is an occupied single-family dwelling on the premises. A conditional use permit is required for the keeping of additional animals. 
(Ord. 336 § 7.07.020, 1977).  
Chapter 17.79 - ADULT RELATED BUSINESSES[4] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 946, § 3, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, amended the former Ch. 17.79, §§ 17.79.010—17.79.040, and enacted a new Ch. 17.79 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.79 pertained to location of sex oriented businesses and derived from Ord. 336 §§ 7.08.000—7.08.030, 1977; Ord. 464 § 1 (part), 1982; Ord. 581 § 42, 1988. 
 
17.79.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that adult entertainment businesses, because of their very nature, have objectionable and deleterious operational characteristics and effects on adjacent areas, particularly when located in close proximity to each other and when located in close proximity to residentially zoned or used property. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary purpose of the regulation is to prevent the concentration or clustering of these businesses in any one area. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 3, 4-14-2009)  
17.79.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
A.  "Adult live entertainment theater" means any place, building, enclosure or structure, partially or entirely used for "live adult entertainment," as defined in this section, performances or presentations characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, displaying, or describing or relating to "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity" for observation by patrons or customers therein. "Live adult entertainment" means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the performer(s) expose to public view without opaque covering "specified anatomical areas" or appear in a "state of nudity" or a "state of partial nudity" for any form of consideration. 
B.  "Adult motion picture" or "video arcade" means any business where coin, paper, note, token, or credit card, debit card-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to four or fewer persons per machine, at any one time, and where the predominant character or theme of the images so displayed is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, or relating to "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity." For purposes of this chapter, motion pictures receiving up to an "NC17" rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization shall not be deemed to be included in the definition of an adult motion picture or video arcade. 
C.  "Adult motion picture theater" means any business, other than a hotel or motel which regularly provides closed-circuit viewing to each individual room as a secondary service to its hotel or motel customers, with the capacity for five or more persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions in which the predominant character and theme is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting or relating to "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity" as defined in this section, are regularly shown. This includes, without limitation, showing any such slides, motion pictures or videos by means of any video tape system which has a display, viewer, screen, or a television set. For purposes of this chapter, motion pictures receiving up to an "NC17" rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization shall not be deemed to be included in the definition of an adult motion picture theater. 
D.  "Adult related business" means any establishment, business or concern which, as a regular course or conduct of the business, offers or engages in the display of "specified anatomical areas," "specified sexual activity," or men and/or women in a "state of nudity," or "state of partial nudity," as defined in this section, by patrons, employees or anyone on the premises, and includes without limitation the following types of establishments: 
1.  Adult Related Book and Video Store. An "adult related book and video store" means an establishment, business or concern with more than twenty-five percent of its total floor display area devoted to and offering for sale or rent, stock-in-trade consisting of adult related book and video products, or an establishment where twenty-five percent or more of the retail or wholesale value of merchandise displayed or offered for sale or rent consists of adult related book and video products. The term "adult related book and video products" means books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, paintings, sculptures, photographs, drawings, motion pictures, slides, films, tapes, video cassettes, records, DVD, CD-ROM, or other visual or audio representations or any material in digital format, which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
2.  Adult Related Sexual Device Store. An "adult related sexual device store" means an establishment, business or concern which sells, rents, displays, exhibits or offers for sale any of the following products: 
a.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed or reasonably intended to be used in connection with "specified sexual activities"; or 
b.  Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate "specified anatomical areas," or goods designed or reasonably intended to be placed on or in "specified anatomical areas" or reasonably intended to be used in conjunction with "specified sexual activities." Such goods include, but are not limited to, devices that are physical representations of the human genital organs, and devices with non-sex related utility being marketed or offered for sale or rent in a manner promoting sexual or sadomasochistic uses, including, but not limited to, leather whips, straps, harnesses, restraints and ligatures. 
The following items are expressly not included within the definitions in this section: (1) devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy; (2) candles and incense; (3) body oils, creams and lotions; (4) lingerie, stockings and undergarments; (5) massage devices that are not replicas of human genital organs; (6) health care or personal hygiene products; and (7) food products. 
3.  "Sexual encounter center" means any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
4.  "Adult live entertainment theater" as the term is defined in this section. 
5.  "Adult motion picture" or "video arcade" as the term is defined in this section. 
6.  "Adult motion picture theater" as the term is defined in this section. 
E.  "Chief of police" means the chief of police or his/her designee. 
F.  "City manager" means the city manager or his/her designee. 
G.  "Employ," "employee," and "employment" describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
H.  "Establish" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult related business as defined in this section; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult related business, to any adult related business as defined in this section; 
3.  The relocation of any adult related business; or 
4.  The addition of any of the "adult related businesses" defined in this section to any other existing adult related business. 
I.  "Exceptions." An "adult related business" shall not include: 
A.  Bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical and psychological personnel with necessary medical or professional credentials for the treatment of patients; or 
B.  Persons depicting "specified anatomical areas" in a modeling class operated: 
1.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue; 
2.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue; or 
3.  In a structure operated either as a profit or not-for-profit facility which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, and where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
J.  "Figure modeling" or "modeling studio" means any business featuring a live person displaying "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity," as defined in this section, for compensation, whether monetary or any other form of consideration and for the purpose of being observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted. "Figure modeling" or a "modeling studio" does not include an artist studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists which is not open to the public and does not provide, permit or make available for viewing "specified sexual activities" on the premises. 
K.  "Nudity" or "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or anus, with less than a fully opaque fabric covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque fabric covering of any part of the nipple and areola, or the showing of completely or opaquely covered (by fabric) male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
L.  "Operate" means to own, lease (as lessor or lessee), rent (as landlord or tenant or as agent for the purpose of representing a principal in the management, rental or operation of the property of such principal), manage, conduct, or direct an adult related business. 
M.  "Operator" means and includes the owner, custodian, manager or person in charge of any adult related business. 
N.  "Partial nudity" means a state of dress in which clothing covers less than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks and nipple, areola and lower portion below the lowest point of the areola of the female breast. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
O.  "Regularly features," "regularly shown," "regular basis" or "regularly" means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the business. 
P.  "Religious institution" means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship, religious education incidental thereto and related religious activities. Religious institution as used herein, shall not include an office or other building owned or operated by a bona fide religious institution used for administrative or related purposes, and not primarily used for assembly or educational purposes. 
Q.  "School" means any public or private educational facility primarily attended by minors, including large family day care homes, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, and special education schools, and includes school grounds. 
R.  "Specified anatomical area" includes the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, and/or the female nipple and breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
S.  "Specified sexual activity" includes the following: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation and intercourse oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, sodomy, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
3.  Human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; 
4.  Fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, lewd fondling or other lewd contact with an animal by a human being; or 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigations. 
T.  "Zoning district" means the zoning designation on the city zoning map or the corresponding designation on the general plan land use map. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 3, 4-14-2009)  
17.79.030 - Location of adult related businesses. 
A.  Adult related businesses are permitted in any zone except for residential, public or quasi-public zones, and provided that the business complies with all other locational regulations of this section. No adult related business shall be located, established nor operated: 
1.  Within one thousand feet of any area zoned or used for residential purposes whether in the city, in an adjoining city or unincorporated area. 
2.  Within one thousand feet of any site used for assembly purposes by a religious organization. 
3.  Within one thousand feet of any public or private school site (developed or designated). For the purposes of this subsection, "designated" means a parcel that is general plan designated, zoned, or that has been conditionally permitted to conduct such use. 
4.  Within one thousand feet of any other existing adult related business. 
5.  Within one thousand feet of any public park, or recreational area, or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by the city, including but not limited to park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, athletic field or facility, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city. 
6.  Within one thousand feet of any privately owed recreational facility that occupies a building that is fifty thousand square feet or larger. 
7.  Distances required by these subsections (A)(1) through (A)(5) shall be measured from parcel line to parcel line. 
B.  In addition to the locational restrictions set forth in subsection A. above, no part of the premises of an adult related business, including building, parking lot, landscaping, or signage shall be located and operated: 
1.  Within one thousand feet of the right of way line of State Route 65; or 
2.  Within five hundred feet of the right of way line of Granite Drive or on any parcel that has its primary access off of Granite Drive. 
E.  Adult related businesses shall not be located in any temporary or portable structures. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 3, 4-14-2009)  
17.79.040 - Waiver of location provisions. 
A.  Any property owner or his authorized agent may apply for a waiver of any location provisions as set forth in Section 17.79.030. The council, after receipt of the planning commission's recommendation and a hearing, may waive any locational provision, if the following findings are made: 
1.  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed; 
2.  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a skidrow area or area of intense blight; 
3.  That the establishment of a regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any program of urban renewal; 
4.  That all applicable regulations of this code will be observed. 
B.  The procedure for this hearing shall be the same as that provided for in Chapter 17.70 of this code for the issuance of conditional use permits, including the same notice requirement, and the same fees payable by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 3, 4-14-2009)  
17.79.050 - Development and operational standards. 
In addition to the development standards in the underlying zoning district and in addition to other provisions of this code, the following development and operational standards apply to adult related businesses. 
A.  Signs. Signs, advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials showing "specific sexual activities" or men or women in a state of nudity or partial nudity or displaying specified anatomical areas shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult related business is conducted. 
B.  Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult related business for amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult related business is conducted. 
C.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior areas, including off-street parking areas and premise entries, of the adult related business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on parking surfaces and walkways. The lighting shall be maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate devices to screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such a manner as to prevent glare or reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public and private properties. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within seventy-two hours. 
D.  Trash and Trash Enclosures. 
(1)  Trash dumpsters shall be enclosed by a screening enclosure and locked at all times so as not to be accessible to the public. 
(2)  At least four times a day, the front and rear exteriors of any adult related business, along with the parking lot, shall be inspected for trash and debris and any trash and debris found shall be immediately removed and placed into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag. 
E.  Posting Age Restrictions. The building entrance to the adult related business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under the age of eighteen are precluded from entering the premises. 
F.  Manager Stations. All indoor areas of the adult related business providing "live adult entertainment" within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view within a direct line of sight at all times by the management from a designated manager station. Manager stations shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in area. Manager stations may include video monitoring of the adult related business, but all areas of the business must be visible by a direct line of sight as described in this subsection. 
G.  Individual Viewing Areas. 
(A)  "Individual viewing area" shall mean a viewing room in which visual displays of "specified anatomical areas" and "specified sexual activities" are regularly shown and which is less than one hundred square feet in area. 
(B)  No individual viewing area shall be occupied by more than one individual at a time. 
(C)  Each individual viewing area within the adult related business shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing the entire interior of the individual viewing area from the main aisle. A manager shall be stationed in the main aisle at all times. Further, no one shall maintain any individual viewing area in any configuration unless the entire interior wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible from one main aisle. The entire body of any patron in any individual viewing area must be visible from the main aisle without the assistance of mirrors or any other device. 
(D)  No doors are permitted on an individual viewing area. No partially or fully enclosed individual viewing areas or partially or fully concealed individual viewing area shall be maintained. 
(E)  No holes or other opening shall be permitted between individual viewing areas. Any such hole or opening shall be repaired within twenty-four hours using "pop" rivets to secure metal plates over the hole or opening to prevent patrons from removing the metal plates. 
(F)  No beds, futons, or sofas shall be permitted in individual viewing area. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 3, 4-14-2009)  
17.79.060 - Service of alcoholic beverages. 
Consistent with Sections 17.54.010, 17.54.020, 17.56.010, and 17.56.020 of the Rocklin Municipal Code which do no permit establishments which serve alcohol in M-1 (Light Industrial) and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) zones, adult related businesses located in M-1 (Light Industrial) and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) zones are prohibited from serving or offering alcoholic beverages for sale. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 3, 4-14-2009)  
17.79.070 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate an adult related business in violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, patron or employee to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as follows: 
A.  Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day that any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the adult related business for purposes of finding a violation of this chapter only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises knowingly, or through negligent supervision of the employee, allowed such act to occur on the premises. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed or constituted to prevent the city from commencing any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration and/or abatement of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 3, 4-14-2009)  
17.79.080 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part, or any part thereof is held for any reason to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall not be affected thereby. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part regardless of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be determined to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 3, 4-14-2009)  
Chapter 17.80 - SIGNS ON CITY PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 977, Exh. B, B19, adopted Oct. 11, 2011, deleted Ch. 17.80, which pertained to section 5116 home and derived from Ord. 336, §§ 10.02.000—10.02.020, 1977.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), adopted Jan. 28, 2014 added new provisions as herein set out. 
 
17.80.010 - Authority, scope, proprietary capacity. 
In adopting this chapter, the city acts in its proprietary capacity as to city property, as defined herein, within the city. This chapter is adopted in accordance with the freedom afforded to cities pursuant to the city's general and police powers; California Constitution Article XI, Section 7; California Government Code Sections 65000 et seq., 65850(b), 38774, and 38775; Business and Professions Code sections 5200 et seq., 5230, and 5490 et seq.; Penal Code 556; and other applicable state laws. The provisions of this chapter and Chapter 17.75 (Signs on Private Property) collectively constitute the "City Sign Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.020 - Intent as to public forum. 
The city declares its intent that not all city property shall function as a public forum, unless some specific portion of city property is named herein as a public forum of one particular type; in such case, the declaration as to public forum type shall apply strictly and only to the specified area and for the specified time period. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.030 - Signs must be permitted or exempted. 
Unless specifically authorized by this chapter or other applicable law, no signs may be displayed on city property, except in or on a traditional public forum and in accordance with this chapter. Any unauthorized sign posted on city property may be summarily removed by the city as a trespass and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.040 - Temporary signs displaying noncommercial messages. 
In areas defined as traditional public forum areas, private persons may display noncommercial message signs thereon, provided that the signs conform to all of the following: 
A.  The signs must be personally held by a person, or personally attended by one or more persons. "Personally attended" means that a person is physically present within five feet of the sign at all times. 
B.  The signs may be displayed only during the time period of sunrise to sunset, except on occasions when the city council or other public body is holding a public hearing or meeting; on such occasions, the display period is extended to thirty minutes after such meeting is officially adjourned. 
C.  The maximum aggregate size of all signs held by a single person shall be six square feet. For purposes of this rule only, apparel and other aspects of personal appearance do not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area. 
D.  The maximum size of any one sign that is personally attended by two or more persons is 24 square feet, measured on one side only. 
E.  The sign must have no more than two display faces and may not be inflatable or air-activated. 
F.  To serve the city's interests in traffic flow and safety, persons displaying signs shall not stand in any vehicular traffic lane when a roadway is open for use by vehicles, and persons displaying signs on public sidewalks must give clearance of at least five feet in width for pedestrians to pass by, unless the sidewalk in question is less than five feet in width, in which case clearance of sufficient width shall be provided so as not to impede or block pedestrian flow on the sidewalk. Persons holding signs may not block the view or line of sight within a "visibility triangle." "Visibility triangle" shall be defined as the area within the vertices of three points, measured from the corner of any vehicular intersection to two points located on the curbline forty-five feet from said corner. 
G.  The message substitution policy of the sign ordinance applies only to the traditional public forum areas. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.050 - Certain governmental signs. 
The following signs may be erected and displayed on city property, subject to the rules set herein: 
A.  Traffic control and traffic directional signs erected by the city, including temporary traffic and traffic direction signs. 
B.  Official notices required or authorized by law. 
C.  Signs placed by the city in furtherance of its governmental functions, including commercial signs authorized by city, i.e. the city streetlight banner program. 
D.  Civic Event Signs. Civic and/or city-sponsored events signs on city property that express the city's own message. 
E.  Signs placed by the city on city property that express the city's own message, such as community directional signs (see Section 20.325.070). Such signs do not require a permit. 
F.  Signs placed by another governmental entity with the city's prior written permission. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.060 - Community directional signs. 
The city may locate community directional signs at its discretion on city property to allow persons to be directed to areas within the city, as follows: 
A.  The maximum number of signs shall be as approved by the city manager to lead persons to identified areas, locations, or subdivisions within the city. 
B.  Signs shall be no larger than sixty inches by twelve inches, and shall be grouped on a single-, double-, or four-sided sign kiosk. Such structure shall contain no more than seven separate identifications and a city identification top piece. 
C.  Signs shall be located at various locations throughout the city along major transportation corridors, as approved by the city manager. Each such approved sign may state the name of the public facility, subdivision, or community area; provide information to the public as determined by the city; and include a directional arrow. 
D.  The placement of each sign structure and its copy shall be reviewed and approved of by the director prior to installation. 
E.  A plan shall be prepared showing the site of each sign and shall be submitted to and approved by the director to the acceptance of a sign permit application, if requested by a private party. 
F.  Any sign approved for a particular community area or subdivision within the city shall not be changed to another community area or subdivision without prior approval of the director. 
G.  There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, devices, display boards, or appurtenances added to the sign as originally approved. No other directional signing may be used such as posters, portable signs, vehicle signs, trailer signs, or temporary subdivision signs. 
H.  All signs not conforming to this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and subject to removal from city property pursuant to Section 17.80.100, below. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.070 - Encroachments. 
When authorized by Chapter 17.75 (Signs on Private Property), private party signs mounted on private property may project into city property or the public right-of-way only with an encroachment permit processed for all applicable and required city approvals prior to such projection and/or encroachment. Sign encroachment permits must satisfy all requirements of the sign ordinance, as well as all requirements applicable to encroachments generally, and all applicable safety codes (building, plumbing, electrical, etc.) 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.080 - Commercial speech and activities. 
Commercial speech by sign, as well as all commercial activity, is prohibited on all city property and the public right-of-way. This provision does not apply to the city or its designees on city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.090 - Immediate removal of signs on city property. 
A.  Removal. Any lettering, advertisement, card, poster, sign, or notice of any kind placed on city property or on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, lamp post, hydrant, bridge, tree, or other surface located on city property in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or any sign that constitutes an immediate peril to persons or property, may be removed without prior notice by any officer or employee of the city designated to do so by the city manager. For the purposes of this subsection, city property shall have the meaning as defined in this chapter. The cost of removal and of any damage to city property resulting from the placement or removal of a sign under this subsection shall be charged to the person who placed the sign or caused the sign to be placed. In any action, hearing, or other proceeding for violation of any of the provisions of this section, proof that the sign or other matter contains the name of or otherwise identifies a person, firm, or corporation, or a particular committee or organization, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such person, firm, or corporation, or chairperson, president, or other head of the committee or organization, posted, or caused to be posted, the sign or other matter. 
B.  Charge for Cost of Removal. The city may recover the cost of removing signs as authorized by this section. When the city has incurred any expense in removing the sign or other matter, or in repairing city property damaged because of the posting or removal of the sign or other matter, any such expense incurred shall constitute a debt owed to the city. The director or his/her designee shall send a bill to the persons responsible for posting or causing to be posted the sign or other matter for the actual or estimated cost of removal. The director may establish administrative regulations to govern the billing procedures. Each bill shall include the cost, both direct and indirect, involved in the removal of the sign or other matter and in administering the billing procedure. The bill shall describe the basis of the amount billed by indicating the number of signs or other matter posted illegally, the time necessary for removal, the hourly cost for removal, the right to a hearing as provided by the appeal provisions of the sign ordinance, and other relevant information. The bill shall also specify a date by which the bill is to be paid, shall be not less than fifteen business days after the bill is mailed. 
C.  Post Removal Hearing Regarding Signs Summarily Removed. The owner or person in charge of any lettering, advertisement, card, poster, sign, or notice of any kind placed on city property, or constituting an immediate peril to persons or property, that has been removed by an officer or employee of the city without prior notice to the owner or person in charge pursuant to this chapter, is entitled to a hearing to be conducted by the director. The request for hearing shall be made in writing to the director no later than fifteen business days from the date the director mails the billing statement specified in subsection B, or within thirty calendar days of the date of the removal, whichever occurs first. The hearing shall be limited to determining whether the lettering, advertisement, card, poster, sign, notice, or other matter was located on city property in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or constituted an immediate peril to persons or property and the accuracy of the amount billed. Upon receiving a written request for the hearing, the director shall set a hearing, which shall be held within forty-five days from the date of receipt of the request. The director shall provide written notification of the hearing to the applicant. The notification shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing. Following the hearing, the director shall, within ten business days after the date of the hearing, notify the person billed of any adjustment to the bill or any determination not to make an adjustment. This notification shall specify the date by which such bill shall be paid, which shall not be less than thirty calendar days after the date of the hearing. Any person who fails to pay the amount billed to such person within the period specified therein shall also be liable for expenses incurred by the city in collecting the debt, including the cost of paying city employees or other persons engaged in debt collection. 
D.  Decision. The decision of the hearing officer operating under this section shall be final. The decision of the hearing officer shall be made in writing, stating the reasons for the decision reached. 
E.  Return of Materials. Any sign removed by the city, except any sign of de minimus value, shall be held in storage and the owner or other person in control of such sign, if known, shall be given written notice and thirty days to reclaim such sign. Any illegal sign in the public right-of-way of de minimus value shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be destroyed by the city after removal. No opportunity to reclaim such sign shall be given by the city. For purposes of this section, any sign made of cardboard or other nondurable material shall be deemed to be of de minimus value. Any sign that was removed under this section may be returned to the owner only upon payment to the city of the costs of removal, as specified in this chapter. If no timely request is made for a hearing, or if no demand is made for the return of the materials removed within the time permitted for requesting a hearing, the director or his/her designee is authorized to destroy or dispose of the removed material with no further notice. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
17.80.100 - Definitions. 
Definitions from Chapter 17.75 (Signs on Private Property), are incorporated herein, unless modified by the following definitions, which apply specifically to this chapter. 
A.  City Property. Land or other property in which the city of Rocklin holds a present right of possession and control, city road easements, and all public rights-of-way, regardless of ownership. 
B.  Community Directional Sign. A multi-sided sign structure with a unified design theme accommodating individual directional sign panels; also referenced as a "kiosk." 
C.  Traditional Public Forum. City-owned parks, the surfaces of city-owned streets, and, subject to the limitations set forth herein, sidewalks forming the city's vehicular and pedestrian circulation system. Sidewalks and associated rights-of-way located along the outside perimeter of the City Hall Complex are included within this definition. Specifically excluded from this definition, and in no way to be construed as a traditional public forum, is the interior of the City Hall Complex. As of the effective date of this chapter, the City Hall Complex consists of three buildings, internal roads and sidewalks, parking lots, a parking structure, adjacent recreation areas (inclusive of Memorial Park located east of the Historic City Hall), and pedestrian grounds. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 5(Exh. B), 1-28-2014)  
Chapter 17.81 - MARIJUANA REGULATION[6] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1099, § 5, adopted June 26, 2018, repealed Ch. 17.81 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.81, §§ 17.81.010—17.81.090 pertained to marijuana cultivation, and derived from Ord. No. 970, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 2011. 
 
17.81.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
The council finds as follows: 
A.  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit all commercial marijuana activities, all outdoor marijuana cultivation, and reasonably regulate the indoor cultivation of marijuana for personal use within the city of Rocklin in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
B.  Applicability. No part of this chapter shall be deemed to conflict with federal law as contained in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 800 et seq., nor to otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under that Act or any other local, state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 6-26-2018)  
17.81.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Accessory structure" means a structure which is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal structure and is significantly smaller in area than the principle structure and does not change the character of the principal structure or the principal use of the primary structure. An accessory structure must be a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
B.  "Adult-use cannabis" and "adult-use cannabis" products shall have the meaning as set forth and regulated in the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulations and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA") codified in Business and Professions Code section 26000 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
C.  "Authorized grower" means a person twenty-one years and older who is authorized by, and in compliance with, state law to grow marijuana indoors for personal medical use or personal non-medical use. Authorized grower also means a person eighteen years and older who is a qualified patient, as that term is described in Health and Safety Code section 11362.5. 
D.  "Cannabis" or "marijuana," which terms may be used interchangeable, shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(f), as may be amended from time to time, and includes "cannabis products" as defined by Business and Professions Code section 26001(i). The term "marijuana" shall also include "medical marijuana" as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5 and "medical cannabis," and "medical cannabis product" as defined in California Business and Professions Code section 26001(ai). 
E.  "Commercial cannabis activity" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(k), as may be amended from time to time, and includes the following commercial activities, whether for medicinal and adult-use purposes, cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, grading, marketing, packaging, labeling, transportation, distribution, dispensary, including a medical marijuana dispensary, delivery, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products, whether or not by a person, business, or entity, for-profit or non-profit, and whether or not conducted with a license issued in accordance with Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code (section 26000 et seq.). 
F.  "Cultivation" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(l), as may be amended from time to time, and includes the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, processing, or storage of any marijuana plants or any part thereof for either medicinal or adult use. 
G.  "Delivery" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(p), as may be amended from time to time, and means the commercial delivery, transfer or transport, of cannabis or cannabis product to a customer, or arranging for the delivery, transfer or transport, or the use of any technology platform to arrange for or facilitate the commercial delivery, transfer or transport, of medical marijuana, adult-use cannabis, all cannabis edibles, and/or any and all cannabis products from any location within the jurisdictional limits of the city of Rocklin. 
H.  "Enforcement official" means the economic and community development director, chief of police, or city of Rocklin Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee respectively. 
I.  "Fully enclosed and secure structure" means a space within a building that complies with the California Building Code ("CBSC"), as adopted in the city of Rocklin, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBSC, that has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors. In order to qualify as a fully enclosed and secure structure, the walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through, such as two-inch by four-inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths-inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products are not considered solid materials. 
J.  "Indoor" means within a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
K.  "Medical cannabis" or "medicinal cannabis product" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(ai), as may be amended from time to time, and includes cannabis or cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician's recommendation. 
L.  "Medical marijuana dispensary" or "dispensary" means any facility or location where medical marijuana is made available to and/or distributed by or to three or more of the following: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a person with an identification card, in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. A "medical marijuana dispensary" shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as any such use complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
M.  "Outdoor" means any location within the city of Rocklin that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
N.  "Parcel" means any parcel of real property that may be separately sold in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act (section 66410, et seq. of the Government Code). 
O.  "Primary caregiver" means a "primary caregiver" as defined in section 11362.7(d) of the Health and Safety Code. 
P.  "Residential structure" means any building or portion thereof legally existing which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on a parcel located within a residential zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 1107, §§ 3, 4, 10-23-2018)  
17.81.030 - Commercial cannabis activity prohibited. 
Commercial cannabis activity by any person or entity is prohibited in all zones within the city of Rocklin. Any commercial cannabis activity that takes place within the city of Rocklin is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 6-26-2018)  
17.81.040 - Outdoor cultivation prohibited. 
The outdoor cultivation of marijuana is prohibited in all zones within the city of Rocklin. It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance, and a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within the city of Rocklin to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the outdoor cultivation of marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 6-26-2018)  
17.81.050 - Indoor cultivation of marijuana for personal use. 
The indoor cultivation of no more than six marijuana plants shall be allowed for personal, non-commercial use when authorized by state law subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Locations Permitted. Cultivation of marijuana is prohibited in all zones except residential zones. 
B.  Minimum Standards. The indoor cultivation of non-commercial marijuana in a residential zone shall only be conducted within a private residential structure or accessory structure which is a fully enclosed and secure structure conforming to the following minimum standards: 
1.  No more than six marijuana plants on a parcel. 
2.  Marijuana cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred watts and shall comply with the California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted by the city, including the applicable ventilation or air filtration requirements. 
3.  The use of gas products, including, without limitation, CO 2 , butane, propane, and natural gas, or generators for marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited. 
4.  There shall be no evidence of marijuana cultivation outside the residence, or outside the accessory structure, from the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any marijuana plants, equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation, and any light emanating from cultivation lighting. 
5.  The authorized grower shall reside full-time in the residence where the marijuana cultivation occurs. 
6.  The authorized grower shall not participate in marijuana cultivation in any other residential location within the city of Rocklin. 
7.  The residence shall maintain fully functional and usable kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedrooms for their intended use by the resident authorized grower, and not be used primarily and exclusively for marijuana cultivation. 
8.  Any fully enclosed and secure structure used for the cultivation of marijuana must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent marijuana plant odors from exiting the interior of the residential structure, the accessory structure, or the residential unit, and that shall comply with the building regulations of the city of Rocklin Municipal Code. 
9.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit an owner of a residential structure, or its accessory structure, from prohibiting the growing of marijuana on his or her property. 
10.  The area in which marijuana is cultivated within a residential structure or accessory structure shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 6-26-2018)  
17.81.060 - Indoor cultivation of marijuana restricted to authorized growers. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within the city of Rocklin to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the cultivation of marijuana, unless the person is authorized by state law to grow marijuana, and such authorized grower is complying with all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 6-26-2018)  
17.81.070 - Violation. 
A.  Any person or entity that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any person or entity commits, continues, licenses, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. 
B.  Any violation of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
C.  A violation of this chapter is subject to administrative citation and fine pursuant to Chapter 1.14. Notwithstanding Section 1.14.024, the administrative citation amount for violating any provision of this chapter shall be one thousand dollars for each violation. 
D.  It is unlawful and a public nuisance to violate any of the provision of this chapter and may be enforced and/or abated pursuant to Chapter 1.16 of this Municipal Code and/or under state law. 
E.  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 6-26-2018)  
17.81.080. - Penalties not exclusive. 
The remedies and penalties provided herein are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent the use of any other criminal, civil, or administrative remedy or penalty authorized by, or set forth in, the Rocklin Municipal Code. None of the penalties or remedies authorized by, or set forth in, the Rocklin Municipal Code shall prevent the city from using any other penalty or remedy under state statute which may be available to enforce this chapter or to abate a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 6-26-2018)  
Chapter 17.82 - AMENDMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.82.010 - Manner generally. 
This title may be amended by changing the boundaries of zones as shown on the official zoning maps or by changing the text of this title whenever the public necessity, convenience, or general welfare requires such amendment. Except as provided in Section 65853 of the Government Code, an amendment of this title may be initiated and adopted as other ordinances are initiated and adopted. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.000, 1977).  
17.82.020 - Petition of owners—Resolution of intent. 
An amendment may be initiated by: 
A.  The petition of one or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment as provided by this chapter; 
B.  Resolution of intention adopted by the council, or resolution of intention adopted by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.010, 1977).  
17.82.030 - Application. 
The planning director shall prescribe the forms and documents to be filed to change property from one zone to another. The forms and documents shall be filed with the planning director and shall be accompanied by the following: 
A.  The legal description and street address of the subject property; 
B.  A map drawn to scale showing the specific property proposed for reclassification and also showing all other parcels having one or more boundaries within a three-hundred-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the property proposed for reclassification. The assessor's parcel number shall be noted on each parcel; 
C.  The names and mailing addresses of the property owners for the properties shown on the map as listed on the last equalized assessment roll for the county; 
D.  An environmental questionnaire; 
E.  Certificate of the owner or his designated representative requesting the change in zoning; 
F.  A fee as specified by resolution of the council; 
G.  The existing land use for the property shown on the map and the proposed use of the land for which the reclassification is requested; 
H.  Such additional information as the planning director may require. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.020, 1977).  
17.82.040 - Planning commission—Public noticing. 
Noticing shall be consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.030, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 7, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1072, § 8, 6-13-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1061, § 7, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, changed the title of § 17.82.040 from "Planning commission—Hearing—Notice" to read as herein set out.  
17.82.050 - Planning commission—Abandonment of proceeding. 
The planning commission may abandon any proceeding which the commission has initiated. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.040, 1977).  
17.82.060 - Planning commission—Report. 
After the commission has held a public hearing, it shall render its decision in the form of a written report and recommendation to the council in the manner provided by Section 65855 of the Government Code. Such report shall be transmitted to the council by memorandum. The commission may recommend an intermediate zone classification as provided in Section 17.82.110. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.050, 1977).  
17.82.070 - Council—Hearing. 
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the council shall act thereon as provided by Section 65856 of the Government Code. If the issue is an amendment to this title to change property from one zone to another, and the planning commission has recommended against the adoption of the amendment, the council shall not take any further action thereon unless an interested party requests such a public hearing by filing a written request with the planning director within ten days after the public hearing at which the planning commission made its recommendation, or within five days after the planning commission files its recommendation with the council, whichever date is last to occur. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.060, 1977).  
17.82.080 - Council—Action. 
The council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission, as provided by Section 65857 of the Government Code. The council shall not approve the proposed modification unless it determines that the proposed modification is consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.070, 1977).  
17.82.090 - Withdrawal of petition. 
The planning commission or the council may, prior to action on a petition, permit the withdrawal of any petition or part thereof filed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.080, 1977).  
17.82.100 - Reapplication after denial. 
If a rezoning application is denied, another petition to rezone substantially the same property shall not be accepted within a one-year period unless specific approval for such filing is given by the planning commission or the council. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.090, 1977).  
17.82.110 - Intermediate sequential zones. 
The planning commission may recommend, and the council may adopt, without further notice or hearing, a zone which is intermediate between the present classification and the classification proposed for adoption, provided such intermediate zone falls between the present and proposed classifications on the sequence chart set forth below. The sequence categories (residential, commercial, industrial) are independent. [Ex.: If the proposed zone is RE-20 and the present zone is RE-2 acre, RE-30 is a proper intermediate zone, but neither an R1-15 zone (which is in the same category, but outside the sequence), nor a C-1 zone (which is outside the category) is an intermediate zone.] 
Category 	Sequence 
A. Residential: 	R1-5 
	R1-6 
	R1-7.5 
	R1-10 
	R1-12.5 
	R1-15 
	RE-20 
	RE-30 
	RE-1 acre 
	RE-2 acre 
	RA-3 
	RA-5 
	RA-10 
B. Multifamily residential: 	R-2 
	R-3 
C. Commercial: 	C-1 
	C-2 
	C-3 
	C-4 
D. Industrial: 	M-1 
	M-2 
E. Nonintermediate zones: The zones listed in this subsection are not intermediate to other zoning classifications. 
	O-A 
	PD 
	C-H 
	B-P 
	-DC 
 
(Ord. 336 § 2.03.100, 1977).  
Chapter 17.83 - REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
Sections: 
 
17.83.010 - Purpose. 
This section provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking access under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies, procedures, and project entitlement exhibits or conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A6., 10-11-2011)  
17.83.020 - Applicability. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any property owner, duly authorized tenant or lessee who desires to implement improvements to a specific property that are designed to provide access to housing and/or places of business, when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy, practice, project entitlement exhibit or condition of approval acts as a barrier to reasonable access. This section is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards, practices, and project entitlement exhibits or conditions of approval for the siting, development and use of structures and facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability with equal opportunity to access housing and places of business. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Section 17.83.030. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A6., 10-11-2011)  
17.83.030 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted as a written request to the community development director (alternative submission formats may be approved by the community development director should a written application be unduly burdensome). All requests shall include the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
2.  The property owners name, address and telephone number; 
3.  The street address and assessor's parcel number of the property for which the request is being made; 
4.  The current actual use of the property; 
5.  The basis for the claim that an individual or group of individuals considered disabled under the Acts is being denied reasonable accommodation; 
6.  The zoning law, provision, regulation, policy, project entitlement exhibit feature or condition of approval from which reasonable accommodation is being requested; 
7.  Why the requested accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual or group of individuals; 
8.  Photos, site plans, drawings, and/or other graphics as may be needed to make the proposed changes clear. 
B.  Concurrent Review. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval, then the applicant may file the request concurrently with the application for discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A6., 10-11-2011)  
17.83.040 - Review authority and procedure. 
A.  Community Development Director. If no approval is sought other than a request for reasonable accommodation, then the request for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the community development director, or his/her designee. The community development director or his/her designee shall make a written determination within five working days and either grant, grant with modifications or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 17.83.050. 
B.  Other Review Authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority reviewing the discretionary land use application. The applicable review authority shall make a written determination and either grant, grant with modifications or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 17.83.050. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A6., 10-11-2011)  
17.83.050 - Findings and decision. 
A.  Findings. The written decision to grant, grant with modifications or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following: 
1.  Whether the facility which is the subject of the request will be used by an individual or a group of individuals considered disabled under the Acts, and that the accommodation requested is necessary to make the specific facility accessible to the individual or group of individuals with (a) disability(ies) under the Acts; 
2.  Whether there are alternative reasonable accommodations available that would provide an equivalent level of benefit, or if alternative accommodations would be suitable based on the circumstances of this particular case; 
3.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; 
4.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would be consistent with the general plan land use designation of the property which is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request, and with the general purpose and intent in the applicable zoning district; 
5.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation substantially affects the physical attributes of the property. 
B.  Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A6., 10-11-2011)  
17.83.060 - Appeal of determination. 
A determination by the reviewing authority to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.86 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A6., 10-11-2011)  
Chapter 17.84 - FEES 
Sections: 
 
17.84.010 - Schedule—When filed. 
For the purpose of defraying the expense involved in connection with an application or petition, the council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees. The schedule of fees shall be available in the planning department and on file in the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. 496 § 1, 1983: Ord. 336 § 2.04.000, 1977).  
17.84.020 - Payment required—City-initiated actions exempt. 
No action shall be taken on any application or petition and no filing shall be viewed as complete until all applicable fees have been paid in full. No fee will be required or charged to persons whose property is included in resolutions of intention adopted by the planning commission or the council initiating proceedings to change a zone classification. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.04.010, 1977).  
17.84.030 - Refunds. 
Concurrent with the withdrawal of an application, an applicant may request, in writing, a refund of the application fee. Upon receipt of a written request for a fee refund, the city manager, or designee, shall determine how much time and other related costs have been incurred in processing the application and may authorize a refund of that amount of the fee, if any, that is not needed to cover these costs. In no event shall the city manager, or designee, approve a refund in an amount in excess of eighty-five percent of the fee paid. 
(Ord. 548 § 1, 1986: Ord. 336 § 2.04.020, 1977).  
Chapter 17.86 - APPEALS 
Sections: 
 
17.86.010 - Right of appeal. 
Any person dissatisfied by an act or determination of an official of the city relating to the enforcement or interpretation of this title may appeal such act or determination to the planning commission as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.05.000, 1977).  
17.86.020 - Notice filing—Deadline. 
Appeals of determination or actions of officials of the city as provided in Section 17.86.010 may be made by filing written notice thereof with the planning department not later than ten days after the day on which the act or determination appealed was made. The ten-day period for filing the notice of appeal is jurisdictional and shall not be waived. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.05.010, 1977).  
17.86.030 - Stay of permit, variance. 
The filing of a notice of appeal shall have the effect of staying the issuance of any permit or variance until such time as the appeal is determined. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.05.020, 1977).  
17.86.040 - Planning commission review. 
The planning commission may review the entire proceedings relating to the act or decision being appealed and in the process of such review may rehear the matter de novo and make any order it deems just and equitable including the granting of any variance or conditional use permit. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.05.030, 1977).  
17.86.050 - City council appeal. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by an action of the planning commission (whether pursuant to Section 17.86.040 or otherwise) may appeal the action to the council. 
B.  The council, upon majority vote, may direct the city manager to file an appeal of an action by the planning commission, which appeal shall be processed in the same manner as an appeal by any other person. 
C.  The appeal shall be filed with ten days of the date the action is taken and shall be in writing. 
D.  The council shall hear the matter de novo and make any order it deems just and equitable, including the granting of any variance, conditional use permit, or mobile home certificate of compatibility. A hearing before the council may be continued from time-to-time. An appeal, once decided by the council, shall not be reconsidered. 
(Ord. 581 § 11, 1988: Ord. 457 § 3, 1981: Ord. 336 § 2.05.040, 1977).  
17.86.060 - Notice. 
Notice of an appeal before the planning commission and the council shall be given to those who received notice in the first instance, or if no prior notice was required, then as provided in Section 17.82.040. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.05.050, 1977).  
Chapter 17.88 - ENFORCEMENT—INTERPRETATION 
Sections: 
 
17.88.010 - Administration and enforcement responsibility—Violation correction order. 
This title shall be administered by the planning director and jointly enforced by the planning director and building inspector. If the planning director finds that any provision of this title is being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.01.000, 1977).  
17.88.020 - Right of entry—Inspection warrant. 
The planning director, the building inspector or the authorized representative of either may, upon presentation of credentials to the occupant or owner, enter any premises, building, or structure at any reasonable time for the purposes of investigating and inspecting the premises, building or structure to determine if the same are being used in compliance with the provisions of this title. If admission or entry is refused, the city attorney shall apply to the court to obtain an inspection warrant. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.01.010, 1977).  
17.88.030 - Permit in conflict void. 
Officers and employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this title. Any permit or license which would authorize the permittee or licensee to erect, alter or enlarge any building or structure or to use property in any manner in conflict with the provisions of this title, intentionally or otherwise, is null and void. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.01.020, 1977).  
17.88.040 - Deadline to challenge official action. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, any action by any person to set aside or annul any decision by any official of the city, the planning commission, or the council pursuant to this title shall be void unless the same is commenced within sixty days of the final determination of the official, planning commission or council. 
(Ord. 336 § 1.101.050, 1977).  
17.88.050 - Planning commission rules. 
The planning commission shall adopt by resolution rules of operating procedure to govern its activities. Copies of the rules shall be made available to the public at cost. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.06.000, 1977).  
17.88.060 - Interpretation—Planning commission jurisdiction. 
The planning commission shall decide any question involving the interpretation or application of any provision of this title subject to appeal of such decision to the council. The planning commission shall seek the advice of the planning director and/or any concerned city department or officer before deciding on any question of interpretation. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.02.000, 1977).  
17.88.070 - Interpretation—Minimum requirements—Map-text conflict. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be construed to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort or general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the regulations of this title shall govern. In the event of difference or conflict between the text of this title and the official zoning maps contained in this title, the designations on the official zoning map shall govern. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.02.010, 1977).  
17.88.080 - Violation—Penalty—Involved parties. 
A.  Violations of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of any conditions established in connection with grants of variances, conditional use permits, site plans or planned unit developments) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise who violates this title or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars or imprisoned not more than six months in the council jail, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
B.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or parts thereof, or any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a violation of this title may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.01.030, 1977).  
17.88.090 - Violation—Nuisance—Abatement. 
Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title and any use of land, buildings or premises conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title or contrary to a permit or variance or the terms or conditions imposed in this title is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the planning director or building inspector may cause to be commenced action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 336 § 2.01.040, 1977).  
Chapter 17.90 - GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT AND SPECIFIC PLANS 
Sections: 
 
17.90.010 - Purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted to provide a procedure whereby interested persons may initiate requests to amend the general plan, or to adopt or amend specific plans, affecting property within, or proposed for annexation to, the city. 
(Ord. 340 § 1(a), 1977).  
17.90.020 - City-initiated action exempt when. 
Except for Section 17.90.040, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to amendments to the general plan, or to the adoption of, or amendment to, a specific plan, initiated by the council or the planning commission. 
(Ord. 340 § 1(b), 1977).  
17.90.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "General plan" means the general plan of the city, and any of its various elements, as adopted pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 65330 et seq.; 
B.  "Specific plan" means any plan adopted for the systematic execution of the general plan, as adopted pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 65450 et seq.; 
C.  All other words and phrases used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 17.04. 
(Ord. 340 § 2, 1977).  
17.90.040 - General plan amendment—Duties when permitted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 65358, no mandatory element of the general plan may be amended more than four times in any calendar year, unless otherwise authorized by state law. The city council shall adopt by resolution a procedure for determining when general plan amendments will be heard by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. 938 § 1, 2008).  
17.90.050 - General plan amendment—Application. 
A.  Any interested person may submit an application to amend the general plan as it may pertain to property within, or proposed for annexation to, the city. 
B.  The application shall be made to the city planner, accompanied by the fee specified therefor, and shall contain such information as the planner may require, in such form (including maps, drawings and textual materials) as may be necessary for adequate review. No applications shall be deemed complete until all required information has been submitted. 
(Ord. 340 § 3(b), 1977).  
17.90.060 - General plan amendment—Planning commission review. 
A.  The planning commission shall, on the dates prescribed, consider at a public hearing the applications for amendments to the general plan, and any amendment initiated by the council or the planning commission. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  Noticing shall be consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
C.  A recommendation for one or more amendments to the general plan shall be by resolution and shall require the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the total voting members of the planning commission, as prescribed by the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 340 § 3(c), 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 8, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1072, § 9, 6-13-2017)  
17.90.070 - General plan amendment—Council review. 
A.  The resolution of the planning commission shall be forwarded to the council. 
B.  At its next regular meeting after receipt of the resolution of the planning commission, the council shall set a public hearing on the proposed amendment(s) to the general plan not more than thirty days thereafter and shall give notice consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
C.  On the date set for hearing, the council shall consider the proposed amendment(s) to the general plan. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
D.  Any change or addition made by the council to the recommendation of the planning commission shall be referred to the planning commission for a report as required by Government Code Section 65356. 
E.  The council may, after the hearing or after receiving the report on any change or addition, amend the general plan by resolution, as provided by Government Code Section 65357. 
(Ord. 340 § 3(d), 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 10, 6-13-2017)  
17.90.080 - Appeal from denial by planning commission. 
A.  Any person whose application for an amendment to the general plan has been denied by the planning commission may, within ten days of such decision, appeal the action to the council by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk. 
B.  The council shall consider the appeal together with its consideration of other amendments to the general plan approved by the planning commission, if any. 
C.  If there are no other proposed amendments before the council, it shall hear the appeal within thirty days of the filing thereof. Whether or not other amendments are pending, if it grants the appeal, it shall be deemed a change or addition within the meaning of Government Code Section 65356. It shall return the matter to the planning commission for its report as required by that section, and shall thereafter consider the matter, upon receipt of the report by the planning commission, as required by Section 17.90.070. 
(Ord. 340 § 3(e), 1977).  
17.90.090 - Specific plan—Application. 
A.  Any interested person may apply for the adoption of a specific plan to implement the provisions of the general plan. 
B.  An application for the adoption of a specific plan shall be made to the city planner, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. Such application shall include such information as the planner may require, in such form (including maps, drawings and textual materials) as may be necessary for adequate review. No applications shall be deemed complete until all required information has been submitted. 
(Ord. 340 § 4(a, b), 1977).  
17.90.100 - Specific plan—Planning commission review. 
A.  The planning commission shall, within thirty days of the receipt of the application, establish a time schedule for the consideration of the application, including one or more public hearings thereon. Such schedule shall provide that the review process will be complete and action shall be taken on the application not more than one hundred twenty days after such schedule is adopted. The time schedule shall automatically be extended if necessary to complete review of any draft environmental impact report on the specific plan as may be required by applicable state law. 
B.  The schedule of the planning commission shall include the order of consideration of all aspects of the specific plan (viz: the order in which it will consider circulation, land uses and densities, location of public facilities, implementing regulations, and other matters specified in Government Code Section 65451). 
C.  The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the specific plan and provide notice consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
D.  The recommendation of a specific plan to the council shall be by resolution of the planning commission and shall require the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of its total voting members, as required by Government Code Section 65501. 
E.  If the planning commission fails to take final action on the application within the time specified in subsection A, the application shall be deemed denied, unless the applicant consents to an extension of time in which the planning commission may act. 
(Ord. 340 § 4(c), 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 11, 6-13-2017)  
17.90.110 - Specific plan—Council action. 
A.  The recommendation of the planning commission shall be forwarded to the council. 
B.  At its next regular meeting after receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the council shall set a public hearing on the specific plan not more than thirty days thereafter and shall give notice consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
C.  On the date set for hearing, the council shall consider the proposed specific plan. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
D.  The council may adopt the specific plan by ordinance or resolution. 
E.  If the council determines to make any change or addition to the specific plan, it shall return the matter to the planning commission for its report thereon as provided by Government Code Section 65504. 
(Ord. 340 § 4(d), 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1072, § 12, 6-13-2017)  
17.90.120 - Appeal of planning commission denial. 
A.  If the planning commission denies the application for a specific plan, the applicant may appeal to the city council within ten days of the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk. 
B.  At its next regular meeting after receiving the appeal, the council shall set a date to act thereon not more than thirty days thereafter. 
C.  On the date set, the council shall hear the appeal and render its decision thereon. The matter may be continued from time to time. 
D.  If the council grants the appeal, it shall be deemed a change or addition within the meaning of Government Code Section 65504. It shall return the matter to the planning commission for its report thereon as provided by that section, and shall thereafter consider the matter, upon receipt of the report of the planning commission, as required by Section 17.90.110. 
(Ord. 340 § 4(e), 1977).  
17.90.130 - Specific plans—Amendment. 
Any person owning property affected by a specific plan may apply to amend the same. Such amendment shall be processed in the same manner as the adoption of a specific plan. 
(Ord. 340 § 5, 1977).  
17.90.140 - Concurrent processing of general amendments and specific plans. 
An application to amend the general plan may be processed concurrently with an application to adopt or amend a specific plan. 
(Ord. 340 § 6, 1977).  
Chapter 17.92 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.92.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.010, 1977).  
17.92.020 - Limitation. 
Unless otherwise expressed in this title, the provisions in this chapter are the exclusive procedures and rules relating to development agreements. In the event of conflict, these provisions shall prevail over any other provisions in this title. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.011, 1977).  
17.92.030 - Initiation. 
A development agreement may be initiated by: 
A.  An application of one or more qualified applicants as defined in Section 17.92.040; 
B.  By resolution of intention of the city council; 
C.  By resolution of intention of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.012, 1977).  
17.92.040 - Qualification of applicant. 
Only a qualified applicant or his authorized agent may file an application pursuant to this chapter. A qualified applicant is a person who (which) has a legal or an equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development agreement. Such interest must be such that the applicant has or will have control of the use of the property during the proposed term of the agreement. The planning director may require an applicant to submit proof of his (its) interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent, if any, designated to act for the applicant. The planning director may require an applicant or agent to submit a title report from a reputable title insurance company or other evidence to verify the legal or equitable interest of the applicant in the property. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.015, 1977).  
17.92.050 - Application. 
A.  Application for a development agreement shall be made in writing to the planning department on a form prescribed by the planning director. The application shall be accompanied by those items specified in Section 17.82.030. 
B.  In addition to the information required by subsection A of this section, the planning director may require a qualified applicant to submit such additional information and supporting data as the director considers necessary to process the application. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1928: Ord. 336 § 12.01.020, 1977).  
17.92.060 - Fees. 
For the purpose of defraying the expense involved in connection with an application, the council may establish by resolution a schedule of fees. A schedule of fees shall be available in the planning department and on file in the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. 496 § 2, 1983: Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.022, 1977).  
17.92.070 - Withdrawal of application. 
An applicant may withdraw an application filed pursuant to this chapter at any time prior to city council action on the application. Any fee required for processing the application shall not be returned or refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.024, 1977).  
17.92.080 - Form of agreement. 
A.  The agreement shall contain all the matters required by Government Code Section 65865.2, and such other matters as the city council determines to be appropriate. 
B.  The agreement shall be drafted on paper eight and one-half inches by eleven inches and all attached exhibits shall be of a size to permit recording of the document pursuant to Section 17.92.160. 
C.  The city attorney shall prepare a standard form of agreement, which, when adopted by the city council, shall be used as the base document for each development agreement. Changes and additions to the standard form shall be made as individual circumstances dictate. An applicant may suggest modifications to the standard form. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.024, 1977).  
17.92.090 - Review of application. 
A.  The planning director shall review the application and shall accept it for filing if it is complete and accurate. 
B.  The planning director shall review the application and shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the planning commission with regard to the proposed agreement. 
C.  The city attorney shall prepare a draft agreement and forward the same to the planning director. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.026, 1977).  
17.92.100 - Transmittal to planning commission—Public hearing. 
The planning director shall transmit the application and the draft agreement to the planning commission for a public hearing when all of the necessary reports and recommendations are complete. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 17.92.140. The application for a development agreement may be considered concurrently with other discretionary permits or approval for the project. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.030, 1977).  
17.92.110 - Report of planning commission. 
After the planning commission has held a public hearing, it shall render its decision in the form of a written report and recommendation to the city council. The report and recommendation shall include proposed findings on the matters stated in Section 17.92.120C. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.032, 1977).  
17.92.120 - Hearing by city council. 
A.  Upon receipt of the recommendation and report of planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 17.92.140. 
B.  After the council has held a public hearing, it may approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the development agreement. It may, but need not, refer matters not previously considered by the planning commission to the planning commission for a report and recommendation. The planning commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on matters referred to it by the city council. 
C.  The council shall not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the agreement: 
1.  Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
2.  Is compatible with the uses authorized in and the regulations prescribed for, the land use zone(s) in which the real property is located; 
3.  Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good land use practices; 
4.  Will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing in the immediate area nor be detrimental or injurious to property or persons in the general neighborhood or to the general welfare of the residents of the city as a whole; 
5.  Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values; 
6.  Is consistent with the provisions of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. 
D.  The agreement may provide that the rules, regulations and official policies governing the permitted uses of land, density, design, improvement and construction standards, or any one of these, shall be those rules, regulations and official policies in force at the date of execution of the agreement. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.034, 1977).  
17.92.130 - Approval of development agreement. 
If the city council approves the development agreement, it shall adopt an amendment to this title approving the agreement and directing the mayor to execute the agreement after the effective date of the amendment to the title. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.036, 1977).  
17.92.140 - Public noticing. 
A.  Noticing shall be consistent with the requirements of [Section] 17.02.080. 
B.  The notice requirements referred to in subsection A of this section are as required by the laws existing at the time of adoption of this chapter. If state law is amended to prescribe a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. 
C.  The failure of any person to receive notice required by law of any hearing as required by this chapter shall not affect the authority of the council to enter into a development agreement. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.038, 1977). 
(Ord. No. 1061, § 9, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1072, § 13, 6-13-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1061, § 9, adopted Dec. 13, 2016, changed the title of § 17.92.140 from "Required notice for public hearings" to read as herein set out.  
17.92.150 - Initiation of amendment or cancellation. 
A.  Any party to a development agreement may propose an amendment to or cancellation of the agreement in whole or in part. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this section and in Section 17.92.190, the procedure for proposing and adopting an amendment to, or a cancellation in whole or in part of, the development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance. However, if the city initiates a proposed amendment to or a cancellation in whole or in part of the agreement, the city shall first give written notice to each party other than the city who executed the agreement of its intention to initiate such proceedings, not less than thirty days in advance of giving public notice of the hearing to consider such amendment or cancellation. 
C.  Any amendment to the development agreement which does not relate to the duration of the agreement, permitted uses of the property, density or intensity of use, height or size of proposed buildings, provisions for reservation or dedication of land, or to any conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements relating to subsequent discretionary actions related to design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, or any other condition or covenant relating to the use of the property shall not require a noticed public hearing before the parties may execute an amendment to the agreement. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.040, 1977).  
17.92.160 - Recordation. 
Within ten days after the effective date of a development agreement, or any modification or the cancellation thereof, the city clerk shall have the agreement, the modification or the notice of cancellation recorded with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.044, 1977).  
17.92.170 - Agreement file. 
The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the agreement file. The file shall include an executed copy of the agreement and the originals of all exhibits, reports of periodic review, amendments, modifications or cancellation, to the agreement. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.046, 1977).  
17.92.180 - Periodic review. 
A.  The planning commission shall not less than once every twelve months from the effective date of the development agreement review the same for compliance with its terms and conditions. 
B.  The planning director shall begin the review proceedings by giving notice of the periodic review of the development agreement to each party to the agreement other than the city. He shall give such mailed notice at least fifteen days in advance of the time at which the matter will be considered by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.050, 1977).  
17.92.190 - Procedure for periodic review. 
A.  The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing at which time the party or parties to the agreement, other than the city, must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue shall be upon such party or parties. 
B.  The planning commission shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not, for the period under review, there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreements. 
C.  After the public hearing, the planning commission shall render its determination in the form of a report to the city council. If the planning commission determines that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement, the commission may include in its report a recommendation for the modification or termination of the agreement. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.052, 1977).  
17.92.200 - Hearing by city council—Modification or termination following periodic review. 
A.  The council shall place the report of the commission on its agenda at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting following the planning commission meeting at which the report was made. 
B.  1.  If the planning commission reports that there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review, the council shall accept the report for filing and shall not take any further action unless: 
a.  The council, on its own motion, votes to set the matter for hearing; 
b.  An appeal is filed from the determination of the planning commission pursuant to Section 17.86.050. 
2.  If the planning commission reports that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review, the council shall hold a public hearing to consider the report and recommendation of the commission. 
C.  Whenever the commission report is scheduled for hearing, notice of such hearing shall be given, as provided in Section 17.92.140. Such notice shall provide: 
1.  The time and place of the public hearing; 
2.  A statement that the planning commission has or has not determined that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review; 
3.  A statement that the city council may terminate or modify the agreement at the conclusion of the hearing. 
D.  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council may refer the matter to the planning commission for a further report and recommendation, or it may make a final determination on whether or not there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. If the council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the review, the council may terminate the agreement or the council may modify the agreement and impose those conditions which it considers necessary and appropriate to protect the interests of the city. Any court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the final determination by the council shall be commenced within sixty days from the date upon which a final determination is made, as set forth in Section 17.88.040. 
(Ord. 476 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 336 § 12.01.054, 1977).  
Chapter 17.94 - TRIP REDUCTION 
Sections: 
 
17.94.010 - Findings—Purpose—Objectives—Intent. 
A.  The city council finds and determines that increasing employment opportunities and residential construction in the city and in Placer County are projected to create a substantial increase in traffic volumes. The geographical location and atmospheric conditions of the city and Placer County are conducive to the formation of air pollution attributed largely to motor vehicle emissions. California Health and Safety Code § 40919(d), as modified by the California Clean Air Act of 1988, mandates that in serious non-attainment areas such as Placer County, there will be no net increases in vehicular emissions by 1997 and by 1999, an average vehicle ridership (AVR) of 1.4 will be attained in the weekday commute period. California Government Code § 65089.3 (b) (3) and the Placer County congestion management plan requires all jurisdictions within Placer County to adopt and implement a trip reduction ordinance. Ridesharing among employees for home-to-work trips is a simple, inexpensive, and effective means of reducing single occupant motor vehicle trips. A reduction in such trips can be expected to result in an improvement to the region's air quality, and a reduction in traffic congestion and energy consumption impacts related to the anticipated growth in new jobs and residential construction. Cooperation with and coordination of trip reduction programs with other cities, counties, and communities in the region and through regional agencies would enhance the effectiveness of such programs. 
B.  The purposes of this chapter are the following: 
1.  Reduce total vehicle emissions in Placer County and South Placer region by reducing the number of vehicular trips that might otherwise be generated by home-to-work commuting; 
2.  Reduce traffic congestion in Placer County by reducing both the number of vehicular trips and the vehicular miles traveled that might otherwise be generated by home-to-work commuting; 
3.  Reduce or delay the need for major transportation facility improvements and reduce congestion by making efficient use of existing facilities; 
4.  Reduce present and future motor vehicle emissions as a contribution for complying with federal and state ambient air quality standards; 
5.  Implement measures that will work towards attainment of ambient air quality standards and compliance with congestion management program (CMP) requirements; 
6.  Increase the average vehicle ridership (AVR) during the weekday commute period ("peak period") to work towards goals set forth in the California Clean Air Act. 
C.  The fundamental objective of this chapter is to increase the average vehicle ridership (AVR) for home-to-work commuting to an average of 1.4 passengers per vehicle (AVR = 1.4). Large employment facilities or common work locations will be expected to accomplish a higher portion of this reduction than small employment centers in recognition of the greater opportunity for rideshare matches and increased viability of transit at large employment facilities. 
D.  The intent of this chapter is that employers strive to reach the goal of an average vehicle ridership (AVR) of 1.4 persons per vehicle within the air basin by 1999 in compliance with the California Clean Air Act. Employers and property controllers are required to put forth a good faith effort to encourage employees to use alternative transportation modes through the methods described below. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Alternative commute mode" means method of traveling to and from the worksite other than by single occupant vehicle (i.e., transit, carpool, vanpool, bicycle, walking, telecommuting). 
B.  "Average vehicle ridership (AVR)" means the average number of persons occupying each vehicle. AVR is calculated by multiplying the number of employees by the standard number of trips in a work week (generally ten), then divided by actual number of vehicular trips per work week. For example, if all employees drive alone to work each day, the AVR = 1.0. Ten employees would be expected to take ten trips each per week for a total of one hundred trips. If only sixty-seven vehicular trips are taken, then the AVR is 1.4, which means that, on average, each vehicle is transporting 1.4 people to their destination. The higher the AVR, the more people are using alternative transportation methods. 
C.  "Carpool" means a motor vehicle occupied by two or more persons traveling to and from work. 
D.  "Common work location" means single building, building complex, campus, or work sites at common location. A common work location is typified by a common private parking lot or area to be used by employees, tenants, customers, and/or other visitors to the complex, notwithstanding parking slot designations, such as specific spaces designated for specific tenants. To be considered a common work location, the site must have a central contact point, such as property manager or property owner. There are different requirements depending on the existence of a central contact point. 
E.  "Commuter" means an employee who travels regularly to and from a work facility three or more days a week. 
F.  "Commuter matching service" means any system for mapping and matching home and work locations of interested commuters to identify prospects for ridesharing. 
G.  "Employee transportation coordinator (ETC)" means an employee or other individual designated by an employer or project controller to coordinate and implement TCM activities as required by the transportation plan. 
H.  "Peak period commuter" means any employee who travels regularly to and from a work facility three or more days a week and arrives or departs from the facility during the weekday peak period specified by the city. This peak period shall be linked to the hours that commuter congestion actually occurs. 
I.  "Project controller" means the owner, lessor and/or manager of a common work location. 
J.  "Rideshare program" means the commuter matching service and commuter information service operated by the South Placer TMA or Caltrans-Sacramento Rideshare. 
K.  "Ridesharer" means any employee who commutes to and from his or her work location by any mode other than single occupancy light or medium duty vehicle, motorcycle, or moped. 
L.  "Shift of employment" means any group of employees who work at a common work location and who arrive and depart from work in a common time interval not greater than one hour. 
M.  "Single occupant vehicle (SOV)" means a motor vehicle occupied by one employee for commute purposes. 
N.  "Transportation control measures (TCMs)" means measures used to maintain or improve the efficient movement of persons and goods while reducing the congestion and air quality impacts associated with motorized vehicles. 
O.  "Transportation control measure (TCM) coordinator" means a city employee designated by the city manager to manage and enforce employer compliance with TRO requirements. 
P.  "Transportation management association (TMA)" means an association, usually of employers, developers, property managers, and public agencies, organized to facilitate, support, and encourage the use of alternative transportation methods for commuters. 
Q.  "Transportation plan" means the plan developed by the employer or project controller to reduce single occupant vehicle trips, pursuant to Section 17.94.050(B). 
R.  "Trip reduction credit" means the number of points credited to an employer's transportation plan for implementing a specific transportation control measure (TCM) program. 
S.  "Vanpool" means a motor vehicle, other than a motor truck or truck tractor, suited for occupancy by more than six but less than sixteen persons including the driver, traveling to and from work. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.030 - Requirements—Level 1 (all employers, and common work locations). 
A.  Providing Information. Every employer and common work location shall encourage use of alternative commute modes by providing the following: 
1.  Posting in a conspicuous place or places informational material provided or updated annually by the TCM coordinator, to encourage ridesharing, such as: 
a.  Current schedules, rates (including procedures for obtaining transit passes), and routes of mass transit service to the common work location or employment site, 
b.  The location of all bicycle routes within at least a five-mile radius of the facility, 
c.  Posters or flyers encouraging the use of ridesharing and referrals to sources of information concerning ridesharing; 
2.  Disseminating annually to all tenants and employees, and to new tenants and new employees when hired, written information provided by the TCM coordinator regarding an area-wide commuter ridesharing matching service. 
All posters, flyers, schedules, maps, and other information required for compliance with this section will be provided by the city on an annual basis or as updates occur. 
B.  Survey. All employers and common work locations shall complete and return to the TCM coordinator an annual survey regarding employees' use of alternative transportation modes. For employers of less than fifty, a brief survey form on a postcard will be used. Employers of more than fifty shall be provided a more detailed survey form for completion. Survey forms shall be provided by the TCM coordinator. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.040 - Requirements—Level 2—All common work locations (without a central contact point) with one hundred or more employees at a single site. 
Worksites that otherwise fit the definition of a common work location but which do not have a central contact point must implement the following measures: (1) all requirements of Level 1; (2) place bicycle racks; and (3) designate carpool parking spaces. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.050 - Requirements—Level 3—All employers or common work locations (with a central contact point) with one hundred or more employees at a single site. 
In addition to the requirements of Level 1, all employers or common work locations with one hundred or more employees working at a single site for at least twenty hours per week and which have a central contact point shall provide additional encouragement for the use of alternative transportation modes through the provision of the incentives and resources described in this section. The single site, twenty hours per week requirement is included to exempt employers and employment situations with highly mobile employment characteristics, such as construction work, real estate sales, part-time employment, and so on. 
A.  Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). 
1.  Every employer or project controller of a common work location which is subject to this section shall designate an employee transportation coordinator (ETC). The name, title, address, and telephone number of the ETC shall be reported to the TCM coordinator within sixty calendar days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for those employers or common work locations currently having one hundred or more employees working at a single site for at least twenty hours per week, or within sixty calendar days after reaching one hundred or more employees working at a single site for at least twenty hours per week. Project controllers of common work locations shall use the annual surveys, employer database updates, or any other information provided by the TCM coordinator to determine when the threshold is met. Employers and project controllers shall encourage ETCs to take advantage of educational resources, including training seminars, workshops, training manuals, and discussions with other ETCs. ETCs need not be full-time employees, nor is it necessary that ETC duties take up a majority of the designated employee's time. 
2.  The ETCs' responsibilities shall include: 
a.  Publicizing the availability of public transportation; 
b.  Communicating employee or tenant transportation needs to the employer, project controller, and TCM coordinator as appropriate; 
c.  Assisting employees or tenants in forming carpools or vanpools; 
d.  Assisting the employer or project controller in developing the transportation plan, and coordinating and implementing the plan; 
e.  Coordinating, documenting, and preparing the annual transportation mode survey and report; 
f.  Performing an annual survey of employees and tenant transportation profile showing the distribution of employees and tenants by transportation mode; 
g.  Coordinating with other project controllers' and other tenants' transportation plans as applicable; 
h.  Coordinating participation in a ridesharing program through a transportation management association, either as a member agency or otherwise, including the distribution and collection of commuter matching forms, and submittal to the appropriate rideshare program. The information on these forms will then be entered into the regional database to match commuters by home and work address for carpools and vanpools; 
i.  Coordinating any necessary, authorized on-site visit by the TCM coordinator. 
B.  Transportation Plan. 
1.  Plan Required. A transportation plan is required for every employer or common work location subject to this section, and for every employer or common work location upon reaching a level of one hundred or more employees working at one site for at least twenty hours per week. 
In the case of seasonal work locations, the transportation plan shall be in effect only at such times that the employment level reaches one hundred or more employees at a single site for at least twenty hours per week. 
2.  Transportation Plan Elements. The transportation plan shall include: 
a.  Description. A description of the activity and operating characteristics of the proposed or existing project (e.g., business hours and peak hours of travel), including a parking area map or diagram. 
b.  Existing Conditions. A description of the alternative transportation facilities and programs currently in place, such as bike lockers, preferential carpool parking, rideshare information posting, vanpool subsidies, etc. 
C.  Estimate. A description and estimation of the commuting characteristics of the labor force (e.g., travel distance and mode). 
d.  Transportation Control Measures (TCMs). Measures designed to reduce the number of single occupant vehicle trips. Each TCM is assigned a point value for trip reduction based on its effectiveness in reducing trips. 
e.  Implementation Schedule. A timeline showing the approximate schedule of implementation of each of the selected mitigation measures. 
f.  Management Support Letter. A letter from the top management of the employer or common work location/project controller expressing its awareness of and commitment to the plan. 
The plan shall be designed to help achieve a goal of AVR of 1.4. To do this, the plan must include mandatory and optional transportation control measures (TCMS) from the list in Section 17.94.060. Each of these TCMs is assigned a trip reduction credit; the plan must include measures that have a cumulative total of thirty trip reduction credits. As noted on the TCM menu, some TCMs can only be implemented by employers, while others are suitable for both employer and common work location transportation plans. 
3.  TCM Coordinator Assistance. The TCM coordinator shall provide assistance to ETCs in preparing and managing their transportation plan. This assistance may include, but is not limited to, guidebooks, estimate of the potential effectiveness of common ridesharing activities, sample transportation plans, educational resources, and networking opportunities. 
4.  Trip Reduction Credit for Transportation Control Measures (TCMs). In order to meet the required levels of trip reduction, every transportation plan shall list the TCMs proposed to be implemented. Every plan shall include and implement all of the mandatory TCMs set forth in Section 17.94.060. The employer or project controller may then select from optional TCMs from the TCM menu shown below that will best serve to reduce commute trips of the employees and/or tenants of the particular project. The transportation plan will then receive the vehicle trip reduction credits as defined in this section. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a common work location otherwise subject to this section may be exempted from some or all of the Level 3 requirements if implementation of the requirements are found to be infeasible by the city council. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.060 - Transportation control measure (TCM) menu. 
Each of the following transportation control measures (TCMs) are assigned a trip reduction credit. Each transportation plan must include measures that have a cumulative total of thirty trip reduction points. The code shown to the left of each measure explains the suitability of that measure for different types of transportation plans. A code (E) means it is suitable for employer plans; a code (P) means it is suitable for common work location. 
A.  Required Transportation Control Measures (TCMs). 
1.  (E, P): Designation of an employee transportation coordinator (ETC). Trip reduction credit—2 points. 
2.  (E, P): Posting of ridesharing information, including: 
a.  Posters or flyers encouraging the use of ridesharing and referrals to sources of information concerning ridesharing, 
b.  The names and phone numbers of the employee transportation coordinator (ETC), transportation management association, and the TCM coordinator. Trip reduction credit—1 point. 
3.  (E, P): Posting (by employers) or providing to employers (by project controllers) of alternative transportation mode information, including: 
a.  Current schedules, rates (including procedures for obtaining transit passes), and routes of mass transit service to common work location or employment site, 
b.  The location of all bicycle routes within at least a five-mile radius of the facility. Trip reduction credit—1 point. 
4.  (E, P): Distribution of commuter matching service applications to employees (by employers) or to employers (by project controllers). The South Placer TMA and Caltrans Sacramento Rideshare each maintain regional computer databases to match commuters with common cross streets. Each provides rideshare applications to employers for distribution and then directly mails the match lists to the employees. The South Placer TMA provides rideshare matchlisting for destinations within Placer County, while Caltrans Sacramento Rideshare provides matchlisting for out-of-county destinations. Credit will be given if the ETC distributes the applications annually to all employees or employers, as applicable, and upon hiring to all new employees. Trip reduction credit—3 points. 
5.  (E, P): Provision of bicycle parking facilities. Unless there are overriding considerations specific to the employment site, sufficient bicycle parking must be supplied to employees. To receive credit, the employer must provide bicycle parking for all bicycle commuters, as determined by survey of employees, or two percent of employment, whichever is less. The bicycle parking facilities shall be, at minimum, Class II stationary bike racks. Trip reduction credit—1 point. 
6.  (E, P): Provision of preferential carpool/ vanpool parking. Unless there are overriding considerations specific to the employment site, parking spaces for four percent of employees must be painted "Carpool Parking" or "Vanpool Parking" and must be, with the exception of handicapped and customer parking, the spaces with most convenient access to the employee entrances. The ETC shall be responsible for monitoring the spaces. Trip reduction credit—1 point. 
B.  Optional Transportation Control Measures (TCMs). Each employer or project controller, in preparing a transportation plan, may choose from the following menu of TCMs to achieve the required number of trip reduction credits. It is at the discretion of the individual employer or project controller to choose which are best suited to his location, business, and employees. 
1.  (E, P): ETC Education Program. ETC must attend educational seminars, workshops, or other approved training programs on an annual basis. Points are given based on number of hours of attendance; two points are given for eight hours of training, with an additional point for every additional four hours of training, to a maximum credit of four points. However, since initial education of the ETC is critical, additional points are available for ETC education in the first year. In the first year, four points are given for eight hours of training, with an additional two points for every additional four hours of training, to a maximum credit of ten points. The ETC training is provided free of charge by the South Placer TMA and Sacramento Rideshare. Trip reduction credit 2—10 points. 
2.  (E, P): In-house Carpool Matching Service. The ETC conducts a survey of all employees in order to identify persons interested in being matched into carpools. Potential carpoolers are then matched by work address and shift. Credit is given if this service is performed on an annual basis and for all new employees interested in ridesharing. Trip reduction credit—4 points. 
3.  (E, P): Additional Preferential Carpool/Vanpool Parking. Additional employee parking spaces must be painted "Carpool Parking" or "Vanpool Parking" and must be, with the exception of handicapped and customer parking, the spaces with most convenient access to the employee entrances. The ETC shall be responsible for monitoring the spaces. An additional point is provided for each additional two percent of total number of employees for employer plans, and for each additional ten percent of total employee designated parking for common work location plans, for which preferential carpool/vanpool parking is provided, up to a maximum of three additional points. Trip reduction credit—1—3 points. 
4.  (E, P): Transportation Management Association (TMA) Membership. The ETC or other designated management employee shall actively participate in a regional TMA. The ETC shall attend all membership meetings or send a designated representative, pay all required dues, and/or be involved in any other programs which the TMA board administers. Trip reduction credit—4 points. 
5.  (E, P): Guaranteed Ride Home Program. Employers will provide or contract to provide a guaranteed ride home for employees who rideshare two days a week or more. The guaranteed ride home would be provided to the ridesharer in the event that an emergency or illness requires that they or their carpool or vanpool driver must leave work early. Trip reduction credit—3 points. 
6.  (E, P): Parking Fee. Employees who arrive at work in single-occupant vehicles must pay a parking fee of ten dollars per week, while carpool and vanpool vehicles are not charged. Credit is given only in situations where there is no alternative free public parking available within one-quarter mile of the site. Trip reduction credit—6 points. 
7.  (E): Clean Air Fuel Vehicles. The employer leases or purchases and maintains fleet vehicles that use clean air fuels, such as compressed natural gas, electricity, methanol, and propane. Two points are given for each dedicated alternative fuel vehicle, and one point is given for each flexible fuel (able to use either gasoline or alternative fuel) vehicle, to a maximum of ten points. Trip reduction credit 1—10 points. 
8.  (E, P): Shuttle Bus Buspool Program. The employer must provide sufficient shuttle service to transport workers to and from their residences, a park-and-ride lot, or other staging area to the workplace. The employer may choose to lease a bus and may work with nearby employers or employment complexes to maximize ridership. Trip reduction credit—4 points. 
9.  (E, P): Vanpool Program. The employer is required to continuously extend an offer to purchase or lease a van or vans, to obtain insurance, and to make available to any group of at least seven employees a van for commute purposes. The employer may recover full or partial operating costs from the vanpool participants. Trip reduction credit—4 points. 
10.  (E, P): Transit/Rail Pass Subsidy. The employer provides a monthly transit or rail pass subsidy of fifty percent or the maximum taxable benefit limit, whichever is higher. The workplace must be within a reasonable walking distance of a transit stop or rail station. The ETC will be responsible for distribution of the passes and collection of fees. Trip reduction credit—4 points. 
11.  (E, P): Transit Shelter. The employer will construct a shelter on the designated bus route or will post a bond for future construction once the transit route is extended to the site. Credit is given when the transit shelter is constructed in conformance with city regulations and when the employment site is on or adjacent to existing or planned bus route. Trip reduction credit—2 points. 
12.  (E, P): Secure Bicycle Parking Facilities. Parking must be supplied for at least three percent of employment. The bicycle parking facilities shall be of the following types: 
a.  A Class I bicycle parking facility with a locking door, typically called a bicycle locker, where a single bicyclist has access to a bicycle storage compartment, 
b.  A fenced and covered area with Class II stationary bike racks and a locked gate. Trip reduction credit—2 points. 
13.  (E, P): Showers and Lockers. Two showers, one men's and one women's, shall be provided for employers of less than two hundred persons. For employers of more than two hundred persons, there shall be four showers with the number increasing by two for every five hundred employees. Ten lockers shall be provided for employers of less than two hundred persons. For employers of more than two hundred persons, there shall be twenty lockers, with the number increasing by ten for each five hundred employees. Trip reduction credit—2 points. 
14.  (E): Flexible Work Location/ Telecommuting. A management strategy allowing the employee flexibility in work place outside of the employer's established location. These strategies may include but are not limited to telecommuting from the employee's home, or the creation of neighborhood office satellites. Credit is given when employees in appropriate positions, which may not include the entire work force, are permitted to telecommute at least one day per week. Trip reduction credit—4 points. 
15.  (E): Flexible Work Hours. A work hour management strategy allowing the employee to adjust work hours outside of the employer's established start and stop time and outside peak hours. Variable work hours may include, but are not limited to: (a) staggered work hours, involving a shift in the set work hours of all employees at the workplace to those outside of peak hours, and (b) flexible work hours involving individually determined work hours within guidelines established by the employer. Credit is given when employees in appropriate positions, which may not include the entire work force, are permitted to take advantage of flexible work hours. Trip reduction credit—2 points. 
16.  (E): Compressed Work Weeks. A management strategy allowing the employee to compress the total number of hours required in a work week to fewer days. For example, a typical forty-hour work week could be compressed into four ten-hour days. Credit is given when employees in appropriate positions, which may not include the entire work force, are permitted to reduce their number of work days by at least one in two weeks (9-80 schedule). Trip reduction credit—3 points. 
17.  (E, P): On-Site Services. Necessary services would be provided within one-quarter mile of the employment site that eliminates the need for a vehicular trip before, during, or after the work day. Necessary services would include, but are not limited to, child care, cafeteria/restaurant, lunch room, automated teller machine, dry cleaners, or post office. These services may be provided by the employer, through cooperative efforts of employers and service providers, or by other means. Actual credits awarded will depend on which service or combination of services are provided and proximity to employment site. Trip reduction credit—negotiable with TCM coordinator and designated approving body. Expected range for each service: 1—10 or more points, depending on service type, proximity, and extent of service provided. Maximum point award for all services is 15 points total. 
18.  (E, P): Transit System Subsidy Grant. Employer provides support to local transit system, which could be for system operations or for capital needs such as new buses. Subsidies or grants could be financial or through donation of capital needs. Actual credits awarded will depend on the amount and type of subsidy or grant. Trip reduction credit—negotiable with TCM coordinator and designated approving body. Expected range: 1—20 points depending on amount and type of subsidy or grant. 
19.  (E, P): Jobs/Housing Balance. Employer or project controller demonstrates that at least fifty percent of the employees reside within eight miles of the work facility. Trip reduction credit—From 5 to 10 points, depending on percentage of employees living within eight mile radius: 
If less than fifty percent 	0 points; 
If fifty percent or more, but less than sixty percent, 	5 points; 
If sixty percent or more, but less than seventy percent, 	6 points; 
If seventy percent or more, but less than eighty percent, 	7 points; 
If eighty percent or more, but less than ninety percent, 	8 points; 
If ninety percent or more, but less than one hundred percent, 	9 points; 
If one hundred percent, 	10 points. 
 
20.  (E, P): Other. Trip reduction measures that are not included in this menu or do not specifically fit the descriptions contained herein may also be considered. Innovative methods are strongly encouraged. An example would be a high school setting up a ridesharing educational program for their students. Trip reduction credit—negotiable with TCM coordinator and designated approving body. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.070 - Transportation plan—Review and action. 
A.  The transportation plan shall be filed with the TCM coordinator for review and evaluation of the proposed TCM measures. The TCM coordinator shall then make a recommendation to the city manager for approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or disapproval. Upon receipt of the TCM coordinator's recommendation, the city manager shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the plan. 
B.  A decision to approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the transportation plan shall be deemed final twenty calendar days after the date the applicant receives a notice of the city manager's decision unless an appeal has been filed. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.080 - Annual reporting requirements. 
A.  All Level 1 and Level 2 employers and project controllers shall complete and return an annual survey as described in Sections 17.94.030 and 17.94.040. 
B.  All ETCs shall complete an annual transportation mode survey and status report. The purpose of this report is to verify the dates and results of the TCM measures specified in the transportation plan. 
C.  The survey portion of the report shall require the ETC to annually perform a transportation survey of employees. A standard form will be provided by the TCM coordinator to determine the changes in the distribution of employees using various transportation modes in comparison with the baseline information. The transportation survey shall include information such as origin and destination of travel, transportation mode used, work schedule, and interest in alternative mode commuting. In order for project controllers to compel tenants and their employees to provide survey information, the lease agreement should include compliance with survey requirements. A survey response rate of seventy-five percent is required to ensure the significance of the results. The surveys distributed by the ETC shall be available for audit by the city following the completion of the annual report. 
D.  The status report portion shall show the TCM measures included in the transportation plan with the implementation or completion date entered for each measure. If a measure was not implemented within the stated time frame, an explanation why it was not done must be included. If there are certain measures stipulated in the previous transportation plan that are believed to no longer be feasible, an explanation must be included. The status report portion shall include the following information: 
1.  Compliance Program. Description and documentation of compliance with TCM measures described in the transportation plan, including details of individual programs; 
2.  Commute Characteristics. Status report on effectiveness of transportation plan as shown by the commute characteristics of employees. Specifically, this includes the average number of tenants and/or employees regularly arriving at and leaving the project site by each of the following modes of transportation: 
a.  Single passenger motor vehicles (including mopeds), 
b.  Carpools, including number of vehicles and number of occupants per vehicle, 
c.  Van-type vehicles with seven or more commuters including the number of vehicles and number of occupants per vehicle, 
d.  Mass transit, 
e.  Bicycles, 
f.  Flexible work location/telecommuting, 
g.  All others; 
3.  Totals. The total number of tenants and/or employees by work shift at the project site; 
4.  Employee Characteristics. The zip code and nearest cross street of each employee's residence; 
5.  Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). The name, address, and telephone number of the ETC; 
6.  Statement of Certification. The employer or project controller must certify that the TCMs agreed to for trip reduction credit have been fully implemented. If the TCMs have not been implemented, an explanation must be included, and the annual transportation survey and report shall include actions to be taken to implement the program. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.085 - Implementation schedule. 
Except as provided in Section 17.94.050(A), employers and common work location subject to Level 3 requirements must comply with this chapter within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. All other employers and project controllers must comply with this chapter within thirty days of receipt of posting information. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.090 - Monitoring of employer performance. 
A.  The TCM coordinator shall review the annual transportation mode survey and report of each employer and common work location and compare performance with the goals established in the approved transportation plan. Inspection of the business location by the TCM coordinator may be conducted as necessary to determine compliance with these provisions or to assist ETCs in preparing surveys or reports. A good faith effort to encourage employees to use alternative transportation as provided in the transportation plan is required. However, this chapter does not hold employers liable if the TCM coordinator finds the results of the transportation plan on employee commute habits did not achieve the stated trip reduction goals. 
B.  The California Clean Air Act of 1988 requires that an average vehicle ridership (AVR) of 1.4 be attained within Placer County's air basin by the year 1999. It is not the responsibility of employers and project controllers to meet this goal in isolation; rather, it is expected that employers and project controllers will contribute towards meeting this goal. 
C.  If, after review of an annual transportation mode survey and report, the TCM coordinator finds the performance has been unsatisfactory, the TCM coordinator shall work with the employer or project controller to achieve the implementation of TCMs within one year of submittal. The employer or project controller will be assisted in submitting a revised report. 
D.  If the revised report is still not satisfactory, the TCM coordinator will prepare a staff report to the city manager. The city manager may then find that the employer or project controller and/or the ETC is in violation of this chapter and commence enforcement proceedings. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.100 - Penalties. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or with the terms of a transportation plan required pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this code and subject to the following penalties: 
A.  Misdemeanor or as an infraction in the discretion of the city attorney; 
B.  Violations of this chapter are punishable separately and independently of any other remedies at law or inequity, including, but not limited to, those remedies provided in any applicable transportation plan. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
17.94.110 - Appeal. 
Appeal from any action taken by the city manager pursuant to this chapter may be made in writing to the city council within twenty days of the city manager's decision. 
(Ord. 693 § 2 (part), 1993).  
Chapter 17.96 - DENSITY INCREASE INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
17.96.010 - Intent. 
This chapter is adopted in accord with Section 65915 et seq. of the California Government Code and the housing element of the city of Rocklin. The purpose of this chapter is to provide both owner-occupied and rental housing affordable to low, very low, extremely low, and moderate income households, senior citizens, and persons with special needs, as identified in the city's housing element. As used in this chapter, density bonus units are those units designated for senior citizens, persons with special needs, or very low, low, extremely low, or moderate income households that qualified the housing project for award of a density bonus or other incentive. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A1., 10-11-2011)  
17.96.020 - Applicable zoning districts. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all zoning districts that allow residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A1., 10-11-2011)  
17.96.030 - Qualifications. 
All proposed housing developments (including residential tentative subdivision maps) that would create five or more dwelling units shall be eligible to apply for a density bonus (including incentives, and/or concessions) consistent with the requirements, provisions, and obligations set forth in California Government Code Section 65915, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A1., 10-11-2011)  
17.96.040 - Density increase and other incentives. 
The city of Rocklin shall grant qualifying housing developments a density bonus, the amount of which shall be as specified in California Government Code Section 65915.(f) and incentives or concessions as described in California Government Code Section 68915.(d). 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A1., 10-11-2011)  
17.96.050 - Application. 
A.  An application for a density increase or other incentive under this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Division of the city of Rocklin Community Development Department, to be processed concurrently with all other entitlements of the proposed housing development. The application shall contain information sufficient to fully evaluate the request under the requirements of this chapter and in connection with the project for which the request is made including but not limited to the following: 
1.  A brief description of the proposed housing development; 
2.  The total number of housing units proposed in the development project, including unit sizes and number of bedrooms; 
3.  The total number of units proposed to be granted through the density bonus program over and above the otherwise maximum density for the project site; 
4.  The total number of units to be made affordable to, and reserved for sale or rent to, extremely low, very low or low income households, senior citizens, or other qualifying residents. 
5.  The zoning, general plan designations, and assessors parcel number(s) of the project site. 
6.  A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway(s), and parking layout. 
7.  A list of any concession(s) or incentives(s) being requested to facilitate the development of the project and a description of why the concession(s) or incentive(s) is needed. 
B.  The application shall be considered by the planning commission and/or the city council at the same time each considers the project for which the request is made. If the project is not to be otherwise considered by the planning commission or the city council, the request made under this chapter shall be considered by the community development director separately. The request shall be approved if the applicant complies with the provisions of California Government Code Sections 65915 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A1., 10-11-2011)  
17.96.060 - Retention. 
Consistent with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65915 et seq. whenever a density increase or other incentive is approved for a project, the city and the applicant shall agree to an appropriate method of assuring the continued availability of the density bonus units for a period of thirty years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. 
(Ord. No. 977, Exh. A, A1., 10-11-2011)  
Chapter 17.98 - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
Sections: 
 
17.98.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides opportunity for a variety of mobile home park environments which are compatible with the surrounding area in which they are placed. Development of mobile home parks in accordance with adopted regulations will increase the options for affordable housing and allow design flexibility in response to different site conditions and potential markets. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.020 - Applicability—Conformance to standards. 
A.  Mobile home parks are permitted in every residential zone upon issuance of a use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.70. Mobile home parks shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter, in addition to those of the underlying zone. Where the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with those of the underlying zone, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
B.  Mobile home parks shall conform to the minimum standards in this article; however, other and more restrictive requirements may be imposed in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare, as conditions of the conditional use permit. 
C.  Residential density within a mobile home park shall not exceed that of the underlying land use designation of the general plan of the city, except as provided for in Chapter 17.96 of this title. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.030 - Accessory uses. 
Mobile home parks may, subject to the issuance of a use permit, contain the following accessory uses, in addition to permitted uses within the underlying zone: 
A.  Commercial uses which are for the convenience of residents of the park, such as coin-operated laundry rooms and recreational facilities; 
B.  Outside storage for boats, campers and other large vehicles for the convenience of residents of the park; 
C.  Office space for management and sale or rent of on-site mobile home units or spaces. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.040 - Mobile home park area. 
Each mobile home park shall have a minimum area of not less than five acres. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.060 - Space area. 
Each mobile home space shall be designed to be occupied by one mobile home, and uses accessory thereto. Space sizes shall be appropriate to anticipated sizes of mobile homes, required yard setbacks, outdoor living areas, and on-site parking, and shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
A.  Spaces designed for a single-width mobile home shall not be less than two thousand four hundred square feet, and not have a space width less than thirty-five feet. 
B.  Spaces designed for double-width mobile homes shall not be less than three thousand square feet, and not have a space width less than forty-five feet. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.070 - Perimeter yards. 
There shall be a landscaped yard setback for mobile home parks of not less than the required setbacks of the underlying zone, but in no case less than twenty feet adjoining each interior property line. Where the interior yard abuts the rear yard of adjoining residentially zoned properties, then the interior landscaped area shall not be less than the rear yard setback requirement of the adjoining property. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.080 - Landscaping. 
All minimum setback areas, open spaces and recreational areas shall be permanently landscaped and maintained with ground cover, trees and shrubs. Earth berming shall be encouraged. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.090 - Perimeter fencing. 
A.  Perimeter fencing six feet in height shall be erected along boundary lines of the mobile home park, except that perimeter fencing abutting any public right-of-way shall be located behind the required landscaped yard area. All perimeter fencing shall be constructed of masonry or shall be constructed of wood with masonry pilasters, spaced a maximum of six feet apart. 
B.  Perimeter fencing may be waived when the planning commission finds that the natural terrain forms an acceptable barrier. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.100 - Separations between mobile homes and other structures. 
A.  A yard of not less than five feet shall be provided between the boundary line of each space and any mobile home, travel or recreational trailer, or accessory structure. 
B.  Minimum setbacks from any internal roadway and mobile home or other structure shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.110 - Outdoor living area. 
Private outdoor living and service areas shall be provided on each mobile home space for the privacy of the occupants. The minimum area shall not be less than three hundred square feet, with a least dimension of fifteen feet. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.120 - Interior access roadways. 
No mobile home, travel or recreational vehicle space shall have direct frontage on any public street. The private, interior roadways shall meet the following standards: 
A.  Private access roadways shall be of circular design where possible, and provide vehicular access at two or more points. Roadways with only one point of access shall not exceed one hundred fifty feet in length; however, such drives may exceed one hundred fifty feet in length if the design includes a turnaround arrangement or emergency access arrangement, to the satisfaction of the fire chief. 
B.  Private access roadways on which parking is prohibited shall be installed with a minimum full travel pavement width of twenty-eight feet. Roadways on which parking is to be allowed on one side shall have a minimum width of thirty-two feet. Roadways on which parking is to be allowed on both sides shall have a minimum width of not less than forty feet. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.130 - Parking. 
A.  At least two paved parking spaces for each mobile home space, plus at least one paved visitor parking space, conveniently located, for each four mobile homes shall be provided. Private internal roadways designed for parking on one or both sides may be used in calculating visitor parking spaces. 
B.  At least one and one-half paved parking spaces, conveniently located, for each space designated for travel or recreational vehicles shall be provided. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.140 - Storage area. 
One or more common storage areas for the convenience of the residents of the park shall be provided in an amount equal to at least one hundred square feet of storage area per mobile home space. This outside storage area shall be completely enclosed with security fencing and adequately screened from exterior view. Such a storage area shall not be located within any street or perimeter yard setback. 
(Ord. 517 § 16 (part), 1984).  
17.98.150 - Grandfather clause. 
All mobile home parks existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be deemed legal uses for the purposes of Title 17 of this code. Any expansion of the mobile home park or its accessory uses shall be subject to this section. 
(Ord. 517 § 17, 1984). 
TITLE 17 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For provisions on general plan amendments, see Chapter 17.90 of this code. 
2.  For provisions on zoning text and map amendments, see Chapter 17.82 of this code. 
