6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 1/436
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Selma, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2019-1, passed March 4, 2019. Ordinances
of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE CODIFICATION OF THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SELMA, CALIFORNIA, AND
PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE OFFICIAL CODE OF THE CITY.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SELMA, DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance the Official City Code of the City of Selma, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., and
hereby approved and accepted shall be the Official Code of all Ordinances of a general and permanent character of the City.
Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplemental
service whereby each newly adopted Ordinance of a general nature, amending, altering, adding to, or deleting provisions of this Official City Code is
identified by the proper catch line, and following preparation by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., is inserted in the proper place in each of the Official copies.
Each such insertion shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of adoption by the Council, and each new provision shall become effective
upon such insertion.
Section 3. At least three (3) copies of this City Code shall at all times be on file and available for inspection in the office of the Clerk.
Passed and Approved by the Mayor and Council this 15th day of April, 1963.
insert figures
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Governing Body this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of Selma.
Any reference made to the number of any Section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate
Chapter and Title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the Section itself, when reference is made to this City Code
by title in any legal document.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of
this State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this City Code shall set forth the Title, Chapter and Section number of the Section or Sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to Sterling Codifiers, Inc., and the said ordinance material shall be
prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted
in each individual copy of the City Code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage.
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 2/436
Whenever any word in any Section of this City Code importing the plural number is used, in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons,
any single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender,
several matters, parties, or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. Provided, that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any Section of this City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
1-1-5: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each Section of this Code the following rules shall be observed:
(A) Intent to Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud
any person.
(B) Liability of Employers and Agents: When the provisions of any Section of this City Code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person
actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the
said person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.1 (1963 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being
still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following Section), from which
are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed; tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries
and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this City Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect of such provisions
only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture
or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon
the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding Section shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance
of the City herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any
person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this City
Code. (1963 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the meaning herein ascribed to them unless the content makes such
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 3/436
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: The word "Agent" as used in the Code shall mean a person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The word "City" as used in this Code shall mean the City of Selma.
CODE: The word "Code" unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this City Code.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words of
the City of Selma.
FEE: The word "Fee" as used in this Code shall mean a sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: The word "Knowingly" imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission within the provisions of this Code.
It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The word "License" as used in this Code shall mean the permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: The word "Misdemeanor" shall mean any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this Code which is a lesser offense than a
felony as defined by State law.
NEGLIGENT: The word "Negligent", as well as "Neglect", "Negligence", and "Negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature or probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: The word "Nuisance" shall mean anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the City; or any act or
thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of, another person or to the Community.
OCCUPANT: The word "Occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land
whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: The word "Offense" shall mean any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this
Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words of the City
of Selma.
OPERATOR: The word "Operator" as used in this Code shall mean the person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: The word "Owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the
whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: The word "Person" shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, or any other form of association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: The term "Personal Property" shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action
and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated,
discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.
RETAILER: The word "Retailer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
STREET: The word "Street" shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevard, public ways, public square, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: The word "Tenant" applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The words "Wholesaler" and "Wholesale Dealer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: The term "Wilfully" when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the
act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage. (1963 Code)
Chapter 4
PENALTY
1-4-1: VIOLATIONS DEEMED INFRACTIONS OR MISDEMEANORS WHEN; PENALTY:
(A) Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, unless the violation is made an infraction by ordinance, the city attorney, or any court of competent jurisdiction.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 4/436
(B) Except where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an
ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
(C) Except where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of an ordinance
of the city of Selma is punishable by:
1. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;
2. A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year;
3. A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.
(D) Each and every day a violation of any provision of this code is committed, exists or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord.
2013-9, 11-4-2013)
1-4-2: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS:
Any violation of this code will be subject to an administrative citation (chapter 20 of this title), unless expressly prohibited. (Ord. 2013-9, 11-4-2013)
1-4-3: CIVIL DEBT:
The amount of any tax, license, permit, service charge, costs to enforce or compel compliance of this code or any code incorporated by reference,
charge for any municipal utility service, or any other amount due of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this code shall be deemed a
civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such
delinquent or unpaid tax fee, charge, license or permit, together with any administrative fee or penalty authorized or required by this code. This remedy
shall not prohibit the use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law and shall be cumulative. (Ord. 2013-9, 11-4-2013)
1-4-4: NUISANCE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
code or of the provisions of any code adopted by reference herein shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city
pursuant to chapter 21 of this title. (Ord. 2013-9, 11-4-2013)
1-4-5: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any person in violation of any section of this code or any code adopted by reference herein may have any license, permit or other entitlement
previously issued by the city revoked by the city at the discretion of the city manager or her or his designee. (Ord. 2013-9, 11-4-2013)
1-4-6: CUMULATIVE; NONEXCLUSIVE:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to be an exclusive penalty or remedy and does not prohibit the application of any other penalty or remedy available
under federal, state or local law. Penalties and remedies described in this chapter are cumulative. (Ord. 2013-9, 11-4-2013)
1-4-7: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any
fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (Ord. 2013-9, 11-4-2013)
Chapter 5
COUNCIL
1-5-1: MEETINGS1:
(A) Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each month, unless otherwise specified by
resolution of the City Council, which shall be adopted at a regular meeting. In the event that a regular meeting falls on a holiday observed by the
City, the meeting shall be held on the next regular business day. The City Council shall establish the time for regular City Council meetings by
resolution, which shall be adopted at a regular meeting. (Ord. 2018-8, 8-20-2018)
(B) Special Meetings; Notice: At any time the Mayor or three (3) Councilmen may call a special meeting by delivering personally, or by mail, written
notice to each member of the Council, and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio, or television station which has requested such
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 5/436
notice in writing. Such notice must be delivered personally or by mail at least twenty four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as specified in
the notice. Such written notice may be dispensed with as to any member who: 1) at, or prior to, the time the meeting convenes files with the Clerk a
written waiver of such notice; 2) is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. (Ord. 754, 9-7-1976)
(C) Special Meetings; Scope: At any special meeting the Council shall act only on matters referred to in the notice or consent.
(D) Meetings; Public: Meetings of the Council shall be public; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the Council from
holding executive sessions during a regular or special meeting to consider the appointment or dismissal of a public officer or to hear complaints or
charges brought against the officer by another officer, unless the officer requests a public hearing. The Council may also exclude from any meeting,
during the examination of a witness, any other witnesses in the matter being investigated by the Council2.
(E) Adjourned Meetings; Hour: When an order of adjournment of a regular meeting fails to state the hour at which the adjournment meeting is to be
held, it shall be held at the hour specified for regular meetings.
(F) Quorum; Adjournment; Compelling Attendance3: A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Less than a
majority may adjourn from time to time and compel attendance of absent members. (1963 Code)
(G) Emergency Meetings4: Whenever a state of war emergency exists, or a state of emergency exists, or a local emergency exists, the City Council
shall meet as soon as possible. The meeting may be called by the Mayor or by three (3) Councilmen, and the place of meeting need not be within
the City of Selma. (Ord. 754, 9-7-1976)
1-5-2: PROCEDURAL RULES5:
The Council may establish rules for the conduct of its proceedings. It may punish a member or other person for disorderly behavior at a meeting.
(1963 Code)
1-5-3: JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS6:
The council shall cause the clerk to keep a correct record of its proceedings. At the request of a member, the clerk shall enter ayes and noes in the
journal. (1963 Code)
1-5-4: VACANCY FOR ABSENCE7:
If a councilman absents himself from all regular council meetings for sixty (60) days consecutively from the last regular meeting he attended, his office
shall become vacant and shall be filled as any other vacancy. (1963 Code)
1-5-5: REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY8:
(A) It is hereby found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city in accordance with the
provisions of the community redevelopment law. Said redevelopment agency is hereby established pursuant to section 33101 of the community
development law, to be known as the Selma redevelopment agency (SRA). Said redevelopment agency is hereby authorized to transact business
and exercise its powers under provisions of the community redevelopment law.
(B) Pursuant to the provisions of section 33200 of the community redevelopment law, this city council hereby declares itself to be the redevelopment
agency of the city and hereby finds and determines that the designation of the city council as the redevelopment agency will serve the public
interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the
community to implement the purposes of the community redevelopment law. (Ord. 861, 10-17-1983)
(C) The compensation of each member of the redevelopment agency is hereby fixed at the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00) per meeting for which the
agency member is in attendance, up to a maximum of four (4) meetings per month. (Ord. 2005-12, 12-5-2005)
Chapter 6
OFFICERS
1-6-1: GOVERNING OFFICERS:
The government of the city shall be vested in the following officers:
(A) Council of five (5) members.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 6/436
(B) City administrator.
(C) Clerk.
(D) Treasurer.
(E) Chief of police.
(F) Fire chief.
(G) Such subordinate officers or employees as are provided by law, and deemed necessary by the council for the proper administration of the
municipal government1. (Ord. 810, 2-19-1980)
1-6-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be eligible to hold office as councilman, clerk or treasurer unless that person is an elector of, and has resided in this city for thirty (30)
days preceding election or appointment to office. If, during the term of office, the official changes residence to outside the city limits or ceases to be an
elector of the city, that person's office shall immediately become vacant2. (Ord. 742-A, 3-15-1976)
1-6-3: ELECTIVE OFFICERS; TERMS:
The elective officers of the city shall hold office for a term of four (4) years, and until their successors are elected and qualified3. (1963 Code)
1-6-4: OATH:
Before entering upon his duties, each city officer shall take and file with the clerk the constitutional oath of office. (1963 Code)
1-6-5: APPOINTMENTS:
The city administrator shall appoint all subordinate officers and employees of the city unless otherwise indicated by law. (Ord. 810, 2-19-1980)
1-6-6: VACANCIES:
The council shall fill any vacancy occurring in the elective offices provided for herein, by appointment. If a vacancy occurs in an elective office and the
council fails to fill it within thirty (30) days, it shall immediately cause an election to be held to fill the vacancy. Any person appointed or elected to fill a
vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 810, 2-19-1980)
1-6-7: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
Before entering upon the duties of their offices, the clerk and treasurer shall each execute a bond to the city. The penal sum of the bond shall be the
amount recommended by the attorney and fixed by the council not less than thirty (30) days before the election of the officers. The council may require
bonds of any other officer or employee of the city, and shall approve all bonds. When approved the clerk's bond shall be filed with the mayor and all
other bonds shall be filed with the clerk. (1963 Code)
1-6-8: COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The compensation of each duly qualified council member is hereby fixed at the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. Such change in
compensation shall not take effect until one or more members of the city council begins a new term of office. (Ord. 2005-12, 12-5-2005)
1-6-9: CITY MONEY; DEPOSIT; REPORTS:
Any officer or employee collecting or receiving money belonging to, or for the use of, the city shall deposit it immediately in the treasury in the manner
prescribed by law for the benefit of the funds to which it belongs. He shall report such deposits to, and settle with, the clerk on the first Monday of each
month4. (1963 Code)
1-6-10: OFFICERS; INTEREST IN CONTRACTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 7/436
City officers shall not be interested in any contract made by them in their official capacity, or by any body or board of which they are members, nor
shall any officers be purchasers at any sale, or vendors at any purchase made by them in their official capacity. (1963 Code)
1-6-11: SIGNATURE:
All written contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the city and all instruments requiring the city seal shall be signed by the mayor or the
city administrator and shall be countersigned by the city clerk. (Ord. 837, 3-1-1982)
Chapter 7
MAYOR
1-7-1: MAYOR; SELECTION:
The offices of mayor and mayor pro tempore shall be rotated among members of the city council each year. At the first meeting of the city council, in
the month of December each year, one member of the city council shall assume the office of mayor, and another shall assume the office of mayor pro
tempore. At the first meeting of the city council in the month of December each year, the most senior member of the city council, in terms of length of
continuous service on the city council, shall assume the office of mayor and the member having the next longest term of service as a city council
member shall assume the office of mayor pro tempore. In the event members eligible to assume the office of mayor and mayor pro tempore are of
equal seniority, the member who received the most votes at the most recent municipal election shall be treated as having more seniority than the other
member. In the year following the year on which the most senior member of the city council occupies the office of mayor the mayor pro tempore shall
assume the office of mayor and the member occupying the office of mayor following the effective date hereof and during the prior year shall be treated
as the least senior member of the city council for purposes of applying this section only until such time as all remaining members have occupied that
office. In that same year the next most senior member shall assume the position of mayor pro tempore.
Newly elected members shall be treated as having less seniority than those who remain on the city council beyond their initial four (4) year term. Any
member may decline to serve in either the position of mayor or mayor pro tempore, in which case, such member shall be treated as having served one
year as mayor or mayor pro tempore, as the case may be. It is the intent of this provision that the office of mayor and mayor pro tempore shall only be
occupied by a member of the city council for one year and that no member shall occupy the office of mayor or mayor pro tempore for more than one
year during any five (5) year period.
In the event the member occupying the position of mayor or mayor pro tempore resigns, dies, becomes incapacitated or is otherwise unable or
unwilling to remain as a member of the city council, then the member having the highest seniority, or who received the most votes in the most recent
election, in the event there are two (2) members having equal seniority, shall assume the position of mayor or mayor pro tempore, as the case may be,
for the remainder of the term of the member who has ceased to remain as a member of the city council. The assumption of that member of the
position of mayor or mayor pro tempore shall not affect that person's seniority with respect to occupying either office following the completion of the
term, as mayor or mayor pro tempore, as the case may be, of the person who has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 2016-6, 10-17-
2016)
1-7-2: MAYOR PRO TEMPORE:
The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council. If the mayor is absent or unable to act, the mayor pro tempore shall serve only until the mayor
returns or is able to act. The mayor pro tempore shall have all of the powers and duties of the mayor in absence of the mayor. If the mayor and mayor
pro tempore are both absent or unable to act, then the council shall appoint one of its members to serve as presiding officer until the mayor or mayor
pro tempore returns or is able to act1. (Ord. 837, 3-1-1982)
1-7-3: CONDUCT AS COUNCILMAN:
The mayor may make or second any motion and present and discuss any matter as a member of the council2. (1963 Code)
1-7-4: SIGNATURE:
(Rep. by Ord. 837, 3-1-1982)
1-7-5: ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS; AFFIDAVITS:
The mayor may administer oaths and affirmations, take affidavits and certify them under his hand3. (1963 Code)
1-7-6: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:
The mayor may acknowledge the execution of all instruments executed by the city and required to be acknowledged4. (1963 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 8/436
Chapter 8
CITY CLERK
1-8-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of City Clerk is hereby created. The City Clerk shall be the head of the office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall be appointed by the City
Manager and shall, under the direction and supervision of the City Manager, plan, organize, direct and supervise the activities and staff of the City
Clerk's office. (Ord. 2000-4, 4-17-2000)
1-8-2: FUNCTIONS, POWERS, AND DUTIES:
In addition to the functions, powers, and duties assigned to the City Clerk by the City Manager and other provisions of the Government Code of the
State of California, the City Clerk shall:
(A) Keep an accurate record of the proceedings of the City Council in books with appropriate titles and devoted exclusively to such purposes.
(B) Maintain the official records of the City Council and City, including, but not limited to, originals, and certified copies of all City ordinances,
resolutions, motions, contracts, memorandum of understandings and all official actions of the City.
(C) Be the custodian of the City Seal.
(D) Administer oaths or affirmations and take and certify affidavits and depositions pertaining to City affairs and business which may be used in any
court or proceedings in the State.
(E) Perform all functions, powers and duties consistent with this Code, assigned by act of the City Council and as set forth in the general laws of the
State. (Ord. 2000-4, 4-17-2000)
Chapter 8.5
FINANCE DIRECTOR/TREASURER
1-8.5-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of Finance Director/Treasurer is hereby created. The Finance Director/Treasurer shall be the head of the Finance Department and shall be
appointed by the City Manager. (Ord. 2000-4, 4-17-2000)
1-8.5-2: DUTIES:
The Finance Director/Treasurer shall under the direction of the City Manager, plan, organize, direct, and supervise the activities and staff of the
Finance Department involved in the accounting of City funds, the control of expenditures in accordance with budget appropriations, revenue reporting
and administration, the preparation of the City payroll, and shall perform professional accounting work. (Ord. 2000-4, 4-17-2000)
Chapter 9
TREASURER
(Rep. by Ord. 2000-4, 4-17-2000)
Chapter 10
ATTORNEY
1-10-1: DUTIES:
The City Attorney shall advise City Officials in all legal matters pertaining to City business; shall frame all ordinances and resolutions required by the
Council; and, shall perform other legal services required from time to time by the Council.1 (Ord. 742-A, 3-15-76)
Chapter 11
ELECTIONS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 9/436
1-11-1: ELECTIONS:
The general election laws of the State shall be made applicable and shall be observed in all Municipal elections, general or special, held in the City.1
(Ord. 55, 1-16-97)
Chapter 12
REVENUE SYSTEM
1-12-1: TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY:
The Assessor and Tax Collector of the County shall perform the duties of assessment, and tax collection upon all real and personal property for the
City.
1-12-2: DETERMINATION OF NECESSARY REVENUE:
Prior to fixing the rate of taxes, the Council shall fix by ordinance the amount of revenue from property taxes necessary to support its departments for
the current year and to pay the bonded or other indebtedness of the City, or any portion or district of the City.
1-12-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES; FILING:
On or before the first Monday of July each year, the Council shall cause to be filed with the Auditor of the County a description of the exterior boundary
of each district or portion of the City in which a rate of taxation is to be levied which is different from the rate to be levied in any other district or portion
of the City.
1-12-4: TAX RATES; STATEMENT:
Annually before September 1 the Council shall fix the rate of taxes, or rates of taxes if different portions or districts require different rates, designated
in the number of cents upon one hundred dollars ($100.00) using as a basis the value of the property as assessed and equalized. The rates shall be
sufficient to raise the amount fixed by ordinance and the expense of collection. The Council shall immediately transmit to the County Auditor a
statement of the rates fixed.
1-12-5: COMPENSATION:
The compensation to be paid to the County for assessing and collecting taxes for the City shall be fixed by agreement between the Board of
Supervisors of the County and the Council.
1-12-6: COLLECTION TIME:
The taxes so levied shall be collected at the time and in the manner of County taxes and paid into the County Treasury. The net amount of the taxes,
after deduction of the County's compensation, shall be paid to the City Treasurer by warrant of the County Auditor.
1-12-7: TAX SALE; REDEMPTION:
The collection of unpaid taxes levied on property by the City shall be enforced by the sale of the property in the manner, at the time, and upon the
penalties, of property sold for nonpayment of County taxes. Real property so sold may be redeemed within the time and upon the terms of property
sold for nonpayment of County taxes.
1-12-8: APPORTIONMENT OF REDEMPTION MONEY:
The County Auditor shall apportion to the City the money paid for redemption in the proportion which the tax due the City bears the total tax for which
the real property was sold.1 (1963 Code)
Chapter 13
PURCHASING SYSTEM
1-13-1: ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM:
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the City supplies and equipment at the lowest
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 10/436
possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing
function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted. (Ord. 712, 1-21-74)
1-13-2: PURCHASING OFFICER:
There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Officer. The City Administrator shall serve as Purchasing Officer. The Purchasing Officer shall have
authority to: (Ord. 810, 2-19-80)
(A) Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this
Chapter, such administrative regulations as the Purchasing Officer shall adopt and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the
Council.
(B) Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment.
(C) Act to procure for the City the needed quality in supplies and equipment at the least expense to the City.
(D) Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases.
(E) Prepare and recommend to the Council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the City.
(F) Prepare and recommend to the Council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules.
(G) Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products.
(H) Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this Chapter and other rules and regulations.
(I) Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications.
(J) Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment
which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for City use.
(K) Maintain a bidders' list, vendors catalog file, and records needed for the efficient operation of the Purchasing Department.
1-13-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM CENTRALIZED PURCHASING:
The Purchasing Officer with approval of the Council, may authorize, in writing, any agency to purchase or contract for specified supplies and
equipment independently of the Purchasing Department, but he shall require that the purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the
procedures established by this Chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the agency on the purchases and contracts made under such
written authorization.
1-13-4: REQUISITIONS:
Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the Purchasing Officer by standard requisition forms. (Ord. 712, 1-21-74)
1-13-5: BIDDING:
Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections 1-13-8 and 1-13-9. Bidding shall be dispensed with only when
an emergency requires that an order be placed with the nearest available source of supply, when the amount involved is less than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), or when the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor. (Ord. 827, 7-6-81)
1-13-6: PURCHASE ORDERS:
Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase order.
1-13-7: ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS:
Except in cases of emergency, the Purchase Officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an
unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 712, 1-21-74)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 11/436
1-13-8: FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases and contracts for supplies and equipment of estimated value greater than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed herein. (Ord. 827, 7-6-81)
(A) Notice Inviting Bids: Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids.
1. Published Notice: Notice inviting bids shall be given at least ten (10) days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at
least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the City, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three (3) public
places in the City that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices.
2. Bidder's List: The Purchasing Officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidder's list
or who have requested their names to be added thereto.
3. Bulletin Board. The Purchasing Officer shall also advertise pending purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall.
(B) Bidder's Security: When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Officer, bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Bidders shall be entitled to return of the bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute
the contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the City is responsible for the delay. The Council
may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the Council awards the
contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the City to the difference between the low bid and
the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.
(C) Bid Opening Procedure: Sealed bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing Officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be
opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during
regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.
(D) Rejection of Bids: In its discretion, the Council may reject any and all bids presented and readvertise for bids.
(E) Award of Contracts: Contracts shall be awarded by the Council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided herein.
(F) Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will
not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the Council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie
bidders at the time of the bid opening.
(G) Performance Bonds: The Council shall have the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract in such amount as it shall
find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. If the Council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond
shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 712, 1-21-74)
(H) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the purchase of vehicles, trucks, street sweepers and similar equipment.
1-13-9: OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE:
Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less may be made by the
Purchasing Officer in the open market without observing the procedure prescribed in Section 1-13-8. (Ord. 827, 7-6-81)
1-13-10: INSPECTION AND TESTING:
The Purchasing Officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or
contract. The Purchasing Officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries
which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications.1 (1963 Code)
Chapter 14
CLAIMS
1-14-1: PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS:
Any person having a claim against the City, except for a salary fixed by ordinance, must present a detailed statement of the claim, verified by his oath
before the Clerk, or other officer authorized to administer oaths, which statement must be filed with the Clerk at least twenty four (24) hours before the
meeting of the Council at which the claim is to be heard.
1-14-2: CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS BY COUNCIL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 12/436
Claims against the City shall be considered and allowed only at the first regular meeting in every month.
No demand or claim against the City shall be paid until after it has been presented to and audited by the Council. (Ord. 10, 4-28-93)
1-14-3: PAYMENTS TO BE BY WARRANT:
All demands when audited and allowed, and all salaries shall be paid by a warrant on the City Treasury and shall be signed by any two (2) of the
following officers: City Treasurer, City Clerk, Mayor, City Administrator. (Ord. 837, 3-1-82)
1-14-4: AFFIDAVIT VERIFYING CLAIM REQUIRED:
No demand against the City shall be paid or allowed unless it be properly itemized, and the claimant affixes thereto an affidavit stating that it is justly
due affiant, has not been paid or allowed, nor theretofore rejected, and that the last item in the claim accrued within one year next preceding the
presentation thereof; and no money shall be paid by the Treasurer, and no warrant be drawn upon him, except by order of the Council. (Ord. 55, 1-16-
97)
Chapter 15
CORPORATE SEAL
1-15-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
The common seal of this City shall be: Argent, a bunch of grapes proper, surrounded by the inscription, "City of Selma; Incorporated March 15, 1893."
(Ord. 55; 1-16-97)
1-15-2: FACSIMILE:
SEAL - On file in the city.
Chapter 16
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
1-16-1: CITY PRINTING; BIDS TO BE TAKEN:
The Clerk shall publish in the newspaper doing the City printing, for two (2) weeks prior to the last meeting of the Council in each year, a notice for bids
for doing the City printing, according to specifications to be kept on file by him, during the next succeeding year, to be presented to the Council at their
last regular meeting in December, at which time it will take action concerning the same.1 (Ord. 55; 1-16-97)
Chapter 17
CORPORATE LIMITS
1-17-1: ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL MAP:
The Map bearing the caption "Map of the City of Selma, Fresno County, California, compiled from Official Records, John S. Bates, City Engineer,
1923, Scale: 1 - inch -- 200 - feet," is hereby adopted as the Official Map of the City for the use of the Council in referring to the matters shown
thereon.
A copy of the Map duly signed and attested shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk for identification as the Official Map of the City. (Ord. 214; 2-
19-23)
Chapter 18
CITY MANAGER
1-18-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of the city manager of the city is hereby created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis
of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 928, 4-16-1990)
1-18-2: BOND:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 13/436
If deemed necessary by the city council, the ability to be bonded may be a condition of employment of a city manager or acting city manager. In the
event that the city determines that a bond is necessary, then the city shall pay any and all premiums or other expense for such bond. (Ord. 2014-4, 4-
21-2014)
1-18-3: ABSENCE:
In the event that the city manager will be absent or otherwise unable to perform the duties of the city manager, the city manager will give notice to the
city clerk of said absence or inability to perform the duties of the city manager as soon as practicable. The city manager may designate one or more
qualified city employees to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the city manager subject to the approval of the city council. (Ord. 2014-4, 4-
21-2014)
1-18-4: COMPENSATION:
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall determine and set forth in an agreement by and between the city and the
city manager. (Ord. 2014-4, 4-21-2014)
1-18-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under the city
manager's control. In addition to general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereof, it shall be the duty of, and the city manager
shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections:
(A) Law Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts,
permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed.
(B) Authority Over Employees: It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads
of departments, and to subordinate officers and employees of the city, under his jurisdiction.
(C) Power Of Appointment And Removal: It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he shall appoint, remove, promote or demote any and all
officers and employees of the city, except those employees appointed by the mayor or city council, subject to all applicable personnel ordinances,
rules and regulations.
(D) Administrative Reorganization Of Offices: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such
administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and
economical conduct of the city's business.
(E) Ordinances: It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he
deems necessary.
(F) Attendance At Council Meetings: It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his request he is
excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council, except when his removal is under consideration.
(G) Financial Reports: It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs
of the city.
(H) Budget: It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city
council for its approval.
(I) Expenditure Control And Purchasing: It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the
city council except on approval of the city manager or his authorized representative. The city manager, or his authorized representative, shall be
responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city.
(J) Investigations And Complaints: It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or
division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to
investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by
public utilities in said city.
(K) Public Buildings: It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all
other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 14/436
(L) Additional Duties: It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him
from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council.
(M) Director Of Personnel: It shall be the duty of the city manager to serve as the director of personnel of the city under provisions of title II, chapter 2
of this code and personnel rules and regulations. (Ord. 928, 4-16-1990; amd. Ord. 2014-4, 4-21-2014)
1-18-6: INTERNAL RELATIONS:
(A) Council Manager Relations: The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager,
except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the
city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city
council and no individual council member shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager.
(B) Departmental Cooperation: It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and employees of the city, including those appointed by the mayor or city
council, the city clerk, and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously.
(C) Attendance At Commission Meetings: The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the economic development commission, planning
commission, personnel commission, community services commission, traffic/streets commission and any other commissions, boards or
committees created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends,
he shall be heard by such commissions, boards and committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof and he
shall inform said members as to the status of any matter going considered by the city council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the
members of all commissions, boards and committees appointed by the city council. The city manager shall designate and assign staff to support
the commissions, boards and committees appointed by the city council. (Ord. 928, 4-16-1990; amd. Ord. 2014-4, 4-21-2014)
1-18-7: REMOVAL FROM EMPLOYMENT:
The removal of the city manager shall be affected only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council
meeting. Notwithstanding the foregoing, or anything to the contrary in the employment agreement with the city manager, the city manager shall not be
removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election
held in the city at which election a new member of the city council is elected or when a new city council member is appointed. The purpose of this
provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the
city manager and performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of said ninety (90) day period the remaining provisions of this
section as to the removal of the said city manager shall apply and become effective. (Ord. 2014-4, 4-21-2014)
1-18-8: AGREEMENT ON EMPLOYMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into an agreement with the city manager
delineating the terms and conditions or additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2014-4, 4-21-2014)
1-18-9: TRANSFER OF DUTIES AND POWERS:
All administrative duties and powers heretofore vested in the city council or other officer or employee of the city by ordinance, resolution or other action
of the city council and all duties and powers vested in the city administrator by such council action are, by provision of this chapter, vested in the city
manager and shall be deemed to be transferred to the city manager as though all such ordinances, resolutions or other actions had been specifically
amended. (Ord. 928, 4-16-1990; amd. Ord. 2014-4, 4-21-2014)
Chapter 19
RETIREMENT CONTRACT
1-19-1: AMENDMENT TO CONTRACT:
An amendment to the contract between the city council of the city of Selma and the board of administration, California public employees' retirement
system is hereby authorized, a copy of said amendment being marked "exhibit A", and by such reference made a part hereof as though herein set out
in full and is on file in the office of the city clerk.
The mayor of the city of Selma is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to execute said amendment for and on behalf of said agency. (Ord.
785, 4-17-1978)
1-19-2: ADDITIONAL AMENDMENTS TO CONTRACT:
(A) An amendment to the contract between the city council of the city of Selma and the board of administration, California public employees' retirement
system is hereby authorized, a copy of said amendment being marked "exhibit A", and by such reference made a part hereof as though herein set
out in full and is on file in the office of the city clerk.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 15/436
The mayor of the city of Selma is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to execute said amendment for and on behalf of said agency. (Ord.
904, 11-7-1988)
(B) An amendment to the contract between the city council of the city of Selma and the board of administration, California public employees' retirement
system is hereby authorized and approved. Said amendment hereby changes the retirement formula for city of Selma local safety members to two
percent (2%) at fifty (50), a copy of said amendment is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Selma.
The mayor of the city of Selma is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to execute said amendment for and on behalf of said agency. (Ord.
2002-6, 6-3-2002)
Chapter 20
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1-20-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SELMA. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of Selma and to provide a method to penalize responsible
parties who fail or refuse to comply with certain provisions of this code; to minimize the expense and delay of enforcement of this code by criminal
citation; and to allow the city to recover costs associated with the enforcement process, while continuing to give persons who have been issued
citations due process. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-3: AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to article XI, section 7 of the California Constitution, the city has the authority to "make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary,
and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws". In addition, California Government Code section 36901 provides that the city
may impose fines, penalties, and forfeitures for violations of ordinances. The city may fix the penalty by fine or imprisonment or both. A fine shall not
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Imprisonment shall not exceed six (6) months. Furthermore, Government Code section 53069.4 authorizes
the city to enact by ordinance an administrative procedure to govern the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of
administrative fines or penalties issued for violation of a city ordinance. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
AUTOMATIC VIOLATION: A violation defined by any provision in this code as an automatic violation.
CITATION OR ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION: A civil citation issued pursuant to this chapter stating that there has been a violation of one or more
provisions of this code and setting the amount of the administrative penalty to be paid by the responsible party.
CITY: The city of Selma.
CITY MANAGER OR MANAGER: The city manager for the city of Selma or her or his designated representative.
DAYS: Calendar days.
HEARING OFFICER: Any person, persons or entity appointed by the city council or any city official designated by the city council, by resolution to
preside over the administrative hearings provided for by this chapter.
OFFICIAL OR ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OR PUBLIC OFFICER: The city manager, building official, building director, building inspector, public works
director, community development director, police chief, fire chief, health officer, or designees, or any other individual or body appointed or designated
by the city council or the city manager to enforce violations of this code.
ORDINANCE OR CITY CODE: Any provision of this code.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, business, trust, organization, corporation, partnership, company or any other entity.
PROPERTY OWNER: The owner of real property.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person who is responsible for violating the provisions of this code as described in this chapter.
YEAR: Three hundred sixty five (365) days. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-5: GENERAL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 16/436
(A) Any person violating any provision of this code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided for by this chapter.
(B) Each and every day a violation of any provision of this code exists will constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(C) Each section of this code violated on any day shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
(D) A fine for violations of this code may be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable
directly to the city.
(E) The amount of fine for a violation of this code shall be determined by resolution of the city council of the city of Selma and may be amended, from
time to time, by resolution of the city council of the city of Selma.
(F) Administrative fines assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be collected by the procedures specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-7,
11-4-2013)
1-20-6: ISSUANCE OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION(S):
(A) Determination Of Responsible Party: Upon discovering or observing any violation of this code, the enforcement officer shall determine the party
responsible for the violation. If a business or other entity is the responsible party it shall be deemed to be the person who is in immediate control of
the business or site on that day. The enforcement officer may also determine that the owner(s) or officer(s) of the business or property or entity are
the responsible party.
(B) Determination Of An Automatic Violation:
1. Any violation defined by this code or the schedule of penalties as an automatic violation; or
2. Violations that create an immediate danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, as determined by the enforcement officer, and for which
immediate correction is required; or
3. Repeat or chronic violations where either formal or informal notice of the violation, and previous reasonable opportunities to correct, have been
provided; or
4. Noncontinuing violations for which it is not possible or practical to provide prior notice and an opportunity to correct.
(C) Issuance Of Notice To Correct:
1. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, the enforcement officer may issue a written notice to the responsible party of the violation.
Said notice need not be in any particular form, but shall include:
(a) The date of the violation;
(b) The address or a description of the location where the violation occurred;
(c) A description of the nature of the violation of this code, including identifying the code section(s) violated;
(d) Identify what action is necessary to correct the violation;
(e) Provide the responsible party with not less than ten (10) days to correct the violation, unless: 1) a lesser time is specified elsewhere in this
code for correcting the violation(s); or 2) the enforcement officer determines that a lesser time is necessary to protect the public health, safety,
or welfare of the citizens of the city; and
(f) An explanation of the consequences of a failure to correct the violation.
(D) Methods Of Issuance Of Notice:
1. The enforcement officer may attempt to locate the responsible party at the location of the violation during regular business hours if a business, or
at any reasonable time if not a business. If the enforcement officer is able to locate the responsible party, the enforcement officer shall attempt to
obtain the signature of that person on the administrative citation. If that person refuses to or does not sign the administrative citation, the lack of
signature shall in no way affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings. If the responsible party refuses to sign the citation, the
enforcement officer may either leave the citation with the responsible party or mail the citation in accordance with this subsection.
2. For property related violations, the enforcement officer may securely post the citation in a conspicuous place on the property and mail a copy of
the citation to the responsible party by first class mail within five (5) days of posting to the responsible party's business address, principal place of
business address, residence address, or other address known to the enforcement officer by reliable information.
3. In lieu of personally serving the responsible party, if the violation is at a business, the enforcement officer may leave a copy of the citation with a
person who is apparently in charge at the person's place of business and thereafter mailing, by first class postage, a copy of the citation to the
recipient at the address where the copy was left, or by leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a
competent member of the household over the age of eighteen (18), and thereafter mailing, by first class mail, to the address where the copy was
left.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 17/436
(E) Issuance Of Administrative Citation: If after the expiration of the time period provided to the responsible party to correct the violation, the
responsible party has not corrected the violation, the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to the responsible party by any
method defined in this section.
(F) Additional Violations Of Same Code Section: The notice provided pursuant to subsection (C) of this section shall be sufficient notice for subsequent
violations of the same code section occurring within one year of the notice even if the violation occurs at a different location, and the enforcement
officer may proceed directly to issuing an administrative citation for future violations of the same code section occurring within one year of the
notice even if the violation occurs at a different location. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-7: CONTENTS OF CITATION:
The administrative citation shall be on a form approved by the city manager and should include, where applicable, the following:
(A) The name and address of the responsible party;
(B) Date and location of the violation(s) and the approximate time the violation(s) were observed and/or discovered;
(C) Section or sections of this code violated and a description of how the section(s) are violated;
(D) A description of the action required to correct the violation(s), if applicable;
(E) A statement requiring the responsible party to immediately correct the violation(s) and explaining the consequences of a failure to correct the
violation(s);
(F) Amount of fine imposed for the violation(s);
(G) An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the fine;
(H) The responsible party's right to an appeal;
(I) Signature of the enforcement officer; and signature of the responsible party and/or the address where the citation is served, posted, or mailed. (Ord.
2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-8: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
(A) Any person receiving an administrative citation which carries a monetary penalty shall within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of issuance of
the citation either pay the fine or file an appeal with the city manager. Fines may be paid at city hall. Warning citations may not be appealed.
(B) A notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall identify the citation being appealed, specify the basis for the appeal in sufficient detail so that a
hearing officer can understand the grounds for the appeal, an address where further notices may be delivered to the responsible party by first class
mail and shall be accompanied by an advance deposit of the total penalty amount or a hardship waiver application form as described in subsection
(H) of this section. The notice of appeal must be received by the city manager at city hall prior to the expiration of thirty (30) calendar days from the
date of the issuance of the citation.
(C) If the deadline to file an appeal or pay a fine falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or city holiday, the deadline for filing an appeal or paying a fine shall be
extended until the next regular business day.
(D) If a hearing officer has not been previously appointed by resolution of the city council as soon as practicable after receiving a written notice of
appeal, the city clerk shall place on the agenda of the city council the appointment of a hearing officer. The appointed hearing officer shall forthwith
fix a date, time, and place for the hearing. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served at least ten (10) calendar days prior
to the date of the hearing to the party appealing the citation by any one or more of the following means:
1. Personal service; or
2. First class mail at the address specified in the notice of appeal, or if no address is specified, at such other address known to the city manager by
reliable information; or
3. If a property related violation, by posting the notice of hearing conspicuously on or in front of the property on which the violation is located.
(E) The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by normal first
class delivery mail in the manner described in subsection (D) of this section shall be effective on the date of mailing.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 18/436
(F) Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of that person's rights to an
administrative hearing and determination on the merits of the citation and the amount of the fine.
(G) Failure by the responsible party to attend the administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of his or her rights to an administrative hearing.
(H) Any person who intends to appeal an administrative citation and is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the penalty as required in
subsection (B) of this section may request an advance deposit hardship waiver by doing the following:
1. Completing an advance deposit hardship waiver application form available from the city clerk's office which shall be signed by the applicant
under penalty of perjury;
2. The request shall be filed, along with the notice of appeal, with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the administrative citation;
3. The city manager may waive all or part of the requirements of an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the
sworn application together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager the person's actual
financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the penalty in advance of the hearing. The city manager, in determining the
responsible party's financial ability or inability to deposit the full amount of the penalty in advance, may consider the amount of the penalty
imposed, the income of the applicant, the expenses of the applicant and any other factors that are reasonably related to the applicant's ability to
deposit the full amount of the penalty;
4. If the city manager makes a determination to deny all or part of the advance deposit hardship waiver, then a written determination listing the
reasons for the denial shall be served by first class mail to the address on the application. The written determination of the city manager shall be
final;
5. If all or part of the advance deposit hardship waiver is denied by the city manager, the applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date the
written determination is mailed to make the advance deposit to the city clerk. Failure to make the advance deposit in the amount determined by
the city manager within ten (10) days from the date the city manager's written determination was mailed will result in the notice of appeal being
considered untimely filed. If the deadline to make the advance deposit falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or city holiday, the deadline for making the
advance deposit shall be extended until the next regular business day. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-9: APPEAL HEARING:
(A) The hearing officer shall conduct an informal and orderly proceeding. The technical rules of evidence shall not apply, except that irrelevant and
unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. Evidence on which persons commonly would rely on in the conduct of their business affairs shall be
accepted. All evidence shall be received only on oath or affirmation.
(B) During the hearing, the city manager or designee, and/or enforcement officer shall present information or testimony relating to the violation and the
appropriate means of correcting the violation. The responsible party(ies), owner(s), or any other interested person(s) may present testimony or
other evidence concerning the violation and the means and time frame necessary for correction.
(C) Each party shall have the right to:
1. Call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;
2. Introduce documentary and physical evidence relevant to the issues of the hearing;
3. Cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;
4. Impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify;
5. Rebut the evidence;
6. Be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so; and
7. Provide an interpreter, at his or her own expense, to translate the proceeding, if the party is not proficient in the English language.
(D) The hearing officer shall direct the order of the proceedings. The hearing shall be electronically recorded. The parties, at their sole expense, may
have the hearing recorded by a certified shorthand reporter.
(E) The hearing officer shall have the authority to grant continuances, from time to time, for good cause shown, upon request of the city, responsible
party, or the hearing officer's own motion.
(F) If the violation is related to real property in the city, the hearing officer may, upon reasonable notice and consent, inspect the property prior to,
during, or after the administrative hearing. The responsible party shall have the right to be present at the inspection.
(G) The hearing officer may take official notice, either during the hearing, or after submission of the matter for decision, of any fact which may be
judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official records, regulations, rules, and decisions of state and local agencies, boards and
departments and of city and county ordinances. In addition, the hearing officer may take official notice of matters in city files and of prior
proceedings under this chapter involving the same issues. If applicable, the hearing officer may also take official notice of any generally accepted
technical or scientific matter within the hearing officer's expertise. The hearing officer shall inform the parties at the hearing on the record, referred
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 19/436
to therein, or appended thereto all matters to be noticed. Any such party shall be given a reasonable opportunity on request to refute the officially
noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority.
(H) At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may sustain the citation, not sustain the citation, may reduce, waive, or conditionally reduce
the fine stated in the citation. The hearing officer may also impose conditions and deadlines by which to correct the violation or pay any outstanding
fine, or continue the hearing, as necessary.
(I) The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and issued within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall be served
upon the responsible party in the manner as the notice of hearing was served on the responsible party and is effective upon the date of service.
The decision of the hearing officer regarding any appeal is the final administrative order and decision. There are no appeals to the city council.
Judicial review may be had only in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code section 53069.4. The decision shall contain a
statement advising of the right to judicial review, and shall be substantially in the following form:
The decision of the Hearing Officer is the final decision of the City. You have the right to seek judicial review of the decision pursuant to and in
accordance with Government Code 53069.4 by filing an appeal with the Superior Court, County of Fresno. The time to file an appeal is within
twenty (20) days after service of this final administrative decision. These are your only rights to judicial review. If you fail to file an appeal within the
prescribed time, you may be barred from seeking judicial review.
(J) The time to pay a fine following the hearing officer's final administrative decision is twenty (20) calendar days after service of the decision unless
the hearing officer provides for a longer time. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-10: FINES ASSESSED:
(A) The amounts of the fines to be assessed for city code violations pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in a schedule of penalties established
and revised from time to time by resolution of the city council. The schedule of penalties shall be maintained and made available to the public by
the city clerk.
(B) The schedule of penalties established by resolution shall specify whether a violation is an automatic violation.
(C) The schedule of penalties established by resolution shall specify any increased penalties for repeat violations of the same city code provision.
(D) The payment of a fine or fines shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar any further enforcement action by the city. (Ord.
2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-11: COLLECTION OF FINES:
(A) All fines assessed shall be payable to the city of Selma.
(B) The failure of any person to timely pay a fine assessed by administrative citation or final administrative decision shall result in an assessment of an
additional late fee to be charged. The amount of a late fee shall be ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the administrative fine owed.
(C) The failure of any person to timely pay a fine assessed by administrative citation or final administrative decision constitutes a debt owed to the city.
To enforce that debt, the city manager may cause to be filed a claim with the small claims or other appropriate court.
(D) The city manager may also pursue any other legal remedy to collect such money owed, including, but not limited to, contracting for collection, or
the imposition of an assessment lien as set forth below:
1. The city manager may impose a special assessment against the property that is the subject of an administrative citation, if the administrative
citation has been issued to a property owner for the amount of the fine, plus late fees, plus an administrative charge established by resolution of
the city council to reimburse the city for costs of imposing the assessment, the assessment shall be imposed by the following procedures:
(a) The city council shall confirm the amount of the assessment at a regularly scheduled meeting or at a special meeting.
(b) The property owner and any holder of the mortgage or deed of trust of record shall be notified of the meeting to confirm the assessment in
accordance with the notice requirement of this chapter.
(c) After confirmation by the city council, the city manager or designee shall record a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder. When so
made, confirmed, and recorded, the confirmed amount shall constitute a lien on that property for the amount of the assessment.
(d) After confirmation and recordation, a copy may be filed with the tax collector for the city of Selma. The tax collector shall add the amount(s) of
the respective assessment(s) to the next regular tax bill or bills levied against the property subject to the lien. Those amounts shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and
procedures under foreclosure and sale in the cases of a delinquency as provided for with ordinary city taxes. Or, after recording, the lien may
be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the matter and means provided by law. The notice of lien for recordation shall be in the form
substantially as follows:
NOTICE OF LIEN
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 20/436
Pursuant to Title 1 Chapter 20 of the Selma City Code, the City Manager of the City of Selma did on or about the day of , 20 , assess the
cost of administrative fines and penalties on the real property hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof and
the City of Selma does hereby claim a lien for such fines and penalties, in the amount of $ . Said amount shall be a lien upon the real property
until it has been paid in full and discharged of record.
The real property, upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land in the City of Selma, County of Fresno, State of California, more
particularly described as follows:
Dated this day of , 20
City of Selma
By:
[Print Name and Title]
(E) If the failure by any person to pay a fine assessed by administrative citation results in the filing of an action in any court of proper jurisdiction, to
collect the fine, the city of Selma shall be entitled to collect all costs, including reasonable attorney fees, associated with the filing of such actions.
(F) The payment of a fine or fines shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. (Ord. 2013-
7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-12: OTHER REMEDIES:
(A) Nothing in this chapter precludes the city of Selma from using any other available method to enforce the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-
4-2013)
1-20-13: ADMINISTRATION:
(A) The city manager may adopt any necessary guidelines, policies, or procedures to aid in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
2013-7, 11-4-2013)
1-20-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter or any part of this code adopted herein by reference is for any reason to
be held invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions thereof. (Ord. 2013-7, 11-4-2013)
Chapter 21
ADMINISTRATIVE AND SUMMARY ABATEMENT
1-21-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for the administrative and summary abatement of public nuisances and city code violations.
The procedures established in these sections are in addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, established by law which may be pursued to
address violations of this code or applicable laws of the state of California. These sections govern the abatement of all nuisances and city code
violations or laws of the state of California unless other procedures are established in other chapters of this code or laws of the state of California and
are specifically stated to apply. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-2: AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to Government Code section 38771 et seq., any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code
or applicable state codes which constitute a public nuisance may be abated by the city of Selma pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 21/436
CITY: The city of Selma.
CITY MANAGER OR MANAGER: The city manager for the city of Selma or his or her designated representative.
DAYS: Calendar days.
HEARING OFFICER: A hearing officer appointed pursuant to this chapter.
OFFICIAL, ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL OR PUBLIC OFFICIAL: The city manager, building official, building director, building inspector, community
development director, public works director, police chief, fire chief, health officer or designees, or any other individual or body appointed or designated
by the city council or the city manager to enforce violations of this code.
ORDINANCE OR CITY CODE: Any provision of this code.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, business, trust, organization, corporation, partnership, company, or any other entity.
PROPERTY OWNER: The owner of record of the parcel of land on which a nuisance is maintained based on the last equalized assessment roll or
supplemental roll, whichever is more current.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: A person who is responsible for violating the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-4: ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT:
(A) Issuance Of Abatement Notice: Whenever the city manager or his or her designee determines that a public nuisance as defined or declared in any
section of this code or applicable state codes, exists on any public or private property within the city of Selma, an abatement notice may be issued
to the "property owner" or "responsible party" (as defined by section 1-21-3 of this chapter) to abate the public nuisance.
(B) Contents Of Notice: The abatement notice shall be in a form determined by the city manager and shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. A description of the property reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the property including address and/or assessor's parcel number, if
available;
2. The city code or state code violation(s) which render the property a public nuisance;
3. The action required to abate the nuisance which may include, but is not limited to: repairs, removal, demolition, correction, vacation of tenants,
obtaining necessary permits, or other appropriate actions necessary to abate the nuisance;
4. Establish a time frame to abate the nuisance;
5. Explain the consequences for failure to comply within the terms of the notice, including, but not limited to, administrative or summary abatement
or administrative citation;
6. State whether as part of the abatement action, a penalty may be assessed or a nuisance abatement lien recorded on the parcel of land on which
the nuisance is maintained; and
7. Identify all applicable hearing and appeal rights.
(C) Service Of Abatement Notice: The service of abatement notice shall be made in the same manner as an administrative citation (subsection 1-20-
6(D) of this title). (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-5: APPEAL OF NOTICE TO ABATE A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
(A) Any property owner or responsible party receiving a notice to abate a public nuisance shall, within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service
of said notice, file an appeal of the notice to abate a public nuisance with the city manager.
(B) A notice of appeal of a notice to abate a public nuisance shall be in writing on a form approved by the city manager and/or shall identify the notice
to abate a public nuisance being appealed, specify the basis for the appeal in sufficient detail so that a hearing officer can understand the grounds
for the appeal, and an address where further notices may be delivered to the property owner or responsible party by first class mail. The notice of
appeal of a notice to abate a public nuisance must be received by the city manager at city hall prior to the expiration of ten (10) calendar days from
the date of service of the notice to abate a public nuisance.
1. The notice of appeal may be mailed or delivered to:
City Of Selma
Attn: City Clerk
1710 Tucker Street
Selma, CA 93662
(C) If the deadline for filing an appeal falls on a Saturday, Sunday or city holiday, the deadline for filing an appeal shall be extended until the next
regular business day.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 22/436
(D) As soon as practicable after receiving a written notice of appeal of a notice to abate a public nuisance, the city manager shall appoint a hearing
officer and fix a date, time and place for a hearing. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served at least fifteen (15) calendar
days prior to the date of the hearing to the party appealing the notice to abate a public nuisance by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address
given in the notice of appeal.
(E) The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.
(F) Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of that person's right to an
administrative hearing confirming the existence of a public nuisance.
(G) Failure of any person to attend the hearing appealing the notice to abate a public nuisance shall constitute a waiver of his or her rights to appeal
the existence of a public nuisance.
(H) Abatement of the public nuisance shall not proceed until the hearing officer issues an order, unless the city manager or his or her designee
concludes that an imminent threat to the public's health and safety exists.
(I) The hearing of the appeal of the notice to abate a public nuisance shall be conducted in the same manner as an appeal of an administrative citation
defined in chapter 20 of this title except that:
1. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may confirm or deny the existence of a public nuisance, may extend or may impose
conditions and deadlines by which the public nuisance may be abated;
2. In any event, the decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and issued within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision
shall be served upon the appealing party by United States mail, first class, postage prepaid, and addressed to the address provided by the
applicant in the notice of appeal.
(J) The decision of the hearing officer regarding an appeal of a notice to abate a public nuisance is the final administrative order and decision. There
are no appeals to the city council. Judicial review in the superior court of the state of California may only be had in accordance with the provisions
of Government Code section 53069.4.
(K) If the hearing officer issues an order confirming the existence of a public nuisance, the city may immediately abate the public nuisance pursuant to
the procedures of this code. The hearing officer's decision shall become effective upon the date of the order. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-6: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
(A) Authority: Whenever the city manager or enforcement officer determines that such conditions exist that the life, health, property or safety of the
public or the occupants of any building or site are endangered such that immediate correction or elimination of such condition exists, the city
manager or enforcement officer may exercise the following powers without prior notice to the property owner or responsible party:
1. Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous; or
2. Board, fence, or secure the building or site; or
3. Order the immediate vacation of any tenants in accordance with applicable law and prohibit occupancy of any building or site until all repairs are
completed; or
4. Make any minimal emergency repairs, as necessary, to eliminate such conditions which endanger the life, health, property or safety of the public
or occupants; or
5. Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent collapse or remove any hazard to the occupants or public; or
6. Take any other action as appropriate under the circumstances.
(B) Right Of Way: The city manager or enforcement officer is authorized to exercise any summary abatement powers listed in this chapter to remove
any items placed or stored on city property, sidewalks, or public rights of way.
(C) Procedures:
1. The city manager or enforcement officer shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or abatement, as necessary, to eliminate the
immediacy of the hazard. The costs incurred by the city during the summary abatement process, including costs associated with relocating
tenants, shall be assessed and recovered against the property owner or responsible party through the procedures outlined in this chapter.
2. The city manager or enforcement officer may also pursue any administrative or judicial remedy to abate any remaining public nuisance. (Ord.
2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-7: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
(A) The city may abate the conditions causing a public nuisance when:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 23/436
1. The property owner or responsible party fails to abate the public nuisance as required by the notice to abate a public nuisance and an appeal
has not been timely filed; or
2. A hearing officer has issued an order confirming the existence of a public nuisance after an appeal, pursuant to this chapter, by the property
owner or responsible party. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-8: ABATEMENT BY THE CITY:
(A) Subject to the procedures set forth in this chapter, the city may abate a public nuisance as follows:
1. The nuisance may be abated by city personnel or by a private contractor;
2. The city personnel or a private contractor may enter upon private property in a reasonable manner to abate the public nuisance as specified in
the notice to abate a public nuisance or an order issued by the hearing officer following an appeal of a notice to abate a public nuisance;
3. If the property owner or responsible party abates the public nuisance before the city personnel or private contractor performs the actual
abatement specified in the notice to abate a public nuisance or hearing officer order, the city manager or his or her designee may, nonetheless,
assess all costs incurred by the city against the property owner or responsible party pursuant to this chapter;
4. Upon completion of the abatement, a report describing the work performed including an itemized account of the total abatement costs, including,
but not limited to, the actual costs and administrative costs including staff time to investigate, document, photograph, and conduct the appeal of
the notice to abate a public nuisance. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-9: GRAFFITI ABATEMENT:
The city may, pursuant to this chapter, summarily abate any nuisance resulting from the defacement of property of another by graffiti or any other
inscribed material at the expense of a minor or other person creating, causing, or committing the nuisance and may make the expense of abatement
of the nuisance a lien against property of the minor or other person and a personal obligation of the minor or other person pursuant to the provisions of
Government Code sections 38772, 38773.2 and/or 38773.6. Further, the parent or guardian having custody and control of a minor creating, causing,
or committing such nuisance shall be jointly and severally liable for the expense of abatement with the minor pursuant to the provisions of Government
Code section 38772. The city shall also provide the names and addresses of the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, if known,
to the probation officer of the county of Fresno or other official pursuant to Government Code section 38772. This section shall be an alternative to and
in addition to the abatement procedures set forth in title VI, chapter 21 of this code. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-10: ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
Costs of abating a nuisance pursuant to this chapter shall include, but are not limited to, court costs, recorder's fees, attorney fees, and administrative
costs. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-11: ABATEMENT PENALTY:
In addition to any other penalty available at law, the city may request, pursuant to Government Code section 38773.7, that the property owner or
responsible person for a condition abated in accordance with this chapter pay treble the costs of the abatement for a second or subsequent civil or
criminal judgment within a two (2) year period. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
1-21-12: RECOVERY OF COSTS OF ABATEMENT:
The city manager or designee shall determine whether the cost of abating the public nuisance shall be recovered as a personal obligation or a special
assessment upon the property.
(A) Personal Obligation Of Recovery:
1. A demand for payment of recovery costs for the abatement of the public nuisance shall be served upon the property owner or responsible party
by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the property and by mailing a copy of the notice to the property owner. The notice shall include,
but is not limited to, the following:
(a) A description of the property sufficient to identify the property including address or assessor's parcel number, if available;
(b) The total amount to be paid associated with the abatement of the public nuisance at the property along with a copy of the accounting of the
charges; and
(c) A demand for payment within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the notice that if payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the
date of the demand for payment, the payment shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty assessment of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and such unpaid amounts including any penalty shall be made a lien upon the property of the responsible party pursuant to
Government Code sections 38773, 38773.1 and 38773.2.
2. If the responsible party fails to pay all or part of the costs associated with the abatement of the public nuisance, the city may then record a lien
on the parcel of land on which the public nuisance was abated pursuant to Government Code section 38773.1 or in the case of graffiti abatement
section 38773.2.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 24/436
3. In the event that the city should initiate any action or proceeding in accordance with Government Code section 38773.1 or 38773.2, the
prevailing party in such action or proceeding shall be entitled to recover costs of such action including reasonable attorney fees.
(B) Recovery Of Abatement Costs By Special Assessment:
1. As an alternative to the recovery of abatement costs as a personal obligation, the city may recover the cost of abatement of a public nuisance
upon a parcel of land by special assessment against the parcel pursuant to Government Code section 38773.5 or in the case of graffiti
abatement section 38773.6.
2. If the city manager or his or her designee determines that the abatement costs shall be charged against the property, the city manager or his or
her designee shall prepare a notice of special assessment.
3. The city manager or his or her designee shall deliver the notice of special assessment to the county auditor/tax collector pursuant to
Government Code section 38773.5 or 38773.6.
4. The notice of special assessment shall be sent to the property owner pursuant to the notice requirements of Government Code section 38773.5
or 38773.6.
5. In the event that the city should initiate any action or proceeding in accordance with Government Code section 38773.5 or 38773.6, the
prevailing party in such action or proceeding shall be entitled to recover costs of such action including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2013-8,
11-4-2013)
1-21-13: NONEXCLUSIVE:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to be an exclusive penalty or remedy and does not prohibit the application of any other penalty or remedy available
under federal, state or local law. (Ord. 2013-8, 11-4-2013)
Title 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Chapter 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
Pursuant to an act of the legislature of the state of California, entitled "planning act of 1929", page 1805 and acts amendatory thereto, a planning
commission is hereby established for the city, and such commission shall have all the duties and powers defined in said act and amendments thereto
and as may be prescribed by other state acts or by this code1. (Ord. 496, 3-4-1957)
2-1-2: ORGANIZATION; TERMS; COMPENSATION:
The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the city council. The planning director shall provide technical
assistance and serve as secretary to the commission; the city attorney, city manager, and city engineer shall be available for consultation and
technical support as needed.
Vacancies for any unexpired term shall be filled by appointment of the city council for the portion of the unexpired term only. Appointments for a new
term of office shall be for four (4) years and shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30.
The compensation of each member of the planning commission is hereby fixed at the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting for which the
commission member is in attendance. Compensation may be hereafter set by resolution of the city council.
The member of the planning commission appointed, or selected by his or her colleagues, as chairperson shall also serve simultaneously for his or her
full term as an ad hoc member of the Selma personnel commission to serve as a member of that commission, attend its meetings and participate in its
proceedings, if and when requested to do so by the chairperson of the Selma personnel commission. (Ord. 2009-5, 6-1-2009)
2-1-3: MEETINGS; QUORUM; RECORDS:
(A) The planning commission shall meet at least once a month at such times and places as it may fix by resolution. The commission shall select from
its members a chairman and vice chairman who shall serve for one year or until their successors are appointed. In case of the absence of the
chairman and vice chairman, the commission shall select a chairman pro tempore.
(B) Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairman or by two (2) members and by written notice served upon each member of the
commission at least twenty four (24) hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting. (Ord. 91-10, 9-16-1991)
(C) Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A five (5) member vote of the commission shall
constitute a super majority for those decisions, which by state law requires a super majority. The commission shall cause a proper record to be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 25/436
kept of its proceedings. The community development director shall serve as secretary to the commission. (Ord. 2004-10, 9-7-2004)
2-1-4: POWERS:
The planning commission shall have power, except as otherwise provided by law:
(A) To recommend to the proper officers of the city plans for the regulation of the future growth, development, and beautification of the city in respect to
public and private buildings and works, streets, parks, grounds and vacant lots.
(B) To recommend to the proper officers of the city plans consistent with the future growth and development of the city in order to secure to the city
and its inhabitants sanitation, proper services of all public utilities and transportation facilities.
(C) To make recommendations to any public authorities or any corporation or individuals of the city with reference to the location of any proposed
buildings, structures or work.
(D) To recommend to the proper officers of the city the approval or disapproval of maps or plats of subdivision of lands; however, such maps or plats
shall, prior to their final approval or disapproval by the proper officers, be submitted to the commission for its recommendation thereon.
(E) To do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 212, 12-4-1922)
2-1-5: DUTIES:
The planning commission shall make or cause to be made, at the direction of the council, a map of the city or any portion thereof, including adjacent
territory lying outside the corporate limits, showing the streets, highways or other natural or artificial features therein; also, the location or relocation
proposed for any new public buildings, civic centers, streets, parkways, boulevards, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds or improvements; also
any proposed widening, extension, closing or relocation of any street, or any change in the plan of the city that it may deem advisable. The
commission may at its discretion, propose such maps and plans as herein set forth for the purpose of making recommendations in connection
therewith to the proper officers of the city having charge, superintendence or control of the matters set forth in the recommendations. It shall make
suggestions to the council from time to time concerning any of the foregoing matters for action by the council thereon, having due regard for the
present conditions and future needs and growth of the city, including the distribution and relative location of public buildings, grounds and open spaces
devoted to public use; also the planning and laying out for urban users of private grounds brought into the market from time to time and the division of
the city into zones or districts for the purpose of conserving and protecting the public health, comfort and convenience. (Ord. 212, 12-4-1922)
2-1-6: SUBMISSION OF PLANS TO COMMISSION:
Any officer or department whose duty it is to prepare ordinances or resolutions relating to the location of any public building, or location, extension,
widening, enlargement, ornamentation, or parking of any street, alley, parkway, park, playground or other public ground or to the location of any street,
or other alteration of the city plan of streets and highways, or the location of any bridge, tunnel, subway, or any surface, underground or elevated
railway or public utility or ordinance relating to housing, building restrictions, building conditions or zones, shall, prior to the submission to the council,
give notice to the commission of the pendency before the officer or department of the proceedings, with reasons and need of the foregoing matters.
(Ord. 212, 12-4-1922)
2-1-7: EXPENSES OF COMMISSION:
The council may in making the annual tax levy, and as a part thereof, levy and collect a tax for the purpose of defraying the lawful expenses incurred
by the planning commission, not exceeding two (2) mills on the dollar of assessed valuation; provided, however, that no expense of any kind shall be
incurred by the commission unless first authorized and approved by the council. (Ord. 212, 12-4-1922)
2-1-8: RESIDENCY:
Members of the commission shall be residents of this city, "provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to current terms of members of the
commission". (Ord. 825, 4-20-1981)
Chapter 2
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2-2-1: ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL SYSTEM1:
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most
competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a
reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the following personnel system is hereby adopted. (Ord. 812, 4-7-1980)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 26/436
2-2-2: PERSONNEL OFFICER:
The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as personnel officer
under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as
provided in section 2-2-16 of this chapter. The personnel officer shall:
(A) Attend all meetings of the personnel commission and serve as its secretary.
(B) Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council or the personnel commission.
(C) Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules.
(D) Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions
thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council. (Ord. 812, 4-7-1980; amd. Ord. 91-6, 7-15-1991)
(E) Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting
and grading of tests; the certification to the appropriate department head of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position
in the competitive service. (Ord. 843, 8-16-1982)
2-2-3: PERSONNEL COMMISSION:
There is hereby created a personnel commission to consist of five (5) regular members, to be appointed by the city council and two (2) ad hoc
members, who shall be the chairpersons of the Selma planning commission and traffic and streets commission who shall serve as members of the
personnel commission on an as needed basis, to participate in meetings and proceedings of the personnel commission only on the request of the
chairperson of the personnel commission.
The five (5) citizen at large members appointed by the city council shall serve four (4) year terms. The terms of the two (2) ad hoc members shall
coincide with their respective terms as commissioners of the planning and traffic and streets commissions. All terms will begin on July 1 and end on
June 30 four (4) years after appointment. Should a vacancy occur in the commission for any reason, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term
by an appointment of the city council. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. A four-fifths (4/5) vote of the city
council shall be required to remove a member of the personnel commission prior to the expiration of his or her term.
Members of the personnel commission shall be residents of the city. No person shall be appointed to the commission who holds any salaried office or
employment with this city.
The compensation of each member of the personnel commission is hereby fixed at the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting for which the
commission member is in attendance. Compensation may be hereafter set by resolution of the city council.
The personnel commission shall have the right of subpoena, the power to examine witnesses and the power to require the production of evidence by
subpoena. Subpoenas shall be issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk.
Each member of the personnel commission shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. (Ord. 2009-5, 6-1-2009)
2-2-4: DUTIES OF THE PERSONNEL COMMISSION:
The personnel commission shall determine the order of business for the conduct of its meetings, and shall meet regularly or on call of the chairman or
a majority of the members of the commission. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
The commission, as provided by this chapter and by the rules, shall hear appeals submitted by any person in the competitive service relative to any
disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion, charge of discrimination, or alleged violation of this chapter or the personnel rules and shall certify its findings
and recommendations as provided in the personnel system rules. (Ord. 812, 4-7-1980)
2-2-5: COMPETITIVE SERVICE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except:
(A) Elective offices.
(B) Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees.
(C) City manager, city attorney, chief of police, planning director, recreation director, fire chief, city engineer/director of public works, director of
community services, director of finance and superintendent of public works.
(D) Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other service.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 27/436
(E) Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firemen.
(F) Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or
earthquake which threatens life or property.
(G) Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. (Ord. 877, 5-6-1985; amd.
Ord. 91-6, 7-15-1991)
2-2-6: ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF RULES:
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council after notice of such action has been publicly posted in at least three (3) public places
designated by the city council, and at least five (5) days prior to city council consideration. The personnel officer shall give reasonable written notice to
each recognized employee organization affected by an ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation, or amendment thereof proposed to be adopted by the
city council. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The
rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system including:
(A) Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including
employment standards and qualifications for each class.
(B) Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for employment.
(C) Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for
appointment.
(D) Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments.
(E) Establishment of probationary periods.
(F) Evaluation of employees during the probationary period.
(G) Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service.
(H) Separation of employees from the city service.
(I) The establishment of adequate personnel records.
(J) The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this chapter and any rules adopted hereunder. (Ord. 812, 4-
7-1980)
2-2-7: APPOINTMENTS:
Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall
be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid in
the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement
and aptitude tests, written test, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any
combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical and medical tests
may be given as part of any examination.
In any examination the personnel officer may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor.
Appointments to positions in the competitive service shall be made by the personnel officer.
When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive services, the personnel officer shall transmit to the appropriate department head the
names of all persons on the appropriate certified employment list. The appropriate department head shall, upon review of the certified employment list,
make a recommendation regarding appointment to the personnel officer. (Ord. 843, 8-16-1982)
2-2-8: PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than one year. During the probationary
period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.
An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position on the class from
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 28/436
which he was promoted unless he is discharged from the city service as provided in this chapter and the rules.
An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the competitive service shall be reinstated to a position in
the class from which he was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him unless he is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and
the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service. (Ord. 812, 4-7-1980)
2-2-9: STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES:
Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of this chapter, shall have served continuously in such
position, or in some other position in competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall
assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without a qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in
all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.
Any other person holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary
periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or
employment. (Ord. 812, 4-7-1980)
2-2-10: APPLICABILITY OF RULES TO CERTAIN EXEMPT POSITIONS:
The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full time exempt positions, unless otherwise
specified. (Ord. 812, 4-7-1980)
2-2-11: DEMOTION, DISMISSAL, REDUCTION IN PAY, SUSPENSION:
(A) The personnel director, as such officer or as the city manager, shall have the right for due cause to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay or suspend
without pay any regular employee in the competitive service or the confidential service. Notice of such action must be in writing and served
personally on such employee, except where an emergency exists, in which case the notice shall be served within three (3) working days of the
action taken. Such notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the reason or reasons therefor.
(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate
positions.
(C) Notwithstanding the authority contained in this section and in subsection 1-18-5(B) of this code, the city manager, as that officer or as the director
of personnel shall not take action to appoint, remove, promote, or demote any member of the confidential service without consultation with the city
council in advance or such action. (Ord. 929, 4-16-1990)
2-2-12: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal to the personnel commission any disciplinary action, or alleged violation of this
chapter of the rules adopted thereunder, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules
adopted thereunder.
All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 812, 4-7-1980)
2-2-13: LAYOFF AND REEMPLOYMENT:
Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary in the interest of economy, or because the necessity for a position no longer exists,
the city council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive service; and the employee holding such position or employment may be
laid-off without taking disciplinary action and without the right of appeal.
The order of lay-off of employees shall be established by the Personnel Officer on the recommendation of the department head involved. The
department head shall take into consideration the job performance and length of service of employees in preparing a recommended lay-off list
provided, however, that no regular or probationary employee shall be laid-off from his position in any department while any emergency, temporary or
provisional employee is serving in the same class in that department.
Employees to be laid-off shall be given at least fourteen (14) days prior notice.
The names of regular and probationary employees laid-off or demoted in lieu of lay-off shall be placed upon re-employment lists for one year for those
classes requiring basically the same qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the class from which lay-off or demotion in lieu of lay-off was made.
Persons whose names are placed on re-employment lists in accordance with this Section, and who are re-employed within the prescribed period, shall
be regarded as having been on leave of absence during this period of absence and entitled to all benefits accruing from such leave.
2-2-14: POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
The political activities of City employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of State law.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 29/436
2-2-15: DISCRIMINATION:
No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or
discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, ancestry, national origin, religious creed, sex, or because of the exercise
of his or her rights under Section 3502 of the Government Code.
2-2-16: RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL SERVICES:
The City Administrator shall consider and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the extent to which the City should contract for the
performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The City Council may contract with any
qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this Chapter.
(A) The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof.
(B) The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof.
(C) The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests.
(D) The conduct of employee training programs.
(E) Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration.
2-2-17: APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS:
The Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 812, 4-7-80)
Chapter 3
RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
2-3-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created a recreation and community services commission in and for the city. (Ord. 97-4, 8-4-1997)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP; ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION:
(A) Membership: The recreation and community services commission shall be composed of seven (7) regular members. The seven (7) regular
members shall be comprised of six (6) citizens appointed at large by the city council and one representative from the Selma Unified School District.
(Ord. 97-4, 8-4-1997)
(B) Organization: The term of office shall be two (2) years. All terms will begin on July 1 and end on June 30 two (2) years after appointment. Should a
vacancy occur in the commission for any reason, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by an appointment of the council. Whenever in
the discretion of the council, the best interests of the city shall be subscribed thereby, any appointed member of the commission shall be removed
from office by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the council. (Ord. 91-5, 7-15-1991; amd. Ord. 2005-12, 12-5-2005)
(C) Compensation: The compensation of each member of the recreation and community services commission is hereby fixed at the sum of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per meeting for which the commission member is in attendance. Compensation may be hereafter set by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 2005-12, 12-5-2005)
2-3-3: MEETINGS:
Within ten (10) days after their appointment, the members of the commission shall meet in regular session and organize, by electing from their
members a secretary, who shall hold office for one year. Thereafter the commission shall hold such regular or special meetings of its members as it
may determine to be necessary. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the commission and transmit its
recommendations to the council. (Ord. 810, 2-19-1980; amd. Ord. 896, 8-3-1987)
Regular meetings shall be held at such stated times as may be fixed by the commission by resolution. Special meetings of the commission may be
called by the chairperson or by any three (3) members. (Ord. 91-5, 7-15-1991)
Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time to a day certain. (Ord. 97-4, 8-4-1997)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 30/436
2-3-4: ABSENCE FROM MEETINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 818, 9-2-1980)
2-3-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
(A) To conduct its meetings in a businesslike manner. (Ord. 810, 2-19-1980)
(B) Accept as its major responsibility to guide the recreation and community services department toward fulfilling the recreation needs of the
community. (Ord. 97-4, 8-4-1997)
(C) Recommend policies, rules and regulations for the conduct and operation of park and recreation facilities, including, but not limited to: Vance
Memorial Youth Center, Edgecomb Center, Brentlinger park, Lincoln park, Ringo park, Sheridan park, Floral/Thompson park and school sites when
applicable. The executive administration of said policies, rules and regulations, once adopted, to be the responsibility of the recreation and
community services director.
(D) Review and make recommendations on the annual fiscal operating budgets for parks and recreation as prepared by the recreation and community
services director. (Ord. 810, 2-19-1980; amd. Ord. 97-4, 8-4-1997)
(E) Visit recreation programs and facilities whenever possible.
(F) Support a statement of the philosophy of the commission and department.
(G) Be able to interpret park and recreation programs as required.
(H) Hold joint meetings and act in liaison with other agencies, districts, groups and individuals concerned with social services as required.
(I) To review and recommend the recreational element to be considered in the general plan of the city as provided in Government Code section 65300
et seq.
(J) To perform or consider any additional duties as may be designated by the council by resolution, ordinance or directive. (Ord. 810, 2-19-1980)
2-3-6: RECREATIONAL DIRECTOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 810, 2-19-1980)
2-3-7: COOPERATION OF CITY DEPARTMENTS REQUIRED:
All officers, departments and department heads of the city shall render cooperation and all reasonably necessary assistance to the recreation and
community services commission. Neither the commission nor any person connected with the commission shall incur any financial liability in the name
of the city. (Ord. 370, 6-17-1946; amd. Ord. 97-4, 8-4-1997)
2-3-8: ANNUAL REPORT OF COMMISSION:
The commission shall render annually a full report of its work to the council. (Ord. 370, 6-17-1946)
2-3-9: RECREATION FUNDS:
The council shall establish a recreation fund, prepare an annual recreation budget, receive voluntary contributions and appropriate such money as it
may deem necessary for the purpose of carrying on the activities of the commission. (Ord. 370, 6-17-1946)
Chapter 4
EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION DISASTER COUNCIL
2-4-1: PURPOSES:
The declared purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 31/436
City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all
other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 685, 8-2-1971, eff. 9-1-1971)
2-4-2: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of
persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions,
including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or
are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political
subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 685, 8-2-1971, eff. 9-1-1971)
2-4-3: DISASTER COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP:
The Selma Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:
(A) The Mayor, who shall be chairman.
(B) The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be vice chairman.
(C) The Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
(D) Such Chiefs of Emergency Services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this Ordinance.
(E) Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be
appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council.
2-4-4: DISASTER COUNCIL POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Selma Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council,
emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such
plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or, in his absence from the City or inability to call such meeting,
upon call of the vice chairman. (Ord. 685, 8-2-71, eff. 9-1-71)
2-4-5: DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
(A) There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Administrator shall be the Director of Emergency Services. (Ord.
813, 5-19-80)
(B) There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director.
2-4-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
(A) The Director is hereby empowered to:
1. Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue
such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, The City Council shall take
action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.
2. Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to
cope with the emergency.
3. Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this Ordinance.
4. Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them.
5. Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.
6. In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the
Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency", the Director is hereby empowered:
(a) To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;
(b) To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the
City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 32/436
(c) To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the County
which this City is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency" to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he
deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by
stated law for registered disaster service workers;
(d) To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and (Ord. 685, 8-2-71, eff. 9-1-71)
(e) To execute all of his ordinary power as City Administrator, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this Ordinance or by resolution or
emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him by any Statute, by any agreement approved by
the City Council, and by any other lawful authority. (Ord. 813, 5-19-80)
(B) The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to
attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.
(C) The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of Emergency Service chiefs, develop emergency plans
and manage the emergency programs of this City; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.
2-4-7: EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION:
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations,
and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Sec. 6 (A) 6. (c) of this
Ordinance, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency
organization of the City of Selma.
2-4-8: EMERGENCY PLAN:
The Selma Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Selma Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective
mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or
state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall
take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council.
2-4-9: EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Selma.
2-4-10: PUNISHMENT OF VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months,
or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:
(A) Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to
this Ordinance, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this Ordinance.
(B) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this Ordinance, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give
assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof.
(C) Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State.1 (Ord. 685; 8-2-71; Eff. 9-1-
71)
Footnote 1: For Statute authority see Gov. C., Sec. 38791.
Chapter 5
BOARD OF HEALTH
2-5-1: BOARD OF HEALTH:
Whereas, the City Council of the City of Selma does deem it proper and expedient to have the County Health Officer enforce and observe the State
rules, regulations, orders, and statutes relating to public health within the City of Selma.
Now, therefore, be it resolved that the City of Selma does hereby consent that the County Health Officer shall enforce and observe in the City of
Selma, all of the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 33/436
(A) Orders, quarantine regulations, and rules prescribed by the State Department of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.
(B) Statutes of the State of California, relating to the public health.
Be it further resolved, that the City Clerk shall serve a certified copy of this resolution upon the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of the County of
Fresno on or before the 1st day of March, 1959.
And be it further resolved, that this resolution shall constitute a notice of termination of the existing agreement between the County of Fresno and the
City of Selma, dated, January 16, 1950, wherein the City of Selma contracted with the County Health Department to perform all functions relating to
public health within the City of Selma. (Res. 444; 2-16-59)
Chapter 6
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-6-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
An Economic Development Commission in and for the City is hereby created. Said Commission shall be an advisory, investigative and fact-finding
body to the City Council on all matters relating to economic development as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 851, 1-3-83)
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The Commission shall consist of twelve (12) voting members, consisting of the President of the Chamber of Commerce, a Chamber representative,
and ten (10) citizens at large appointed by the City Council.
2-6-3: TERMS:
Of the members of the Commission appointed by the City Council the terms shall be two (2) years each. All terms will begin on July 1 and end on June
30 two (2) years after appointment. The President of the Chamber of Commerce and the Chamber representative shall serve a term commensurate
with their terms in those positions. (Ord. 91-7, 7-15-91)
2-6-4: COMPENSATION AND STAFF LIAISON:
The members of said Commission shall serve without compensation. The City Manager shall serve as staff liaison to said Commission and provide
those staff resources necessary for the Commission to fulfill its advisory policy role to the City Council. (Ord. 892, 3-2-87; amd. Ord. 91-7, 7-15-91)
2-6-5: VACANCY:
Should a vacancy occur other than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. The terms of the Commission
members shall correspond to their respective official tenures.
2-6-6: MEETINGS:
The Commission shall meet at least quarterly at such time and places as it may fix by resolution. The Commission shall adopt rules for the conduct of
business and shall keep accurate records of its minutes, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which records shall be a public record
maintained in the Clerk's office.
2-6-7: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
(A) To conduct its meetings in a businesslike manner;
(B) Accept as its major responsibility the development of guidelines for the economic development of the City, in order to fill the requirements of the
community;
(C) To establish the following as its goals and objectives:
1. Decrease unemployment and underemployment,
2. Improve the economic well being of the residents of the City, and
3. Enhance the economic base and comparative advantages while maintaining the environment of the City.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 34/436
(D) Recommend policies and guidelines for the economic development of the community;
(E) Review and make recommendations on the annual fiscal operating budgets for said Economic Development Commission;
(F) Visit and review other commercial and/or economic development projects, programs and/or facilities whenever possible and feasible;
(G) Develop a philosophy for economic development of the community;
(H) Develop and interpret economic programs for the community as required;
(I) Hold joint meetings and act in a liaison capacity with other agencies, cities and counties, districts, groups and/or individuals concerned with
economic development of the said community as required.
(J) To review and recommend to the Planning Commission factors involved in the economic development and recommending their adoption into the
general plan and zoning ordinances of the City;
(K) To perform or consider any additional duties in the economic development as may be designated by the City Council by resolution, ordinance or
directive. The Commission should be interested in all matters pertaining to the economic development of the City and the outlying community;
(L) To invite prospective commercial/economic development facilities to the City.
2-6-8: APPLICATION, REMOVAL AND ABSTENTION OF APPOINTEE MEMBERS:
The rules relating to removal of appointee members and absentation of appointee members as provided in Sections 2-8-1, 2-8-2 and 2-8-3 of the City
Code shall apply to said Economic Development Commission. (Ord. 851, 1-3-83)
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC/STREET COMMISSION
2-7-1: COMMISSION SUSPENDED:
The existence of a traffic/street commission in the city of Selma is hereby suspended. The planning commission of the city of Selma shall perform the
duties of the traffic/street commission as set forth in section 2-7-2 of this chapter. The making of this amendment shall not change the terms or
compensation of the planning commission members as set by this code, or by city council resolution. If and when the city council deems it desirable to
do so, the traffic/street commission will be reestablished to advise the city on traffic/street related policy issues. The voting membership of the
commission, once activated, shall consist of five (5) citizens at large, with the director of public works, city engineer and police chief serving as staff
liaison to the commission. (Ord. 2014-9, 10-20-2014)
2-7-2: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
It shall be the duty of the traffic/street commission to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of
this city having authority with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic and street matters; to stimulate and assist in the preparation and
publication of traffic and street reports; to receive complaints having to do with traffic and street matters; and to recommend to the legislative body of
the city and to the traffic engineer, the chief of the traffic division and other city officials ways and means for improving traffic and street conditions and
the administration and enforcement of traffic and street regulations. (Ord. 829, 8-3-1981)
2-7-3: MEETINGS:
The traffic/street commission shall meet once a month at such times and places as the chairman shall designate. (Ord. 829, 8-3-1981)
2-7-4: TERMS AND COMPENSATION:
The five (5) citizen at large members appointed by the city council shall serve terms of two (2) years each. All terms will begin on July 1 and end on
June 30 two (2) years after appointment. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by an appointment of the council. Whenever, in the discretion
of the council, the best interests of the city shall be subscribed thereby, any appointed member of the commission shall be removed from office by a
four-fifths (4/5) vote of the council.
The compensation of each member of the traffic and street commission is hereby fixed at the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per meeting for which
the commission member is in attendance. Compensation may be hereafter set by resolution of the city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 35/436
The member of the traffic and street commission appointed or selected by his or her colleagues as chairman shall also serve simultaneously for his or
her full term as an ad hoc member of the Selma personnel commission to serve as a member of that commission, attend its meetings and participate
in its proceedings if and when requested to do so by the chairperson of the Selma personnel commission. (Ord. 2009-5, 6-1-2009)
Chapter 8
COMMISSIONS
2-8-1: APPLICATION:
All the rules and regulations prescribed in Chapter 8 of this Title shall apply to all commissions of the City, heretofore or hereinafter created, except as
hereinafter expressly excepted.
2-8-2: REMOVAL OF APPOINTEE MEMBERS:
Any appointee member of any commission may be removed by any of the following:
(A) The appointing official, subject to approval of the legislative body.
(B) A four-fifths (4/5) vote of the legislative body.
2-8-3: ABSENTEEISM OF APPOINTEE MEMBER:
If any appointee commission member absents himself or herself from three (3) regular meetings consecutively from the last regular meeting he or she
attended, the position becomes vacant and shall be filled as any other vacancy. (Ord. 818, 9-2-80)
2-8-4: CHAIRMAN AND VICE CHAIRMAN:
Each commission or board, whether established by the City Code or other action of the City Council, shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from
among its own members, each of whom shall serve for one year and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The chairman shall preside at
all meetings and exercise all the usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the head of any similar organization. The vice chairman shall perform the
duties of the chairman in the absence or disability of the chairman. Vacancies created by any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term by a new
election by the commission. (Ord. 867, 6-1-84)
Chapter 9
PIONEER VILLAGE ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-9-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created a Pioneer Village advisory commission in and for the city. (Ord. 2001-9, 11-5-2001)
2-9-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The advisory commission shall be composed of seven (7) regular members. The members of the advisory commission shall be appointed at large by
the city council. Members of the advisory commission must live, own a business, or pay real property tax within the area delineated by the boundaries
of the Selma unified school district, as now or hereafter amended. One member of the advisory commission may, at the discretion of the city council,
be appointed without meeting the aforementioned qualifications. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-20-2015)
2-9-3: ORGANIZATION:
(A) Members of the advisory commission shall serve two (2) year terms. Two (2) year terms shall be renewed by the recreation and community
services commission for their member who continues to represent the commission. At large members may reapply for successive terms. Should a
vacancy occur on the advisory commission for any reason, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by the representative's group
(recreation and community services commission) or in the case of the at large member by recommendation and approval of the city council. From
within its members, the advisory commission shall elect for a term of one year a chairperson and vice chairperson. Elections shall be held annually
at the scheduled July annual meeting. Prior to any scheduled meeting, either regular or special session, it is the responsibility of each member to
notify either the chairperson or city staff of possible nonattendance at the meetings. Upon accrual of two (2) nonexcused absences within the term
of two (2) years, a member may be requested to appear before the officers of this advisory commission to survey the incumbent's ability to serve
on the advisory commission. If it is found the incumbent is committed to serve, the matter shall be dismissed. Upon a third nonexcused absence
within a two (2) year term, a member shall be deemed to have resigned.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 36/436
(B) Any member may resign by giving written notice of said member's resignation to the advisory commission or commission chairperson. The
resignation shall take effect at the time specified in such notice. The acceptance of such notice shall not be necessary to make it effective.
(C) Subsections (A) and (B) of this section are in addition to the provisions of chapter 8 of this title. Any conflict between provisions shall be controlled
by said chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 2004-8, 10-4-2004)
2-9-4: COMPENSATION AND CITY STAFF LIAISON:
(A) The compensation for each member of the advisory commission is hereby fixed at the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per meeting for which the
commission member is in attendance. Compensation may be hereafter set by resolution of the city council. Staff support for the advisory
commission will come from both administration and the recreation and community services departments, including, but not limited to, a person to
serve as recording secretary (herein "secretary") for the meetings. (Ord. 2005-12, 12-5-2005)
(B) The secretary shall give notice of all meetings of the advisory commission and shall maintain a record of such meetings, including motions taken,
discussion had, and recorded votes. The secretary shall be responsible for conduct of correspondence and for implementing orders, votes, and
resolutions not otherwise committed to an officer for completion. The secretary shall further keep a list of the members of the advisory commission.
(Ord. 2001-9, 11-5-2001)
2-9-5: MEETINGS:
Regularly scheduled meetings will be determined by the advisory commission. Special meetings of the commission can be called by the chairperson
or a quorum of the advisory commission. It shall be the duty of the chairperson or vice chairperson to preside over all meetings. A majority of the
members of the commission positions currently filled and not vacant, but not less than three (3) members thereof, shall constitute a quorum. The
annual meeting for, inter alia, all organizational purposes shall be held in July of each year at the time designated by the advisory commission, in the
chambers of the city council of the city of Selma. All meetings are subject to the Ralph M. Brown act for open public meetings. (Ord. 2008-5, 6-16-
2008)
2-9-6: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
(A) Assist city in encouraging, promoting and developing use of Pioneer Village including, but not limited to, Pioneer Village's historical, cultural and
recreational potential.
(B) Recommend policies, rules and regulations for the conduct and operation of the Pioneer Village facilities. The executive administration of said
policies, rules and regulations, once adopted, to be the responsibility of the recreation and community services director.
(C) To perform or consider any additional duties as may be designated by the council by resolution, ordinance or directives. (Ord. 2004-1, 2-2-2004)
2-9-7: RULES, REGULATIONS AND POLICIES:
Rules, regulations and policies shall be submitted to the council for review and approval which approval may be by ordinance or resolution. Fees for
facility use shall be similarly approved by council. Rental agreements or other use agreements for specific purpose and limited duration may be
approved by the recreation and community services director. Limited duration shall be directed and approved by the director but in no event longer
than sixty (60) days without council approval. (Ord. 2004-1, 2-2-2004)
2-9-8: ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COMMISSION:
The commission shall render annually within ninety (90) days of the end of the applicable fiscal year a full report of its work to council and any
recommendations as to Pioneer Village and accomplishment of the purposes of the commissioner. (Ord. 2004-1, 2-2-2004)
2-9-9: PIONEER VILLAGE FUND:
The finance director of the city shall establish a Pioneer Village fund and any accounts thereunder as necessary to receive voluntary contributions and
other monies generated by the operation and use of Pioneer Village. Receipts and disbursements and procedures therefor shall be added as directed
by the finance director. The annual budget as developed by the director, with advice and comment of the commission shall be submitted to the finance
director. (Ord. 2004-1, 2-2-2004)
Title 3
DEPARTMENTS
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 37/436
3-1-1: FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES:
The duties of the Fire Chief shall be as follows:
(A) To formulate and recommend to the City Administrator policies and procedures pertaining to the enforcement of rules and regulations for the
government and operation of the Fire Department; to administer such policies and procedures when approved by the City Administrator to conduct
such activities for the City.
(B) He shall be responsible for development and operation of the fire prevention and suppression program of the City.
(C) He shall operate such equipment as is necessary for the fulfillment of his function.
(D) To perform such other duties as the City Administrator may require.
3-1-2: BUILDING INSPECTIONS; FIRE HAZARDS:
(A) The Fire Chief, or any member he may so designate, is hereby authorized, empowered and required to inspect from time to time all buildings and
premises where accumulations of combustible materials or other hazardous conditions are liable to exist, and to order such changes or removals
as in his opinion are necessary for safety from fire, principally in the business and industrial sections. For the purpose of inspection, he is hereby
empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises at any reasonable hour.
(B) Also, in the same districts for the purpose of facilitating fire fighting, building inspections shall be made by the Department officers from time to time
to determine the arrangement of buildings with respect to one another, to familiarize themselves with the inside of every building and its contents,
to study the best methods of attacking every building in case of fire and to note all new construction.
(C) Records shall be kept of all inspections including notes and sketches. These records shall be made a permanent part of the records of the Fire
Department.
3-1-3: FIRE DEPARTMENT RECORDS:
The Fire Chief is hereby required to keep and maintain department records of the following:
(A) Fires:
1. Date, time and locations;
2. Probable origin or cause;
3. Method of extinguishment of fires;
4. Amount of property loss;
5. Valuation of property involved at fires;
6. Amount of insurance carried on buildings and contents;
7. Amount of insurance paid on buildings and contents;
8. Description of buildings and contents damaged or destroyed and name of owner and occupant;
9. Whether alarm originated as telephone or box alarm;
10. Losses to exposures.
(B) Attendance: Complete records shall be kept of the attendance of every officer and fireman to fires, drills, schools and meetings.
(C) Other Records: Other records deemed necessary by the Fire Chief for the proper administration of the Department.
3-1-4: TRAFFIC AT FIRES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle during the time of a fire in the City so as to in any way interfere with the actions,
maneuvers or operations of the fireman or police officers in the conduct of fire fighting operations.
At the time of any fire alarm, every person then driving a vehicle on the streets must immediately drive the vehicle to the right hand side of the street
and stop the vehicle until after the fire alarm has stopped.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 38/436
No vehicle shall be operated, after the same is stopped, on the streets over which the fire truck will traverse from the fire house to the place of the fire,
until after the fire truck has passed and is a distance of five hundred feet (500') from the parked vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle ahead of the fire truck on any street over which the fire truck will travel to the fire.
All firemen and police officers are exempt from the provisions of this Section.
3-1-5: DUTY TO RENDER AID:
In addition to the performance of their regular duties, it shall be the duty of all firemen, at all times, and under all circumstances, to go to the aid of all
persons or animals in distress or danger and render them such help and assistance as lies within their power.
3-1-6: FALSE ALARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false alarm of fire by ringing the fire bell, telephone call, alarm, or by shouting fire. (Ord. 810, 2-19-80)
Chapter 2
POLICE DEPARTMENT1
3-2-1: DEPARTMENT; CONTROL OF:
The Police Department shall be under the supervision and control of the Chief of Police, who shall be responsible to the City Administrator.
3-2-2: OFFICERS; APPOINTMENT:
The Chief of Police may:
(A) Appoint one or more police officers subject to the approval of the City Administrator.
(B) Appoint additional police officers with the concurrence of the City Administrator when they deem it necessary for the preservation of public order.
3-2-3: CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES:
The duties of the Chief of Police shall be as follows:
(A) To formulate and recommend to the City Administrator policies and procedures pertaining to the enforcement of rules and regulations for the
government and operation of the Police Department; to administer such policies and procedures when approved by the City Administrator and to
conduct such activities for the City. (Ord. 810, 2-19-80)
(B) He shall be responsible for the preservation of the public peace and order, the prevention and detection of crime, the apprehension of offenders,
the protection of persons and of property, and the enforcement of the law.
(C) He shall be responsible for the operation of the juvenile law enforcement program of the City.
(D) He shall operate such equipment as is necessary for the fulfillment of his function.
(E) He shall enforce all traffic regulations and supervise the functions of the Traffic Division.
(F) He shall sell unclaimed property at public auctions as provided for in Title VI, Chapter 7 of this Code. (1963 Code)
(G) To perform such other duties as the City Administrator may require. (Ord. 810, 2-19-80)
3-2-4: POLICE OFFICERS; DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the enforcement of all of the laws of the City and all Statutes applicable therein;
and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof. (1963 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 39/436
3-2-5: ATTENDANCE AT PUBLIC MEETINGS:
The City Administrator or Chief of Police shall direct a sufficient number of policemen to attend and keep order at any public meeting at which a breach
of the peace may occur. (Ord. 810, 2-19-80)
3-2-6: REWARDS:
The Chief of Police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the Department in the due discharge of his duty may permit such member to
retain for his own benefit, so far as he may be permitted by law, any reward or present tendered him therefor, and it shall be cause for dismissal for
any member to receive such reward or present without notice thereof to the Chief of Police and without his permission.
3-2-7: WITNESS FEES:
Every member of the Department shall appear as witness whenever necessary in a prosecution for a violation of any Municipal, State or Federal law.
No member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness in any action or suit to which the City is a party; any fees paid for such service shall be
turned over to the Chief of Police, who shall deposit the same with the Treasurer. (1963 Code)
3-2-8: DUTY TO RENDER AID:
In addition to the performance of their regular duties, it shall be the duty of all policemen, at all times, and under all circumstances, to go to the aid of
all persons or animals in distress or danger and render them such help and assistance as lies within their power. (Ord. 270, 10-20-30)
3-2-9: TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS:
The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State under the provisions of chapter 1, title 4, part 4 of the California Penal Code.
Pursuant to section 13522 of said chapter 1, the City while receiving aid from the State pursuant to said chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for
recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 583, 2-17-64)
3-2-10: ADHERENCE TO POST STANDARDS FOR POLICE SAFETY DISPATCHERS:
The City of Selma declares that it desires to continue to qualify for reimbursements for dispatcher training under the provisions of section 13522,
chapter 1, of title 4, part 4 of the California Penal Code.
Pursuant to section 13510(c), chapter 1, the Selma Police Department will continue to adhere to standards for recruitment and training of public safety
dispatchers as established by the California Commission of Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST).
Pursuant to section 13512, chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to
ascertain that the Selma Police Department's public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the
Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 912, 3-20-89)
Chapter 3
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
3-3-1: SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT:
The Public Works Department shall be under the direction of the Public Works Superintendent, who shall be responsible to the City Administrator. The
Superintendent's duties shall be as follows:
(A) To formulate and recommend to the City Administrator policies and procedures for the planning, design, construction, maintenance, repair and
improvement of all public works and places owned by the City, except as otherwise provided in this Code. To administer such policies and
procedures when approved by the City Administrator and to conduct such activities for the City.
(B) To provide such technical services to other departments as the City Administrator may direct. (Ord. 810, 2-19-80)
(C) He shall proceed as directed by law on all matters requiring his official action.
(D) He shall inspect all construction work done by or for the City and require compliance with all contracts made in connection therewith. He shall have
subject to his approval all progress payments of construction work done for the City.
(E) He shall act as Superintendent of Streets in all matters required of that position.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 40/436
(F) He shall prepare or cause to be prepared all official maps of the City and shall keep and maintain such records as are necessary for the fulfillment
of his function. (1963 Code)
(G) (Rep. by Ord. 810, 2-19-80)
(H) He shall administer the weed abatement activities of the City. (1963 Code)
(I) To recommend to the City Administrator a schedule of fees and rates to be charged for services performed by the Department.
(J) To perform such other duties as may be required by the City Administrator or the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 810, 2-19-80)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
4-1-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE AND CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the California building standards code, 2016 edition, California code of
regulations, title 24 and California code of regulations, title 25, division 1, chapter 1, subchapter 1 (state housing law) as the foundation of the city of
Selma building requirements and made part of this chapter as though set forth in full except as amended herein. These codes shall be designated as
title IV, chapter 1, California building standards and California code of regulations of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
4-1-2: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
Except as otherwise provided in this code, all references to the "building official" in this code or any adopted code therein shall mean and refer to the
community development director of the city, or his or her designee. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
4-1-3: APPEALS BOARD AND HOUSING APPEALS BOARD:
Except as otherwise provided in this code, all references to the "appeals board" and "housing appeals board" shall mean and refer to the city planning
commission with respect to those matters as to which the planning commission has jurisdiction under this code, or to the city council. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-
5-2016)
4-1-4: PERMITS REQUIRED:
Except as specified in this code, no building, structure, or building service equipment regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate, appropriate permit for each building, structure, or building
service equipment has first been obtained from the building official. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
4-1-5: FEES:
Except as otherwise provided in this code, all fees and charges including permit fees, inspection fees or other fees related to this title or title VII,
chapter 1 of this code, shall be set forth in the latest resolution of the city council of the city of Selma establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
(Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the 2016 edition of the California building standards administrative code,
California code of regulations, title 24, part 1, copies of which are on file with the city of Selma for public record and inspection. These are hereby
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 41/436
adopted by said council by reference as the administrative code of the city of Selma and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject,
however, to the amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code shall be designated as title IV, chapter 2,
titled "the administrative code of the city of Selma". (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
4-2-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
(A) Delete: Sections 4-231 through 4-234; 4-320 through 4-326; 5-104 through 5-108; 7-133 and 7-134; and 16-401 and 16-402 (relating to fees).
Add: Permit Fees: The provisions for permit fees and all matters relating to permits and fees shall be as set forth in the latest resolution adopted by
the city council establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
Add: Violation; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of the California building standards administrative code. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative
and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. Violations of any provision of this chapter are subject to administrative, criminal,
civil or other penalties and enforcement pursuant to title I, chapter 4 of the city code.
(Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 3
BUILDING CODE
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE:
For the purpose of regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in the city that certain code designated as the California building code,
2016 edition, based on the 2015 international building code as published by the International Code Council (ICC) as adopted and amended by the
California building standards commission in the California building standards code, title 24, part 2 of the California code of regulations, together with all
appendices, copies of which are on file in the city of Selma, for public record and inspection, are hereby adopted by reference pursuant to the
provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And Safety Code of the
state of California as the building code of the city of Selma, and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to the
amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions set forth in this chapter. This code, appendices and standards shall be designated as title IV,
chapter 3 and the building code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
4-3-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
(A) Delete: Section 1.8.4 of division 1 of chapter 1 (Permits, Fees, Applications And Inspections); section 109 of division 2 of chapter 1 (Fees); section
113 of division 2 of chapter 1 (Board Of Appeals); appendix A (Employee Qualifications); appendix B (Board Of Appeals); and appendix C through
J, inclusive.
Add: Permit Fees: The provision for building permit fee schedule and all matters relating to permits shall be as set forth in the latest resolution
establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
(B) Add: Plan Review Fees For Tract Homes: In lieu of the above, for tract home construction, two (2) sets of plans may be submitted for each model.
Said plan, when approved, shall be good for a period of one year from the date of approval. This approval is granted pursuant to codes in effect at
the time the plan is approved. If the codes are amended, a new plan approval will be required prior to any new building permit being issued. Once
a plan has been approved, and a structural change is to be made, said change must be submitted with a wet stamp, date and signature of a
structural engineer. A separate set of plans shall be submitted for each building site that corresponds with the plans on file in the building
department. Fees for tract home construction as discussed above shall be as set forth in the latest resolution establishing a schedule of fees and
charges.
(C) Amend: All references to the "building official" in appendix chapter 1, or in this chapter, shall mean and refer to the community development
director of the city, or his designee, and all references to "board of appeals" in appendix chapter 1 shall mean and refer to the city planning
commission with respect to those matters as to which the planning commission has jurisdiction under the code; or to the city council.
(D) Add: Violation; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of the California building code. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other
remedies available at law or in equity. Violations of any provision of this chapter are subject to administrative, criminal, civil or other penalties and
enforcement pursuant to title I, chapter 4 of the city code.
(Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
4-4-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 42/436
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the California electrical code, 2016 edition, included in the California
building standards code, title 24, part 3, of the California code of regulations, copies of which are on file in the community development department, for
public record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the electrical code of the city of Selma and made a part of this
chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions set forth in this chapter. This code
shall be designated as title IV, chapter 4, and the electrical code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
4-4-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
(A) Add: Permit Fees: The provision for electrical permit fees and all matters relating to permits shall be as set forth in the latest resolution adopted by
the city council establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
(B) Add: Violation; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of the California electrical code. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other
remedies available at law or in equity. Violations of any provision of this chapter are subject to administrative, criminal, civil or other penalties and
enforcement pursuant to title I, chapter 4 of the city code.
(Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 5
MECHANICAL CODE
4-5-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the California mechanical code, 2016 edition, included in the California
building standards code, California code of regulations, title 24, part 4, copies of which are on file in the community development department, for public
record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the mechanical code of the city of Selma and made a part of this
chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code
shall be designated as title IV, chapter 5, and the mechanical code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
4-5-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
(A) Delete: Section 110.0 of chapter 1 of division II (Board Of Appeals), sections 115.1, 115.2 and 115.3 (Fees) of chapter 1 of division II.
Add: Permit Fees: The provision for mechanical permit fees and all matters relating to permits shall be as set forth in the latest resolution approved
by the city council establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
(B) Delete: Section 111 of chapter 1, division II, Violations.
Add: Violation; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of the California mechanical code. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any
other remedies available at law or in equity. Violations of any provision of this chapter are subject to administrative, criminal, civil or other penalties
and enforcement pursuant to title I, chapter 4 of the city code.
(Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 6
HOUSING CODE
4-6-1: ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM HOUSING CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt
by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the 1997
edition of the uniform housing code, as prepared and published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road,
Whittier, CA 90601-2298, three (3) copies of which are on file in the community development department, for public record and inspection. These are
hereby adopted by said council by reference as the housing code of the city of Selma, and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full,
subject however, to the amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code shall be designated as title IV,
chapter 6, the housing code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2002-15, 10-7-2002)
4-6-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 43/436
(A) DELETE: Section 302, Fees.
ADD: PERMIT FEES: The provision for housing permit fees and all matters relating to permits shall be as set forth in the latest Resolution adopted
by the City Council establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
(B) DELETE: Section 204, Violations.
ADD: VIOLATION; PENALTY: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary
to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Uniform Housing Code. The Building Official or his/her authorized representative shall issue a
citation for an infraction, unless a determination has been made by the City Attorney that a misdemeanor charge is more appropriate. The citation
shall be issued to the person, firm or corporation where the violation exists, certified mail or by personal delivery. If the property has an occupant
other than the owner, a copy of the citation shall also be posted at the property or delivered to the occupant. The Citation shall contain the
following:
1. The location of the subject property by street number and/or Assessor Parcel Number.
2. A description of the violation and the applicable Uniform Housing Code section.
3. A notice to appear before the Court or Superior Court of the County of Fresno, if applicable by determination of the City Attorney, at a specified
date and time.
(Ord. 2002-15, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 7
CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
4-7-1: ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt
by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the 1997
edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, as prepared and published by the International Conference of Building Officials,
5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601-2298, three (3) copies of which are on file in the community development department, for public record
and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council as the abatement of dangerous buildings code of the city of Selma, and made a part of this
chapter as though set forth in full, subject however, to the amendments, additions, deletions, and fee exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code
shall be designated as title IV, chapter 7, the abatement of dangerous buildings code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2002-15, 10-7-2002)
4-7-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
(A) DELETE: Section 203, Violations.
ADD: VIOLATION; PENALTY: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary
to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. The Building Official or his/her authorized
representative shall issue a citation for an infraction, unless a determination has been made by the City Attorney that a misdemeanor charge is
more appropriate. The citation shall be issued to the person, firm or corporation where the violation exists, certified mail or by personal delivery. If
the property has an occupant other than the owner, a copy of the citation shall also be posted at the property or delivered to the occupant. The
Citation shall contain the following:
1. The location of the subject property by street number and/or Assessor Parcel Number.
2. A description of the violation and the applicable Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings section.
3. A notice to appear before the Court or Superior Court of the County of Fresno, if applicable by determination of the City Attorney, at a specified
date and time.
(Ord. 2002-15, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 8
MOVING BUILDINGS
4-8-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to move, haul or transport any house or building upon, across or along any public street or alley in the City without a
permit to be issued by the Clerk upon the order of the Council. The permit shall specify the streets or alleys over which the building is to be
transported, and the time the same is to be transported. The applicant shall pay the Clerk five dollars ($5.00) for the issuance of the permit which fee
shall be paid into the Treasury. (Ord. 813, 5-19-1980)
4-8-2: APPLICATION; DEPOSIT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 44/436
Any person desiring to obtain a permit as herein required shall apply to the Council for the same and shall with the application deposit with the Clerk
the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00), which sum shall be retained by the City as a bond for the faithful compliance by the applicant with the terms
and conditions of the permit, and the applicant shall agree to repair all damage or injury caused to any street or alley by reason of the removal of any
building, said sum to be returned to the applicant upon his compliance with the terms of his application and permit and the repairing of all damage
done by the removal of the building. In the event that the applicant shall fail or refuse to comply with the terms of the permit or to repair any damage
done by the removal of the building, within the time specified in the permit, the twenty five dollar ($25.00) deposit shall be retained by the City. (Ord.
248, 2-7-1927)
4-8-3: RELOCATION, BUILDING, CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT, INSPECTION AND FEES:
Any building in or outside the limits of the City proposed to be moved to a location in the City shall first be inspected by the Building Inspector and
approved; and a conditional use permit be issued by the Planning Commission, and thereafter a permit or conditional permit shall be issued if found to
be a structure that will or can be made to meet this Code.
(A) The owner or person proposing to move a building and locate it in the City shall before moving it, petition the Planning Commission for a
conditional use permit therefor. The Planning Commission shall thereafter set the petition for public hearing in accordance with the provisions of
this Code.
(B) The Public Works Department shall prepare a check list which shall be used in the inspection of building. Said list will show items which must be
repaired, or remodeled, and the estimate cost of such matters. (Ord. 646, 5-6-1968, eff. 6-6-1968)
(C) A building inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) paid in advance shall be charged for inspections of structures proposed to be moved within or into
the City. Where the Building Inspector must go outside the City to inspect a building to be moved, additional costs for such inspection must be paid
in advance at the rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per mile travel expense and fifteen dollars ($15.00) per hour while outside the City limits. This charge
is in addition to the building inspection fee, building permit fee, and performance requirements. (Ord. 813, 5-19-1980)
(D) Double building permit fees shall be charged on any building. (Amount of inspection and checking a structure to be moved within or into the City is
greater than for the normal inspection of new buildings built on a site which is considered permanent.) (Ord. 646, 5-6-1968, eff. 6-6-1968)
4-8-4: PERFORMANCE BOND:
Any person wishing to move a building into or within the City shall post a faithful performance bond equal to the estimated cost of placing a building
and remodeling of same to meet this Code. Bond may be cash, or surety company bond.
(A) Building shall be completed and the site left in a clean and neat condition within six (6) months from the time of issuance of a moving and building
permit. If this requirement is not met, the City shall cause the subject building to be completed and the performance bond forfeited to pay all costs.
Extension of the six (6) months period may be granted by the Council or its appointed representative for good cause for a period of not longer than
three (3) months. (Ord. 620, 8-1-1966)
4-8-5: DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS:
Where buildings are demolished or moved from a location, a permit shall be required which may be issued by the Building Inspector. In addition to the
demolition permit, a faithful performance cash deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required. The completion of the moving and the cleanup
of the site shall be achieved within ninety (90) days after issuance of moving permit. The following items listed herein shall be completed in said
period:
(A) After moving of a building, all trash, old lumber, concrete footings and/or foundations shall be removed from the site.
(B) Holes in the site, such as basements or other excavations, shall be filled by the use of fill soil (free of deleterious matter) to the natural grade of the
site.
(C) Holes or excavations which are intended to be used in the construction of a building or other use at a future date shall have a safe fence placed
around said excavations at least six feet (6') high to protect persons and/or animals from falling into the same. Said fence shall be neat appearing
and kept in good condition. If no building is started within one year after the fence is built, the hole shall be filled as noted in subsection (B) of this
Section and the fence removed.
(D) If, after demolition or removal of a building or other structure, the property is in a rough graded condition, the owner shall be required to grade said
area to its natural grade and to leave it in a neat condition.
(E) In case of failure to clean the site, fill holes, grade, or construct the required fence within said ninety (90) day period, the City shall complete the
job, the cost of which will be applied against the one hundred dollar ($100.00) deposit and any cost exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall
be a lien on the property until paid. (Ord. 620, 8-1-1966)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 45/436
Chapter 9
SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE
4-9-1: ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt
by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the 1997
edition of the uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code as prepared and adopted at the 67th Annual Conference, September 1996, and published
by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 20001 Walnut Drive South, Walnut, CA 91789-2825 in November 1996, three
(3) copies of which are on file in the community development department, for public record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council
by reference as the swimming pool, spa and hot tub code of the city of Selma, and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject
however, to the amendments, additions, deletions, and fee exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code shall be designated as title IV, chapter 9,
the swimming pool, spa and hot tub code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2002-15, 10-7-2002)
4-9-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
(A) DELETE: Section 110, Fees; Table 1-1, Schedule of Fees.
ADD: PERMIT FEES: The provision for swimming pool, spa and hot tub permit fees and all matters relating to permits shall be as set forth in the
latest Resolution approved by the City Council establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
(B) DELETE: Section 106, Violation and Penalties.
ADD: VIOLATION; PENALTY: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary
to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. The Building Official or his/her authorized
representative shall issue a citation for an infraction, unless a determination has been made by the City Attorney that a misdemeanor charge is
more appropriate. The citation shall be issued to the person, firm or corporation where the violation exists, certified mail or by personal delivery. If
the property has an occupant other than the owner, a copy of the citation shall also be posted at the property or delivered to the occupant. The
Citation shall contain the following:
1. The location of the subject property by street number and/or Assessor Parcel Number.
2. A description of the violation and the applicable Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code section.
3. A notice to appear before the Court or Superior Court of the County of Fresno, if applicable by determination of the City Attorney, at a specified
date and time.
(Ord. 2002-15, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 10
CODE FOR BUILDING CONSERVATION
4-10-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA CODE FOR BUILDING CONSERVATION:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt
by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the 2001
edition of the California Code for Building Conservation together with appendices, as copyrighted in 2001 by the California Building Standards
Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936 as published by the International Conference of Building Officials,
5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601-2298, three (3) copies of which are on file in the community development department, for public record
and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the building conservation code of the city of Selma, and made a part of this
chapter as though set forth in full, subject however, to the amendments, additions, deletions, and fee exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code
shall be designated as title IV, chapter 10, the building conservation code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2002-15, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 11
PLUMBING CODE
4-11-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the 2016 edition of the California plumbing code with appendices, title
24, part 5 of the California code of regulations, copies of which are on file with the community development department, for public record and
inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the plumbing code of the city of Selma and made a part of this chapter as
though set forth in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code shall be
designated as title IV, chapter 11, and the plumbing code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 46/436
4-11-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
(A) Delete: Chapter 1, division II, section 103.4 (Fees).
Add: Permit Fees: The provision for plumbing permit fees and all matters relating to permits shall be as set forth in the latest resolution approved
by the city council establishing a schedule of fees and charges.
(B) Add: Violation; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of the California plumbing code. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other
remedies available at law or in equity. Violations of any provision of this chapter are subject to administrative, criminal, civil or other penalties and
enforcement pursuant to title I, chapter 4 of the city code.
(Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 12
HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
4-12-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the California historical building code, 2016 edition, included in the
California building standards code, part 8 of title 24 of the California code of regulations, copies of which are on file in the community development
department, for public record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the historical building code of the city of
Selma and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions as set
forth in this chapter. This code shall be designated as title IV, chapter 12, and the historical building code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 13
ELEVATOR SAFETY CONSTRUCTION CODE
4-13-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA ELEVATOR SAFETY CONSTRUCTION CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt
by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the 2001
edition of the California Elevator Safety Construction Code together with appendices, as copyrighted in 2001 by the California Building Standards
Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936 as published by the International Conference of Building Officials,
5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601-2298, three (3) copies of which are on file in the community development department, for public record
and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the building conservation code of the city of Selma, and made a part of this
chapter as though set forth in full, subject however, to the amendments, additions, deletions, and fee exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code
shall be designated as title IV, chapter 13, the building conservation code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2002-15, 10-7-2002)
Chapter 14
REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
4-14-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the California referenced standards code, 2016 edition, included in the
California building standards code, part 12 of title 24 of the California code of regulations, copies of which are on file in the community development
department, for public record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the referenced standards code of the city of
Selma and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions as set
forth in this chapter. This code shall be designated as title IV, chapter 14, and the referenced standards code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-
2016)
Chapter 15
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
4-15-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 47/436
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the California residential building code, 2016 edition, included in the
California building standards code, part 2.5 of title 24 of the California code of regulations, copies of which are on file in the community development
department, for public record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the residential building code of the city of
Selma and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions as set
forth in this chapter. This code shall be designated as title IV, chapter 15, and the residential building code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-
2016)
Chapter 16
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
4-16-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the California existing building code, 2016 edition, included in the
California building standards code, part 10 of title 24 of the California code of regulations, copies of which are on file in the community development
department, for public record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the existing building code of the city of Selma
and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions as set forth in this
chapter. This code shall be designated as title IV, chapter 16, and the existing building code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 17
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
4-17-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the California green building standards code, 2016 edition, included in
the California building standards code, part 11 of title 24 of the California code of regulations, copies of which are on file in the community
development department, for public record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the green building standards
code of the city of Selma and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to amendments, additions, deletions and fee
exceptions as set forth in this chapter. This code shall be designated as title IV, chapter 17, and the green building standards code of the city of Selma.
(Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Title 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSES
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
BUSINESS: Professions, trades and occupations and every kind of calling carried on for profit or livelihood.
CONTRACTOR: Includes the definition as provided in sections 7026, 7026.1, 7026.2 and 7026.3 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of
California.
FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS: The premises in the city occupied for the particular purpose of conducting the business thereat, and regularly kept
open for the purpose with a competent person in attendance for the purpose of attending to such business.
GROSS RECEIPTS: The total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or
employment of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such service, act or employment is done as a
part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares or merchandise. Included in the term "gross receipts" shall be all other receipts, cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature except as hereinafter excluded, and any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any
deduction therefor on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses
or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from the term "gross receipts" shall be cash discounts allowed and taken on sales, any fees required by law
to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; and such part of the sale price of property returned by
purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit.
JOBBING BUSINESS: Every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling goods, wares, or merchandise in job lots to wholesale merchants for
resale at wholesale to the trade by the wholesale merchants.
MANUFACTURER: One engaged in making materials, raw or partly finished, into wares suitable for use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 48/436
PERSON: Every individual, corporation, partnership, or any other legally recognized form of doing business.
QUARTER: A period of three (3) calendar months. The quarters begin on July 1, October 1, January 1, and April 1 of each year. The quarter shall
include fractions thereof.
RETAIL BUSINESS: Every business conducted for the purpose of selling, or offering to sell, any goods, wares, or merchandise, other than as a part of
a "wholesale business" and "jobbing business" as hereinbefore defined.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS: Every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling goods, wares, or merchandise in wholesale lots to retailers for
resale at retail to the trade by the retailers. (Ord. 474, 11-15-1954; amd. Ord. 891, 3-2-1987, eff. 7-1-1987; Ord. 2002-16, 10-7-2002)
5-1-2: REVENUE MEASURE:
This Chapter is enacted primarily to raise revenue for Municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation.
Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this Chapter shall be relieved from the payment of any
license tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any other provision of this Code, but shall remain subject to the
regulatory requirements of such other provision. This Section shall not apply to inspection or permit fees.
5-1-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
There are hereby imposed upon the businesses specified in this Chapter license taxes in the amounts hereafter prescribed, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to transact and carry on any business in the City, without first having procured a license from the City so to do or without complying with
any and all applicable provisions of this Chapter, and each day such business is carried on without a license shall constitute a separate violation of this
Chapter. (Ord. 474, 11-15-54)
(A) No license shall be required for selling at public sale, any goods belonging to the United States or State or for the selling of property by legal
process, or for the bona fide selling of household goods at the domicile of the owner thereof. (Ord. 824, 4-6-81)
5-1-4: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and each license shall
authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location and in the manner designated in the license;
provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this Chapter
shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishment; provided further, that when all of the businesses conducted by one
person at one location are subject to taxation on the basis of gross receipts, only one license need be obtained, and the tax shall be based on the
entire gross receipts of the business.
In the event that more than one business subject to flat amount of taxation or more than one business subject to both flat amount and gross receipts
taxation are carried on at the same location by one person, the license tax to be paid shall be the amount applicable to the highest licensed business
plus one-half (1/2) of each additional license of the other businesses conducted at the location.
In the event a person conducts a business subject to a license tax specified in Sections 5-1-16 or 5-1-17 plus a retail business subject to gross
receipts or flat amount taxation under any other section of this Chapter, the businesses shall be licensed as provided in Sections 5-1-16 or 5-1-17.
5-1-5: LICENSE A DEBT:
The amount of any license imposed by this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City, and any person carrying on any business mentioned in this
Chapter without having a license from the City so to do, shall be liable to an action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the
amount of license by this Chapter imposed on the business, together with all penalties then due thereon in any such action.
5-1-6: DUTY OF CLERK:
It shall be the Clerk's duty to prepare and issue a license under this Chapter for every person liable to pay a license hereunder, and to state in each
license the amount thereof, the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom issued, the business licensed, and the location or
place where the business is to be carried on.
It shall further be the duty and responsibility of the clerk to see that all new businesses are licensed and that all changes in location and status are
recorded.
No license granted or issued under any provisions of this Chapter shall be in any manner transferred or assigned or shall authorize any person other
than is therein mentioned or named to do business without the approval of the Council in any classification set forth in Section 5-1-8 of this Chapter or
by the Clerk in any other case. (Ord. 474, 11-15-54)
The Clerk shall make a charge of five dollars ($5.00) for each duplicate license issued to replace any license issued under the provisions of this
Chapter which has been lost or destroyed. In no case shall any mistake made by the Clerk in stating the amount of the license prevent or prejudice the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 49/436
collection by the City of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a business subject to a license under this Chapter. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff.
7-1-87)
5-1-7: LICENSE FEE; HOW AND WHEN PAYABLE:
All license fees shall be paid in advance at the office of the Clerk. Any person carrying on, either as principal or agent, any business in the City not
herein specifically set forth shall pay the amount of the license fee prescribed herein provided for the business nearest corresponding to the nature of
the business sought to be licensed. (Ord. 474, 11-15-54)
The annual license fee in this Chapter provided shall be due and payable on the anniversary date of the issuance of the license. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff.
7-1-87)
5-1-8: APPLICATIONS:
(A) Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this Chapter shall make application for the same to the Clerk, and upon payment
of the prescribed fee, the Clerk shall issue to the person a license, unless the license falls within a classification set forth in subsection (C) below, in
which event approval of the Council shall first be obtained.
(B) The application shall furnish all information required to enable the Clerk to properly classify the business of the applicant and determine the proper
license to be paid by the applicant. Each applicant for a license must properly fill in the application, sign the same and certify, under penalties of
perjury, that the contents thereof are true and correct; or sign and swear to the same before the Clerk, Deputy Clerk, or some other person
authorized to administer oaths. The Clerk and his deputies and assistants are authorized to administer oaths in all matters pertaining to the duties
of their respective offices. The completed applications must be submitted to the Clerk, who shall compute the proper amount of the license and on
payment of the amount shall issue the appropriate license.
(C) No license shall be issued for any laundry, hotel, boarding house, lodging house, rooming house, restaurant, bakery, shooting gallery, billiard room,
pool room, amusement parlor, garage, creamery, auctioneer, auction room, boxing contest, message or parcel service, carnival company, rope or
wire dancer, merry-go- round, nor for any theatrical entertainment save carrying on and conducting a permanently established theater or motion
picture show, except on the order of the Council, and whenever any person desires to open or carry on any business or do any thing specified in
subsection (C) of this Section, the person shall petition the Council to order a license issued therefor. The petition shall be made through the Clerk
and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the character of the business to be carried on or thing to be done, and the location of the premises
where the business is to be conducted or thing done. The Council shall not order the license for any business in this Section specified, to issue at
the meeting on which the petition therefor is presented to it nor within six (6) days thereafter. Where any business, in this Section specified, for any
reason is or may become dangerous to or affect the public health, peace, safety or morals, or be or become dangerous to surrounding or adjacent
property, the Council shall refuse to grant the license.
Should the Council at any time determine that the premises wherein any business prescribed in this Section is conducted are not in good sanitary
condition or dangerous to adjacent property, or do injure or affect the public health, peace, safety or morals, it may also revoke any license
theretofore issued, by written notice to the licensed person.
5-1-9: FIRST LICENSE; WRITTEN STATEMENT REQUIRED:
(A) Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of license tax to
be paid is based upon gross receipts or is graduated according to some other sliding scale, the person shall furnish to the Clerk, for his guidance in
ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form provided by the Clerk, signed by the applicant
and sworn to before the Clerk, his deputies or assistants or any person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information as may be
therein required and as may be necessary properly to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant.
(B) If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon the amount of his gross receipts, he shall estimate the amount of his
gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license for the purpose of determining the license bracket which will be applicable to him for the
period to be covered by the license issued. The estimate, if assented by the Clerk as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of
license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, that the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only and such person
shall, within fifteen (15) days after the expiration of the period for which the license was issued, furnish the Clerk with a certified or sworn statement
upon a form furnished by the Clerk, containing the date required to show the licensing bracket properly applicable to the person during the period
of the license and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this Chapter, after deducting from
the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time the first license was issued. The Clerk shall not issue to any such person another license
for the same or any other business until the person shall have furnished to him the written statement and paid the license tax as herein required.
(C) If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is graduated according to some sliding scale other than gross receipts, the applicant
shall furnish to the Clerk for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by applicant's certified or sworn statement upon a
form provided by the Clerk, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary properly to determine the amount
of license tax to be paid by the applicant and which statement shall show, among other things, the number of vehicles or tonnage thereof, the
number of seats, chairs, rooms, tables, or other units used or involved in the person's business as of the time of filing the application. The person
shall thereupon pay the required license fee in advance, computed in accordance with the information contained in the statements. (Ord. 474, 11-
15-1954)
(D) Method Of Prorating: Except as otherwise provided herein, no proration of any license fee due hereunder shall be made for any portion of the
period for which a license is payable. (Ord. 891, 3-2-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 50/436
5-1-10: RENEWAL OF LICENSE; WRITTEN STATEMENT:
(A) In all cases, where the amount of license fee to be paid is based upon gross receipts or is graduated according to some other sliding scale, the
applicant for renewal of a license shall submit to the Clerk for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license fee to be paid by the applicant
a written statement upon a form to be provided by the Clerk, certified under penalties of perjury to be true and correct, or, sworn to before the
Clerk, his deputies or assistants, or by any person authorized to administer oaths, or certified under the penalties of perjury to be true and correct,
setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the preceding license period as may be required by the Clerk to enable
him to ascertain the amount of license fee to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and such statement shall be used
as the basis for determining the amount of license fee to be paid by the applicant for the renewal period. (Ord. 474, 11-15-1954)
(B) Where the license to be paid under any section hereof is based on gross receipts, only one such statement need be filed during any fiscal year,
unless the Clerk requires a corrected statement to be filed, which statement shall be filed at the time the first license is procured, as provided in
Section 5-1-9 of this Chapter, and thereafter on or before the fifteenth day of the first month of the annual period covered. (Ord. 891, 3-2-1987, eff.
7-1-1987)
5-1-11: STATEMENTS NOT CONCLUSIVE:
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate
action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. The statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit
and verification by the Clerk, his deputies, or authorized employees of the City, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books
and records of any licensee or applicant for license as may be necessary, in their judgment, to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. (Ord.
474, 11-15-1954)
5-1-12: FAILURE TO FILE STATEMENTS:
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the Clerk may determine the amount of
license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain.
In case such a determination is made, the Clerk shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United
States Post Office at Selma, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. The person may, within ten (10) days
after the mailing or servicing of the notice, make application in writing to the Clerk for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. The Clerk must cause
the matter to be set for hearing within fifteen (15) days before the Council regardless of whether or not the application is made. The Clerk shall give at
least ten (10) days' notice to the person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed herein for the service of notice of assessment. The
Council shall consider all evidence produced, and written notice of its findings thereon, which findings shall be final, shall be served upon the applicant
in the manner prescribed herein for the service of notice of assessment. (Ord. 474, 11-15-1954)
5-1-13: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license may appeal to
the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Council. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The
Clerk of the Council shall give notice to the person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post
Office at Selma, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his last known address. (Ord. 474, 11-15-1954)
5-1-14: DUTY OF POLICE OFFICERS:
All police officers are hereby appointed inspectors of licenses and in addition to their several duties as police officers, are hereby required to examine
all places of business and persons in their respective beats liable to pay a license, and to see that such licenses are taken out, and shall have and
exercise the power:
(A) To make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
(B) To enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for which a license is required by this Chapter and to demand the exhibition of the
license for the current term by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business and if the person shall then and there fail to
exhibit the license, the person shall be liable to the general penalty provided for a violation of this Code. (Ord. 474, 11-15-1954)
5-1-15: BUSINESSES THAT DISTRIBUTE ANY ADULT MATERIAL:
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this Chapter who proposes to and does distribute, sell or transfer any adult material,
as defined in Section 11-29-2 of this Code, shall maintain complete records which can be segregated with regard to all transactions involving such
products, merchandise, adult material, services or entertainment which are sufficient to establish the percentage of gross receipts of the business
which is derived from such transactions. In the event that the percentage of gross receipts of the business derived from the sale, trade or rental of
adult materials shall exceed twenty percent (20%) for any consecutive six (6) month period the business shall be required to comply with Title XI,
Chapter 29 of this Code. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three (3) years. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
5-1-16: LICENSE FEE; HOME OCCUPATIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 51/436
(A) through (D) (Rep. by Ord. 891, 3-2-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
(E) Home Occupations: The license fee for this class shall be set by resolution duly adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 891, 3-2-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
(F) In computing gross receipts, any return of capital invested, for the purchase of property or money let or advanced may be excluded.
(G) Nothing in this Section contained shall be deemed or construed as applying to any person engaged in any of the professions or occupations
hereinbefore enumerated solely as an employee of any other person conducting, managing or carrying on any such business in the City. (Ord. 474,
11-15-54)
5-1-17: LICENSE FEE; FLAT AMOUNT:
The license fee for contractors, all classifications, shall be set by resolution duly adopted by the Selma City Council. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
5-1-18: LICENSE FEE; JUNK COLLECTOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87) (See Section 5-1-34)
5-1-19: LICENSE FEE; TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHERS:
Every traveling or transient photographer who has no fixed and permanent place of business within the City shall pay a license fee of one hundred
eighty seven dollars fifty cents ($187.50) per year. (Ord. 474, 11-15-54; amd. Ord. 792, 6-28-78)
5-1-20: LICENSE FEE; HANDBILLS:
For the business of posting and distributing advertisements for any store or other business carried on outside the City, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00)
per day; for the business of posting and distributing advertisements for any store to other business within the limits of the City, the license shall be
included in the regulation license paid by the business pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
5-1-21: LICENSE FEE; CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS:
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of a circus, carnival, caravan, menagerie or exhibits, one hundred dollars
($100.00) per day, and for every person conducting, managing or carrying on a sideshow, or aftershow connected with or accompanying any circus or
exhibits as in this Section mentioned, twenty dollars ($20.00) per day for each such sideshow or aftershow; provided, however, that twenty dollars
($20.00) of every one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the principal show collected as aforesaid shall be refunded to the person paying the same upon
said party delivering to the Clerk a certificate of the Director of Public Works that the grounds where the show was conducted were properly cleaned
after the show. In case the grounds are not cleaned, then the sum shall be forfeited to the City. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
5-1-22: LICENSE FEE; POOL HALLS AND BOWLING ALLEYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87) (See Section 5-1-34)
5-1-23: USE OF VEHICLES; NO FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS; WHEEL FEES:
The provisions of this Section are not to be construed as imposing a fee upon vehicles, but as a method of classification of businesses and
distinguishing between those businesses maintaining a fixed place of business in the City and those in the conduct of which vehicles are used but do
not have a fixed place of business in the City.
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the City who delivers and/or picks up goods, wares, or merchandise by vehicle or who
provides any service by use of vehicles in the City shall pay a license fee on the basis of gross receipts as set by resolution duly adopted by the Selma
City Council. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
5-1-24: THEATERS, MOVING PICTURES:
(Rep. by Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87) (See Section 5-1-34)
5-1-25: FORTUNE TELLING:
(Rep. by Ord. 799, 4-16-79)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 52/436
5-1-26: CONSTITUTIONAL OR STATUTORY EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the
constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the State from the payment of such fees as are herein prescribed. (Ord. 775, 9-6-77)
5-1-27: CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage or carry on any business,
occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or
from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any
entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the City, whenever the receipts of any
such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall
any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal,
educational, military, State, County, or Municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or
lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which the organization or association was formed and from which profit is not derived,
either directly or indirectly, by any person; provided, however, that nothing in this Section shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or
association from complying with the provisions of this Code requiring a permit from the Council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage or
carry on any profession, trade, calling or occupation. (Ord. 775, 9-6-77)
Paid Promoters For Charitable Activities Charging Admission: A paid promoter is defined as every person and each agent or representative of such
person, conducting, carrying on or managing, for any compensation whatsoever, the business of selling tickets for, or promoting by advertising or
otherwise, any charitable, political, social or benevolent activity within the City for which a paid admission is charged or collected. The license fee paid
by such promoters shall be set by resolution duly adopted by the Selma City Council. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
5-1-28: DISABLED VETERANS:
No license fee payable hereunder shall be payable by any person who has received an honorable discharge or release from active duty in one of the
United States armed services, and who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, who is a voter of this State, in connection with the
distribution of circulars or the hawking, peddling or vending of any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other
intoxicating liquor.
5-1-29: INTERSTATE COMMERCE:
(A) None of the license fees provided for by this Chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce.
(B) In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may file
with the City Clerk a petition for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such interstate commerce.
(C) Such petition shall be filed at, or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The petitioner shall, by affidavit and supporting
testimony, show his method of doing business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of his business and such other information as the
City Clerk may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such interstate commerce.
(D) The City Clerk shall conduct an investigation, and, after having first obtained the written approval of the City Attorney, shall fix as the license fee for
the petitioner an amount that is reasonable and non-discriminatory, or if the license fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount
over and above the license fee so fixed.
(E) In fixing the license fee to be charged, the City Clerk is authorized to base the license fee upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other
measure which will assure that the license fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount
assessed does not exceed the license fee prescribed by this Chapter.
(F) Within ten (10) days after the Clerk's decision, the City Clerk shall give such petitioner notice thereof and shall file a copy of such decision with the
City Council.
(G) The petitioner may appeal such decision, according to the procedure provided for appeals, by filing notice of appeal with the City Clerk within six
(6) months from the service of such notice of such decision upon him.
(H) Should the City Clerk determine the gross receipts measure of license fee to be the proper basis, the Clerk may require the applicant to submit
either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the City, or at the end of each quarter, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay
the amount of license fee therefor, provided that no additional license fee during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall
have paid an amount equal to the annual license fee as prescribed in this Chapter.
5-1-30: PUBLIC UTILITIES UNDER FRANCHISE:
Any public utility, possessing a franchise granted by the City and making payments under said franchise to the City, shall not be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 53/436
5-1-31: CLAIM OF EXEMPTION:
(A) Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this Chapter shall file a verified statement with the City Clerk stating the facts upon which
exemption is claimed.
(B) The City Clerk shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person without payment to the City of the
license fee required by this Chapter.
(C) The City Clerk shall file a report of the Clerk's decision with the City Council; and, if the Clerk's decision is adverse, shall within ten (10) days
thereafter give the claimant notice of the Clerk's decision.
(D) The City Council may at any time conduct a hearing on and consider whether the licensee has ceased to be entitled to the exemption provided in
this Chapter by reason of change of circumstances, or whether such licensee was not entitled to the exemption because of facts not stated in the
claim for exemption, and for such purpose shall fix a time and place for hearing such matter. Notice of hearing shall be given, and said hearing
shall be conducted and said matter determined substantially in the manner provided in the case of appeals. The decision of the Council in such
case shall be immediately effective. (Ord. 775, 9-6-77)
5-1-32: PENALTIES:
(A) Penalty for Nonpayment of Annual License: Every annual license which is not paid within a period of forty five (45) days from the time the same
becomes due and payable is hereby declared to be delinquent and the City Clerk shall thereupon add to the license and collect a penalty of fifty
percent (50%) of the amount due, not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
(B) In the event the license has not been paid for a period of six (6) months from the time the same becomes due and payable, legal action may be
taken and in the event legal action is required to collect a business license fee and penalty, said business fee and penalty shall bear interest from
the due date thereof at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum until paid.
(C) Criminal and Civil Action: The conviction and imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct
the business shall not relieve the person from paying the license fee to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a
criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. All remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for
the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (Ord. 775, 9-6-77)
5-1-33: ADMISSION FEES, FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of the property admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of
police officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
5-1-34: LICENSE FEE; GROSS RECEIPTS:
(A) Every person engaged in conducting, carrying on or managing any trade, profession or occupation not otherwise specifically enumerated herein
shall pay an annual license fee based on that person's annual gross receipts. The license fee for this section shall be set by resolution duly
adopted by the Selma city council.
(B) In computing gross receipts, any return of capital invested, for the purchase of property or money let or advanced may be excluded.
(C) Nothing in this section contained shall be deemed or construed as applying to any person engaged in any of the professions or occupations herein
before enumerated solely as an employee of any other person conducting, managing or carrying on any such business in the city. (Ord. 891, 3-2-
1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
5-1-35: EXCLUSIONS:
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the terms hereof shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any of the following:
(A) Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license fee upon them under the provisions of article XIII,
section 16, subdivision 1(a) of the state constitution.
(B) Insurance companies and associations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license fee upon them under the provisions of article XIII, section
144/5 of the state constitution.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 54/436
The city clerk may require the filing of a sworn statement from any person claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this section, setting forth all
facts upon which the exclusion is claimed. (Ord. 891, 3-2-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
5-1-36: WORD SUBSTITUTION:
In each instance where the term "tax" is used, substitute the word "fee". (Ord. 891, 3-2-1987, eff. 7-1-1987)
5-1-37: SWAP MEETS:
(A) Any person conducting a swap meet operation shall pay an annual business license fee at the office of the clerk in advance of conducting
business. This annual license fee shall be due and payable on the anniversary date of the issuance of the original license. The license fee for this
subsection shall be set by resolution duly adopted by the Selma city council.
(B) Within fifteen (15) days after March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31, the swap meet operator shall pay at the office of the clerk a set
fee per day of operation per vendor. The fee for this subsection shall be set by resolution duly adopted by the Selma city council. The swap meet
operator shall keep a daily list of each vendor conducting business at the swap meet and submit these lists at the time of payment of the vendor
fees at the office of the clerk.
(C) The swap meet operator shall require any vendor conducting business more than two (2) times within one calendar year to provide the swap meet
operator with proof of possession of a valid sales tax permit issued by the state board of equalization. Any vendor with the sales tax permit shall
collect sales tax on all taxable items sold at the swap meet. (Ord. 900, 6-6-1988)
Chapter 2
LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
5-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord. 710, 11-19-1973)
5-2-2: RATE AND OPERATIVE DATE:
(A) Sales Tax Provision: For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate
of zero point nine hundred fifty one-thousandths of one percent (0.950%) of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal
property sold at retail in the city on and after July 1, 1999.
(B) Use Tax Provision: An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased
from any retailer on and after the operative date of this section for storage, use, or other consumption in the city at the rate of zero point nine
hundred fifty one-thousandths of one percent (0.950%) of the sales price of the property on and after July 1, 1999. (Ord. 99-3, 4-19-1999)
5-2-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage and adoption as an urgency ordinance. (Ord. 765, 3-7-1977)
5-2-4: PURPOSE:
The city council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
(A) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code;
(B) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
(C) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state
board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory
and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes;
(D) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of
part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 55/436
the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Ordinance.
5-2-5: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
Prior to the operative date of this Ordinance, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the
administration and operation of this Sales and Use Tax Ordinance; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of
Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar
quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this Ordinance. (Ord.
710, 11-19-73)
5-2-6: SALES TAX:
(Rep. Ord. 765, 3-7-77)
5-2-7: PLACE OF SALE:
For the purpose of this Ordinance, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery
is made.
In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 710,
11-19-73)
5-2-8: USE TAX:
For the use tax purposes, the sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the
place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 765, 3-7-77)
5-2-9: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW:
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this
Ordinance as though fully set forth herein1.
5-2-10: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part
of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the
Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or
against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this Ordinance; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections
referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with
respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such
sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof),
6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made in the word "State" in the phrase "retailer
engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.
5-2-11: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be
required by this Ordinance. (Ord. 710, 11-19-73)
5-2-12: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:
(A) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 56/436
(B) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or
city, in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Ordinance.
(C) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as
common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
(D) In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.2
5-2-13: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
(A) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.
(B) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or
city in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Ordinance.
(C) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of water-borne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.
(D) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempt from the use tax.
(E) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators
of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as
common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
(F) In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.3 (Ord. 864, 12-19-83)
5-2-14: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
(A) Section 5-2-13 of this Ordinance shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization
adopts an assessment ratio for state assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 5-2-12 of this Ordinance shall become inoperative.
(B) In the event that Section 5-2-13 of this Ordinance becomes operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment
ratio for the state assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, Section 5-2-12 of this Ordinance shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher
ratio is adopted, at which time Section 5-2-13 of this Ordinance shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the
Board again adopts an assessment ratio for state assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by section 401 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 5-2-13 shall again become operative and Section 5-2-12 shall become inoperative.
5-2-15: AMENDMENTS:
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of
division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 710, 11-19-1973)
5-2-16: ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this
city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 710, 11-19-1973)
5-2-17: PENALTIES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 57/436
(Rep. by Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
5-2-18: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application
of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 710, 11-19-1973)
5-2-19: REPEALS:
Ordinance 513, as amended by ordinances 531, 547 and 569, is hereby repealed; provided, however, that said ordinance, as amended, shall remain
applicable for the purposes of the administration of said ordinance and the imposition of and the collection of tax with respect to the sales of, and the
storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property prior to January 1, 1974, the making of refunds, effecting credits, the disposition of
monies collected, and for the commencement or continuance of any action or proceeding under said ordinance. (Ord. 710, 11-19-1973)
Chapter 2.5
PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES USE TAX
5-2.5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SELMA POLICE, FIRE, 9-1-1 RESPONSE, AND ANTIGANG AND DRUG PREVENTION ORDINANCE, a special
transactions and use tax ordinance. The city of Selma hereinafter shall be called "city". This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of
the city. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-2: OPERATIVE DATE:
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption hereof, the
date of such adoption being as set forth below. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-3: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish
those purposes:
(A) To impose a special retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of part 1.6 (commencing with section 7251) of division 2 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code and section 7285.91 of part 1.7 of division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be
operative if two-thirds (2/3) of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the enactment of the tax at an election called for that purpose.
(B) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code.
(C) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by
the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and
use taxes.
(D) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent
with the provisions of part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and
at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-
2007)
5-2.5-4: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the
operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the
execution of such a contract. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-5: TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 58/436
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a special tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city
at the rate of 0.50 percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after
the operative date hereof. Such tax shall be in addition to any other transactions tax imposed by this code or applicable state law. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-
2007)
5-2.5-6: PLACE OF SALE:
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery
is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization.
(Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-7: USE TAX RATE:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and
after the operative date hereof for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of 0.50 percent of the sales price of the property. The
sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
Such special tax shall be in addition to any other use tax imposed by this code or applicable state law. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-8: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 (commencing with section 6001) of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-9: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES:
In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:
(A) Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
1. The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of control, state board of equalization, state
treasury, or the constitution of the state of California;
2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or
against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
3. In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result
of the substitution would be to:
(a) Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would
not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the
provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or
(b) Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
4. In section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
(B) The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in section 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in section 6203. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-10: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this chapter. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-11: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
(A) There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns uniform local sales and use tax law or the amount of any state
administered transactions or use tax.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 59/436
(B) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:
1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the
county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
2. Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point
by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
(a) With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of
division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels
registered under division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out of city address and by a declaration
under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
(b) With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out of city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to
the operative date hereof.
4. A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease
the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date hereof.
5. For the purposes of subsections (B)3 and (B)4 of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the
contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
(C) There are exempted from the use tax enacted by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided
in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.
3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date hereof.
4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date hereof.
5. For the purposes of subsections (C)3 and (C)4 of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or
power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any
party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
6. Except as provided in subsection (C)7 of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the
sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer
in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
7. "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with section 21411 of the Public
Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be
required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.
(D) Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale
to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-12: AMENDMENTS:
(A) All amendments subsequent to the effective date hereof to part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes
and which are not inconsistent with part 1.6 and part 1.7 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to part 1.6 and part
1.7 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment
shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter unless any increase in the rate of this tax is first approved by two-thirds (2/3) of
the voters of the city of Selma voting on such question.
(B) Pursuant to California Elections Code section 9217 or any successor statute, the city council of the city of Selma may amend or repeal this chapter
and any of its exhibits, but not increase or extend the rate of tax imposed herein, without a vote of the people. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-13: ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 60/436
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application
of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-15: USE OF TAX PROCEEDS AND EXPENDITURE PLAN:
All proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder shall be accounted for and paid into a public safety fund or special account designated for use
by the city of Selma only for the public safety services set forth in the program guidelines and public safety expenditure plan for the administration and
expenditure of the tax proceeds, attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit 1. The public safety expenditure plan may be amended from time
to time by a majority vote of the city council, so long as the funds are exclusively utilized for public safety, police and fire protection services within the
city of Selma. No funds can be taken by the state or another government agency; all funds can only be spent within the city of Selma for the purposes
designated in the public safety expenditure plan. These purposes include: a) obtaining, furnishing, operating, and/or maintaining police protection
equipment or apparatus, paying the salaries and benefits of police protection personnel, and such other police protection service expenses as are
deemed necessary by the city council for the benefit of the safety of residents of the city, consistent with the public safety expenditure plan; b)
obtaining, furnishing, operating, and/or maintaining fire protection equipment or apparatus, paying the salaries and benefits of fire protection
personnel, and such other fire protection service expenses, including capital expenses, as are deemed necessary by the city council for the benefit of
the safety of residents of the city and consistent with the public safety expenditure plan. No revenues collected pursuant to the tax levied herein may
be spent on department administrators' salaries, general fund operating expenses in effect at the time this chapter becomes effective, or projects not a
part of the public safety measure police and fire expenditure plan. It is the intent of the people that revenues collected hereunder shall supplement,
rather than supplant, existing city expenditures for public safety. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
5-2.5-16: ESTABLISHMENT OF CITIZENS' OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
(A) Committee Established: There is hereby established in the city of Selma that an independent citizens' oversight committee shall monitor the
expenditures of revenue collected pursuant to this chapter only and report to the people and the city council.
(B) Selection Of Members: Members of the citizens' oversight committee shall be appointed by the city council. The committee shall consist of five (5)
members. The citizens' oversight committee members shall not be current city of Selma employees, officials, contractors or vendors of the city.
Past employees, officials or vendors shall be eligible to serve on the committee, provided that there are no conflicts of interest as determined by
the city attorney.
Of the members of the committee first appointed, three (3) shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years and two (2) for terms of three (3) years.
Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. No member may serve more than two (2) consecutive three (3) year terms.
The city council shall solicit citizens' oversight committee members through an open application process that is promoted through a broad based
recruitment process. Any Selma resident is eligible to apply for committee membership, subject to the appointment categories specified above. All
applications will be reviewed by the city council, which will have the authority to make all final decisions on committee representation, subject to
these guidelines.
(C) Purpose And Jurisdiction: The citizens' oversight committee shall review expenditures of revenue collected pursuant to this chapter only to
determine whether such funds are expended for the purposes specified in the then current public safety measure police and fire expenditure plan,
and issuing reports on their findings to the city council and public at least annually. Committee members may also review the annual financial or
performance audits performed by an independent auditor. The committee shall confine its oversight specifically to revenues generated under this
chapter. Revenue generated through other sources shall be outside the jurisdiction of the public safety measure citizens' oversight committee.
In order to preserve the integrity and independence of the oversight process, committee members will not play a formal role in contracting, project
management, or any other aspect of the public safety measure funding.
The committee is not charged with decision making on spending priorities, schedules, project details, funding source decisions (e.g., leveraged
funds, developer fees, etc.), financing plans, or tax rate assumptions. The committee shall serve in an advisory only role to the city council. The
committee shall have no jurisdiction other than that delegated to it by the people pursuant to this chapter.
The city of Selma city manager or his or her designee shall provide any reasonable administrative or technical assistance required by the
committee to fulfill its responsibilities or publicize its findings.
(D) Meetings: The citizens' oversight committee shall meet semiannually (or as otherwise provided for in approved or amended bylaws) with specific
meeting dates to be determined by committee members. Citizens' oversight committee meetings are subject to the Brown act. Meetings must be
noticed and open to the public. Committee minutes and reports are a matter of public record, and must be posted on a website provided by the city.
Additional meetings may be scheduled by the committee as necessary. All committee members shall attend a training and orientation session prior
to the first regular committee meeting.
Committee members are expected to attend all regular meetings. Failure to attend two (2) consecutive meetings may result in removal from the
committee at the discretion of the city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 61/436
(E) Committee Operations: The citizens' oversight committee will select members to serve as chair and vice chair of the committee. A city staff person
will be appointed by the city manager or his or her designee to serve as secretary. The secretary will be responsible for preparing, posting and
distributing agendas and taking minutes at each meeting. Approved minutes shall be made available to the public. Committee decisions, positions,
findings and procedures shall require a simple majority vote of those members in attendance. The quorum requirement for any meeting shall be a
minimum of three (3) members.
(F) Vacancies: Committee members may be removed from the committee only by the city council for repeated absence (see subsection (D) of this
section), for malfeasance, for failing to meet the qualifications set forth in this section or for inability or unwillingness to fulfill the duties of a
member. In the event of removal, resignation, or death, the city council shall appoint a person to fill the vacant seat.
(G) Miscellaneous: With the exception of those items specifically addressed in these guiding principles, the committee may draft and adopt its own
standard procedures and bylaws by majority vote.
All citizens' oversight committee procedures and bylaws remain subject to review and approval by the city council. Citizens' oversight committee
reports and audits are subject to review and approval of the city council. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-6-2007)
Chapter 3
NURSING HOMES
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
AGED: The word "Aged" shall mean any person sixty-five (65) years of age or over.
APPLICANT: The word "Applicant" shall mean a person that submits to the Health Department an application for a license or the renewal of a license
to conduct, operate or maintain a nursing home under the provisions of this Chapter
INMATE: The word "Inmate" shall mean any person accommodated, cared for, treated, hospitalized, or boarded in any nursing home.
LICENSEE: The word "Licensee" shall mean a person having a City license in full force and effect issued hereunder for a nursing home.
NURSING HOME: The term "Nursing Home" shall mean any nursing home, convalescent home, institution, home, place or facility for the
accommodation, care, hospitalization, treatment or boarding of one (1) or more aged, sick, infirmed, convalescent, invalid, mentally ill, feeble-minded,
incompetent, decrepit, blind, disabled, injured, infected or chronically ill person, drug addict, dipsomaniac, or inebriate, for which accommodation, care
treatment, boarding, or hospitalization a charge is made or compensation is required or expected, whether by fee or gift; provided, however, that the
accommodation, care, treatment, hospitalization or boarding in a household or family, for compensation or otherwise of a person related by blood to
the head of such household or family, or to his spouse, within and including the fourth degree of consanguinity within the Law of this State, shall not be
deemed to constitute a nursing home within the meaning of this Chapter; provided, further, that the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any
nursing home, hospital, clinic, treatment center, institution or other facility operated or maintained by or under the jurisdiction of the State, any agency
or political subdivision of the State, or by any other public body or public entity, or operation or maintained pursuant to State license or permit or State
supervision.
5-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or maintain or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the conduct,
maintenance or operation of a nursing home within the City unless the Health Department has issued a valid license therefor which is in full force and
effect.
5-3-3: APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE:
Application for a license hereunder shall be made to the Health Department in such form and manner as it may prescribe. The application shall include
such information and data respecting the nursing home for which the license is requested as the Health Department may prescribe, including a
description of the facility and service and a statement of the personnel and program that are to be used therefor.
5-3-4: INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for a license hereunder, the Health Department shall cause an investigation to be made of the activities, services and
facilities of the applicant, including the character, reputation, health and qualifications of the applicant and members of the applicant's staff and of the
applicant's financial responsibility. The applicant shall afford the representatives of the Health Department reasonable opportunity to inspect the
applicant's nursing home for which the license is requested, its books and records and to interview the applicant's agents and employees and any
inmate within the care or custody of the applicant in such nursing home.
5-3-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon completion of such investigation the Health Department shall issue a City license to the applicant for the nursing home when it finds and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 62/436
determines that the applicant is adequately qualified and equipped to conduct, operate and maintain the nursing home for which the license is to be
issued; that such nursing home conforms to the requirements of this Chapter; that it will be operated and maintained in such manner as to be
conducive to the benefit and welfare of the inmates in such nursing home; that the applicant's financial responsibility is such as to give reasonable
assurance of the continued operation and maintenance of such facility; and that the applicant and the applicant's staff are of good character and
reputation.
5-3-6: LICENSE; TERMS:
(A) Number of Inmates: The license when issued shall designate the maximum number of inmates to be accommodated in the nursing home to which
it applies and this number shall at no time be exceeded.
(B) Expiration: Each license, whether an original or a renewal license, shall expire at the end of one year from the date of its issuance, which date of
expiration shall be stated upon its face, unless sooner revoked or surrendered.
(C) Form and Transferability: The licenses shall be issued on forms prescribed by the Health Department. Licenses shall not be transferable either as
to place or person.
(D) Provisional License: The Health Department may issue a provisional license to any applicant for any period not to exceed six (6) months if the
applicant is temporarily unable to comply with all the requirements of this Chapter. Such provisional license may be renewed but only for one
additional period, not exceeding six (6) months, provided, the applicant has made reasonable efforts to comply with such requirements.
(E) Delays: In the event of delay on the part of the Health Department to take final action upon an application for a license within ninety (90) days after
submittal, it shall be lawful for the applicant to engage in the operation of the nursing home for which the license has been applied for until the
Health Department has taken final action on the application and has notified the applicant thereof. (1963 Code)
(F) Fees: There shall be collected by the Health Department before the issuance of any license or renewal license an annual fee of ten dollars
($10.00), which fee shall be deposited with the City Clerk. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
5-3-7: REFUSAL OF LICENSE:
The Health Department shall deny a license for a nursing home if it shall appear to its satisfaction that the applicant, or if the applicant be a
corporation, any officer or person who is to be in charge of such nursing home, has been convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude, or has had inadequate training or experience in the care of inmates of the nursing home.
5-3-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Health Department shall have the power and is hereby authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations for the operation of nursing homes in
the City which it finds necessary or proper to carry out the intent of this Chapter.
5-3-9: RECORDS; REPORTS:
Every licensee hereunder shall provide and maintain in such nursing home a register in bound book form setting forth the following facts concerning
each inmate received, cared for or accommodated in such nursing home:
(A) Name.
(B) Last previous address.
(C) Age.
(D) Date of admission.
(E) Next of kin.
(F) Name and address of the person responsible for the care and maintenance.
(G) Name of inmate's attending physician.
(H) All written or verbal orders of the inmate's attending physician and the date on which such orders were given.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 63/436
(I) Date of discharge or death.
(J) Cause of death.
(K) Disposition of personal effects at death.
(L) The amount and disposition of any money or other valuable deposited with the licensee to the credit of the inmate.
All entries required herein shall be made within twenty four (24) hours from the time of admission, or from the time of occurrence of the event required
to be recorded. Every licensee shall keep and maintain such other records and make such reports to the Health Department as it may reasonably
require upon such forms as it may prescribe.
5-3-10: RECORD OF EMPLOYEES:
Every licensee shall maintain a record setting forth the following facts concerning each nurse, attendant or other employee in such nursing home:
(A) Name.
(B) Age.
(C) Date employment began in the nursing home.
(D) Present and last previous address.
(E) Name and address of employers during the preceding three (3) year period.
(F) Position and duties.
(G) If employed as a nurse, date of State registration.
(H) Date employment terminated.
(I) Reason for termination.
A copy of such record shall be delivered to the Health Department at its office in the City not later than seventy two (72) hours following the
employment of any such person.
5-3-11: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
All records required to be kept under the terms of this Chapter by the licensee shall be open to inspection by the Health Department at all reasonable
hours. It shall be unlawful to make any false entries in said records. In addition to the penalties provided in this Code, falsification of such records or
the omission of information required thereon shall be cause for revocation of the license.
5-3-12: INSPECTIONS; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of the Health Department to inspect nursing homes for which licenses have been issued hereunder as often as it shall be
necessary for the adequate control and supervision of the same, and the Health Department shall have the right to enter all such homes at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making necessary investigations and inspections, and shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing and
administering the provisions of this Chapter. Every nursing home shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection by the Fire Chief and the Building
Department of the City as well as the Health Department.
In case of any failure by a licensee to comply with the requirements of this Chapter or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, the
Health Department shall notify the licensee to correct the noncompliance, breach, default of illegal condition within such number of days as is
reasonable in the light of the conditions to be remedies. In the event of failure, or upon refusal of the licensee, to comply with the Health Department's
instructions, the Health Department shall revoke the license; provided, however, that upon a showing of hardship or other circumstances warranting
such action, the Health Department shall have the authority to grant an extension of time for compliance with the Health Department's instructions.
5-3-13: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 64/436
No license for a nursing home shall be issued hereunder unless it is determined that the provisions of this Code applicable to such nursing home are
being observed and complied with, including the provisions relating to health, sanitation, safety, fire, buildings, housing, electrical and other provisions
relating thereto.
5-3-14: ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for a nursing home if the location thereof shall be in violation of the Zoning provisions of this Code, unless such nursing
home was being operated in such a locality as a nursing home prior to the enforcement of the Zoning provisions.
5-3-15: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The Health Department may revoke or suspend any license for a nursing home if it is determined that the nursing home is being operated or
maintained in violation of the requirements of this Chapter or of the regulations promulgated pursuant to this Chapter or for any of the following
causes:
(A) Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the license.
(B) Maltreating or abusing any inmate of such nursing home.
(C) Using practices inimical to the physical, mental or moral well-being of any inmate.
(D) Conducting the nursing home in a manner constituting a breach of the public peace or a menace to the public health, safety, morals or welfare.
Such revocation or suspension of the license shall be in addition to any other penalty that may be provided by Law. (1963 Code)
Chapter 4
TAXICABS; VEHICLES FOR HIRE
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Chapter they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
TAXICAB: The word "Taxicab" shall mean every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon
any public street in the City and not over a particular or defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of
the City or not, where charge for the transportation is measured by the distance traveled or by the time required for such transportation, or both,
excepting vehicles or transportation companies as herein defined.
TRANSPORTATION COMPANIES: The term "Transportation Companies" shall be synonymous with the phrase "Transportation Company" as defined
in that certain Act of the Legislature of the State, approved May 10, 1917, providing for the supervision of transportation of persons and property for
compensation over public highways by automobiles, jitney buses, auto trucks, stages and auto stages and all amendments to the Act.
AUTOMOBILE FOR HIRE: The term "Automobile For Hire" shall mean every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are
transported for hire upon any public street in the City and not over a regular or defined route and irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond
the limits of the City or not, except vehicles embraced in the term taxicab and except vehicles and transportation companies as herein defined.
5-4-2: VEHICLE PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall he unlawful to operate an automobile for hire or a taxicab upon any public street within the City without first having obtained a permit to so do in
accordance with the provisions hereof and without complying with all the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46)
5-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
Any person desiring to obtain a permit required by Section 5-4-2 of this Chapter shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the Clerk and shall
make application for the permit to the Council which application shall set forth: (Ord. 906, 12-19-88)
(A) The name and address of the applicant, and if the same be a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same is a partnership,
association or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company with the addresses of each.
(B) A statement as to whether the permit is desired for an automobile for hire or taxicab.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 65/436
(C) A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, giving:
1. Trade name, year and model.
2. Motor and serial number.
3. State license number.
4. Seating capacity.
5. Body style.
6. The street number and exact location of the place where the applicant proposes to stand each such automobile.
(D) Proposed schedule of rates or fares to be charged for carrying passengers in such automobile. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46)
(E) The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia, and illuminated status display (vacant/in use) which shall be used on the automobile.
(Ord. 906, 12-19-88)
(F) If any proposed stand is in the public street, the application shall be accompanied by a written consent thereto of all the occupants of the ground
floor of any building in front of which the automobile is to be located and for twenty feet (20') each way therefrom, or if there is no such occupant,
by the written consent of the owner or lessee of the building or lot.
(G) The applicant shall maintain a place of business within the limits of the City and maintain a telephone at such place of business and that taxicabs
shall be available for patrons on a twenty four (24) hour basis.
(H) The past experience of the applicant in the matter to which the requested permit pertains; and the name, address, and past experience of the
person to be in charge of the premises ar business.
(I) A verified financial statement of the applicant.
(J) Whether or not any permit has been revoked, and if so, the circumstances of the revocation.
(K) Such further information as the Council, or such official of the City to whom the application may be referred, may require. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46)
(L) Proof of maintenance of vehicles in accordance with the manufacturer of the vehicle's recommended maintenance specifications and schedule of
maintenance. (Ord. 906, 12-19-88)
5-4-4: APPLICATION HEARING; NOTICE:
Upon receipt of any application referred to in Section 5-4-3 hereof, the Clerk shall set a time, not less than ten (10) or more than thirty (30) days
thereafter, for the hearing of the application before the Council and shall give notice of the time so set at least seven (7) days before the date of the
hearing to the applicant by mail at the address set forth in the application and by mail to all other permit holders. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46)
At the time set for the hearing of the application, the Mayor and Council may examine the applicant and all persons interested in the matter set forth in
the application, and shall determine whether or not the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the permit applied for. It
shall, by resolution, order the Clerk to issue a permit, subject to the filing and approval of an insurance policy as hereinafter provided in Section 5-4-20.
(Ord. 906, 12-19-88)
5-4-5: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The following reasons shall be sufficient for denial of the permit:
(A) That the application is not in the form and does not contain the information required to be contained therein by this Chapter.
(B) That the vehicles described therein are inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which they are to be used.
(C) That the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used upon the vehicles shall be in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, name,
monogram or insignia used by any other person in such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public.
(D) That the location of the stand as herein stated, is such as to congest or interfere with travel on any public street or that the proposed stand is within
one hundred feet (100') of any other stand heretofore fixed by the Council on the same street.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 66/436
(E) That the applicant has, at some time prior, had a permit for the operation of automobiles for hire or taxicabs revoked for reason, or that the
applicant is not financially responsible.
(F) That it shall appear to the Council that there are a sufficient number of taxicabs and automobiles for hire in the City to fully serve the public and that
the granting of more permits would unduly congest traffic and interfere with the free use of the public streets by the public, and that the public
interest, convenience and necessity do not require the issuance of the permit.
(G) That the persons holding permits for the operation of taxicabs or automobiles for hire are under efficient management and are adequately serving
the public under normal conditions.
5-4-6: UNLAWFUL SERVICE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner granted a permit hereunder to conduct any operation or give any service other than the service authorized by his
permit granted by the Council in accordance with provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46)
5-4-7: REVOCATION OF PERMIT; HEARING:
The Council shall have the power to suspend or revoke any or all of the owner's permits granted under the provisions of this Chapter for any of the
following reasons:
(A) That the insurance provided for in Section 5-4-20 of this Chapter has not been given, has been withdrawn or lapsed for nonpayment of premium,
or is not in force for any reason;
(B) When it shall have determined that any of the provisions hereof have been violated or that any holder of a permit shall have failed to comply with
the terms of the permit or the rules and regulations of the Council pertaining to the operation of and to the extent, character and quality of the
service of any such vehicles;
(C) For the nonpayment of any license fee provided by Chapter 1 of Title 5 of this Code;
(D) For the violation of any laws of the State, County, or City by any permittee, operator, or driver of an automobile for hire or taxicab;
(E) For failure to maintain satisfactory service to the public by means of any of the vehicles described in the permit, or for failure to keep any such
vehicle in use for any reasonable length of time, or for failure to use the distinctive color, monogram or insignia, or illuminated status display
described in the application; or
(F) For any cause which, in the opinion of the Council, makes it contrary to the public interest, convenience, and necessity for the permit to be
continued.
Before revocation of the permit, the owner shall be entitled to a hearing thereon before the Council, and shall be notified thereof. Notice of hearing on
such suspension or revocation shall be in writing, and shall be served at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing thereon, such service to be
upon the holder of the permit, or its manager or agent, and the notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of the permit and shall
also state the time when, and the place where the hearing will be held. In the event the holder of the permit cannot be found, or service of the notice
cannot be made upon him, in the manner herein provided, then a copy of the notice shall be mailed postage fully prepaid, addressed to the owner, at
his last known address, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 906, 12-19-88)
5-4-8: LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE:
The permits herein mentioned shall entitle the holder thereof to obtain a license to engage in the business described in the permit from the Clerk upon
payment of the license fee as set forth in Section 5-1-34. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
5-4-9: TAXICABS TO BE NUMBERED:
Each taxicab operated pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be numbered to correspond with the number appearing on the license. The number
shall be printed upon the body of the taxicab in numbers not less than four inches (4") nor more than six inches (6") in height in a position approved
from time to time by the Council.
5-4-10: DRIVER'S PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle required by this Chapter to obtain a permit, without first obtaining a driver's permit or
temporary driver's permit, issued pursuant to this Chapter, so to do. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 67/436
(A) The applicant for such permit shall deposit a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) when making an application for a temporary driver's permit. The fee so
deposited is to cover the expenses incurred and no refund shall be made for any reason. The applicant for a permit shall appear personally before
the Police Chief or his designee and file with him an application, in writing, upon blanks to be furnished by the Police Chief.
(B) When an applicant has applied for a driver's permit and has paid the fee for the permit, the Police Chief shall issue a temporary driver's permit. The
temporary driver's permit shall have written or printed thereon the expiration date, and also the fact that the permit shall automatically become null
and void after the expiration date. After the expiration of the time so allotted, the temporary permit shall be of no further force and effect and shall
not be renewed or extended.
5-4-11: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
At the time of the issuance of the temporary permit, the applicant for the temporary permit shall be fingerprinted by, and his record filed in the Police
Department. The applicant for the temporary permit shall also file with the Police Chief a copy of his driving record which he has obtained from the
State of California Department of Motor Vehicles. As soon as possible thereafter, the Police Chief shall make an investigation regarding the character
and moral fitness and the driving history of the applicant. If satisfied that the operation by the applicant of the vehicle authorized to be operated under
the terms of this Chapter will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, the Police Chief shall upon the expiration of the applicant's
temporary driver's permit, issue the applicant a driver's permit in the manner hereinafter provided. Otherwise, he shall deny the application. No such
driver's permit issued hereunder shall be transferable.
(A) No driver's permit or temporary driver's permit shall be issued to any applicant who is under the age of eighteen (18) years, or who has, to the
knowledge of the Police Chief, been convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or of serious California Vehicle Code
violations, such as negligent manslaughter and driving while under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol or found to be a negligent driver by the
State of California Department of Motor Vehicles, or who does not possess a chauffeur's license of the State.
(B) The Police Chief shall keep a copy of the driver's permit on file in his office. The driver's permit shall constitute evidence of compliance with the
terms of this Chapter, but shall be subject to all other applicable laws, or orders of the City. The driver's permit shall be effective until the expiration
date printed thereon unless suspended or revoked as herein provided.
(C) A driver's permit shall be effective for a period of six (6) months from the date of issuance. Ten (10) days prior to the date of expiration of the
driver's permit the driver will file with the Police Chief a current copy of his driving record which he has obtained from the State of California
Department of Motor Vehicles. Within the ten (10) day period prior to expiration of the driver's permit the Police Chief shall review the driving record
report and renew the driver's permit, otherwise, he shall suspend or revoke the driver's permit.
(D) At the time of application for a driver's permit, the applicant shall provide to the Police Chief two (2) passport-size photographs suitable for
inclusion on the applicants temporary driver's permit and the driver's permit.
(E) At the time of issuance of the temporary driver's permit the Police Chief shall cause to be prepared an identification badge to be worn by the
taxicab driver. This identification badge shall be inscribed with the name of the person to whom the permit has been issued, the permit number, the
date of issuance of the permit, and the name of the taxicab company.
5-4-12: REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S PERMIT:
The Council or the Police Chief shall have the power to revoke or suspend any driver's permit issued hereinunder if the driver or applicant has, since
the granting of a permit:
(A) Been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude;
(B) Been convicted of reckless driving or driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics;
(C) Has his State operator's or chauffeur's license revoked or suspended;
(D) Had two (2) or more convictions of speeding within any twelve (12) month period; or
(E) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
In the event of such revocation or suspension of the driver's permit and such certificate as may be issued in connection therewith, shall be, by the
holder thereof, immediately surrendered to the Police Chief. (Ord. 906, 12-19-88)
5-4-13: TAXICAB STANDS:
The Council shall designate in any stand permit granted by it, the exact location of the stand in which the taxicab may park. No stand shall be wider
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 68/436
than twenty feet (20') on streets where parallel parking is required. Upon the granting of a permit under this Chapter, every stand as designated by the
Council shall be designated by red paint or other red material upon the entire curb surface with the word "Taxicabs Only" in white letters thereon. lt
shall be unlawful for any vehicle to occupy any regularly established taxi stand unless the vehicle is one being operated by the owner to which the taxi
stand has been assigned.
5-4-14: TAXICAB STAND PERMIT FEE:
An application fee in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be required to be paid for each stand or change of location thereof for which a permit is
applied. All application fees shall accompany the application. All permits granted pursuant to this Section shall be nontransferable. When any permit is
granted hereunder, the Clerk shall issue to the grantee thereof a certificate, giving the name and address of the grantee, the nature of the permit
granted, and the date when same was granted. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46)
5-4-15: CHANGES IN RATES OR VEHICLES TO BE REPORTED:
In the event that any permit holder desires to change his schedule of rates and charges or the color scheme, monogram or insignia or illuminated
status display used on automobiles for hire or taxicabs, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles used by him as automobiles for hire or
taxicabs, he shall make application for permission to do so from the Clerk, which permission shall be granted by the Council in its discretion if the
Council deems the public interest, necessity and convenience will be subserved by the change, and if the permit holder has compiled with all
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 906, 12-19-88)
5-4-16: VEHICLES TO BE OPERATED BY OWNER:
Any motor vehicle for which a permit has been issued hereunder shall be operated by the owner, personally, or his employee, on his behalf, and it
shall be unlawful for any owners or drivers to enter into any contract, agreement or understanding between themselves by the terms of which the
driver pays to, or for the account of, the owner a fixed or determinable sum for the use of the vehicle.
5-4-17: TRIP RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
The driver of every vehicle covered by this Chapter shall keep a complete and accurate record of each trip upon a daily sheet, showing the time and
place of origin and destination of the trip, the number of passengers carried and the amount of fare collected. This record shall be filed daily by the
driver with the company by whom he is employed; and the record shall be kept on a file available for inspection by the Police Department for a period
of not less than six (6) months.
5-4-18: TAXICAB TO DISPLAY RATE SCHEDULE:
Every taxicab shall have displayed in a conspicuous place in the passenger compartment thereof at all times a sign stating in clear legible characters
the rates of fares charged for carrying passengers therein, the owners name or the fictitious name under which he operates, the business address and
telephone number of the owner and the license number furnished by the Clerk. The driver of every chauffeured limousine shall have in his possession
at all times rate cards upon which shall be printed the name and address of the owner of the vehicle and the rates authorized to be charged for the
chauffeured limousine service. Every person making inquiry regarding the rates charged by the operator of the chauffeured limousine service shall be
furnished with a copy of the printed rates.
5-4-19: SCHEDULE OF FARES TO BE FURNISHED CITY:
All owners or operators of taxicabs and automobiles for hire shall file with the Clerk reasonable and uniform tariffs or schedules of fares. It shall be
unlawful to charge, collect or receive any different compensation for the use of the taxicab or automobile for hire than that specified in the tariff or
schedule of fares on file and at the time in effect. The tariffs and schedules of fares shall not be amended except with the consent of the Council. (Ord.
371; 8-19-46)
5-4-20: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to drive or operate any taxicab or automobile for hire, unless there is on file with the Clerk and in full force
and effect at all times while the taxicab or automobile for hire is being operated, a true copy of a policy of insurance, approved by the Council, in a
solvent and responsible company with a B+ rating, insuring the owner of the taxicab, or automobile for hire, giving the manufacturer's motor number
and serial number thereof, against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from the negligent operation or defective
construction of the taxicab or automobile for hire, or from the violation of this Chapter or of the laws of the State. The policy may be limited to one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury or death of one person, and to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for the injury or death
of two (2) or more persons in the same accident, and to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury or destruction of property. The policy of
insurance shall guarantee the payment to any and all persons suffering injury or
damage to person or property, of any final judgment rendered against the owner, within the limits herein mentioned irrespective of the financial
condition or any acts or omissions of the owner and shall insure to the benefit of the persons, if at any time, the policy of insurance shall be cancelled
by the company issuing the same, the Council shall require the owner to replace the policy with another policy or bond as herein provided, satisfactory
to the Council, and in default thereof may revoke the owner's permit and license.
WORKER'S COMPENSATION INSURANCE REQUIRED: The operator of the vehicle for hire or taxicab employ any person to work for him, the
operator shall file with the Clerk a certificate of proof of worker's compensation insurance covering all employees and that coverage is in compliance
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 69/436
with the regulations set forth by the State of California. In the event the owner is the sole operator and is not required by law to carry worker's
compensation insurance, a declaration to that effect must be filed with the Clerk.
5-4-21: VEHICLES TO BE APPROVED BY POLICE CHIEF:
All taxicabs or automobiles for hire, shall, before being placed for service, be inspected and approved by the Police Chief or his designee(s). After
initial approval and placement for service, each vehicle must be inspected and approved by the Police Chief or his designee(s) on a quarterly basis or
every three months thereafter during which period the vehicle(s) is in service. All vehicles shall at all times be kept in a clean, satisfactory and sanitary
condition and in a good state of repair or if in a condition of obsolescence may be retired from service upon order of the Police Chief, and no vehicle
which has been so retired shall be again operated in such service except with approval of the Police Chief.
In the event the condition of any vehicle shall, in the opinion of the Police Chief or his designee(s) be so unclean or unsightly as to be undesirable for
use by the public, the Police Chief may require the vehicle to be immediately withdrawn from service and the vehicle shall not be again placed in
service until approved by the Police Chief or his designee(s). (Ord 906, 12-19-88)
5-4-22: DUTIES OF DRIVERS:
Every driver of a taxicab who is engaged to carry passengers shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and
expeditiously to their destination, unless otherwise directed by a passenger.
When a taxicab is engaged, the persons engaging the taxicab shall have the exclusive right to the full and complete use of the passenger
compartment and it shall be unlawful for the driver of the taxicab to solicit or carry additional passengers therein; provided, however, that where the
Council finds that public necessity requires the grouping of passengers in taxicabs, the Council may issue after application special written permit,
which permit shall specifically set forth the rules and regulations under which passenger grouping is permitted. lt shall be unlawful for any driver to
operate any taxicab in violation of any of the rules and regulations set forth in the special permit.
The number of passengers which may be carried in any vehicle covered by this Chapter shall he limited to the seating capacity of the vehicle as
specified by the manufacturer. No person shall be carried in the vehicle who is required to share in any way the seating space occupied by another,
nor shall any person be carried who is required to occupy any space in or on the vehicle which does not provide a seat. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46)
Any person operating a taxicab shall wear the identification badge provided by the Police Chief at all times of operation of the vehicle. All taxicabs and
automobiles for hire shall, while carrying passengers, come to a full stop within thirty feet (30') of the nearest rail before crossing any railroad track
where no gates are maintained. No taxicab or automobile for hire shall be operated by any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or by any
person who does not have a chauffeur's license issued by the State or by any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or drugs, or by any
person who is for any reason whatsoever unable or incompetent to safely handle such automobile, or by any person in violation of any law. (Ord. 906,
12-19-88)
5-4-23: OPERATION OF VEHICLE WITHOUT PROPER INSIGNIA PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful far any person to drive or operate any taxicab other than one bearing the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia set forth ln
the application for the permit as herein provided. lt shall be unlawful for any person to change the color scheme, name monogram or insignia without
first having obtained the consent of the Council. (Ord. 371, 8-19-46)
5-4-24: PERMIT HOLDERS SUBJECT TO APPLICABLE LAWS:
Every person holding a permit issued under the terms of this Chapter shall at all times be subject to the laws of the State, the County and all
provisions of this Code not in conflict with this Chapter.
5-4-25: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Clerk and the Police Chief enforce, as applicable, the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 906, 12-19-88)
5-4-26: REFUSAL TO PAY FARE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare for the hire of any automobile for hire or taxicab with the intent to defraud the person
from whom it is hired. (Ord. 371, 12-19-46)
Chapter 5
MOBILE HOME PARKS
5-5-1: ADOPTION OF STATE OF CALIFORNIA MOBILE HOME PARKS ACT:
The City does hereby adopt all of the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, Division 13, Part 2.1 and titled "Mobile Home
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 70/436
Parks Act" as those provisions to be enforced within the City. (Ord. 675, 8-17-70, eff. 9-17-70)
5-5-2: KEEPING MOBILE HOMES OR TRAVEL TRAILERS ON PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL LOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, occupy or maintain for living purposes a travel trailer or mobile home on any area or tract of land in the City
zoned for residential or commercial purposes unless the travel trailer or mobile home is located upon or in an area designated as a mobile home park,
and which mobile home park has a permit from the City to operate in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Chapter.
A temporary, special permit for the use or maintenance of a mobile home for living purposes on a private lot during the construction period of a
dwelling on the lot may be granted by the Council on recommendation of the Building Department if the applicant can present sufficient proof,
substantiated by the Building Department, that the construction period of the house is necessarily longer than the stipulated six (6) month period. No
further extension may be granted. (Ord. 791, 7-3-78)
Chapter 6
AMUSEMENT MACHINES
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Chapter, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
AMUSEMENT MACHINE: The term "amusement machine" shall mean any sport pastime played or operated with cards, dice, balls, pins, checkers,
counters, quoits, benas, spindles, tables, wheels, or any other device, contrivance, or apparatus or any combination thereof, which machines are
operated by inserting therein a coin or by payment of a valuable consideration.
PHONOGRAPH MACHINE: The term "phonograph machine" shall mean any machine or device playing phonograph records reproducing voice,
music, or sound, which machine or device is operated by inserting therein a coin or by payment of a valuable consideration.
5-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or carry on the business of any amusement machine or phonograph machine without first
having obtained a license therefor from the Clerk.
5-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
Every person desiring to conduct, operate or carry on the business of one or more amusement machines or phonograph machines shall make written
application to the Clerk for a license so to do on forms to be provided by the Clerk. The Clerk shall not issue any license for any amusement machine
until he has made an investigation concerning the legality of the amusement machine and finds the machine to be legal. (Ord. 389, 3-1-48)
5-6-4: LICENSE FEE:
Every person who engages in the business of owning, leasing, renting and or operating coin-operated amusement vending machines at a fixed place
of business within the City shall pay a license fee as set forth in Section 5-1-34. (Ord. 891, 3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
5-6-5: OPERATING WITHOUT LICENSE; SEIZURE; REDEMPTION:
Any amusement machine or phonograph machine which is operated in the City without a license shall be seized and held by any authorized officer of
the City and may be redeemed only by the owner paying the reasonable value of the storage and safekeeping of the machine together with a license
fee for the period during which the machine was operated without a license, and the redemption must be made within sixty (60) days after the seizure
of the machine.
5-6-6: UNREDEEMED MACHINES; SALE OR DESTRUCTION:
In the event that any amusement machine or phonograph machine seized for nonpayment of license fee shall not be redeemed as herein provided,
the machine shall be sold or destroyed by the Clerk, and if sold, the money received from the sale thereof shall be deposited in the Treasury.
5-6-7: OPERATION WITH OTHER BUSINESS NO EXEMPTION:
The license fees provided for herein shall be paid whether the amusement machine or phonograph machine is operated in connection with any other
business or not. (Ord. 389, 3-1-48)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 71/436
Chapter 7
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions of this Section shall govern the construction of this Chapter:
CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Selma or the City Clerk's authorized designee.
ENGAGED IN BUSINESS: The conducting, managing or carrying on of any business mentioned herein by any person or owner, officer, agent,
manager, employee, servant, tenant or lessee, partner or associate.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Fresno County Health Officer.
PEDDLER: Any person who travels by foot or by any type of conveyance from door to door, house to house, place to place or street to street, carrying,
conveying or transporting food, goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property of any nature whatsoever, offering or exposing the same for
sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from any
vehicle or from any place not a permanent store building. The word "peddler" shall mean and include the words "hawker", "huckster", "roadside
vendor" and "itinerant vendor". The word "peddler" shall also mean a person offering goods, wares or merchandise for sale or future delivery from a
fixed place of business if the goods, wares or merchandise are sold during a temporary or limited period of time, or seasonally.
PERSON: Shall include the singular and plural and shall also mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association, club, copartnership, joint
venture or any other organization.
SOLICITOR: Any person who travels either by foot or by any type of conveyance from door to door, house to house, place to place or street to street,
taking or attempting to take subscriptions, contracts of sale or orders for the sale of foods, goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property of
any nature whatever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether or not he collects advance payments on such sales. The word "solicitor" shall include any
person who uses or occupies any building, structure, room, shop, conveyance or other place other than a permanent store building within the City for
the purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for merchandise or service for future delivery. The word "solicitor" shall include itinerant merchants
and persons soliciting funds or otherwise peddling or soliciting for religious, political or charitable purposes. (Ord. 854, 4-18-83)
5-7-2: PEDDLING, SOLICITING; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of peddler or solicitor within the City without first obtaining a permit as provided in this Chapter. Each
employee and each principal of a business engaging in peddling or soliciting or both, who is present at the time of the peddling or soliciting, whether or
not that employee or principal is directly involved in any particular transaction, shall have first obtained an individual permit as provided in this Chapter.
A single permit for the entire business is not adequate, unless only the person in whose name and to whom the permit was issued is the sole
representative of the business present when any activity under the permit occurs. (Ord. 93-1, 2-1-93)
5-7-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to:
(A) Persons soliciting orders from or selling to retail dealers for use or for resale, or to manufacturers for processing.
(B) Public agencies.
(C) Any person operating a regular route not less than once a week for newspapers, eggs, dairy or bakery products.
(D) Persons regulated and required to be licensed by the State of California, or any of its agencies, while these persons are actually engaged in the
activity for which the license is required.
(E) Persons delivering or soliciting for a newspaper of general circulation.
(F) Growers or producers of any agricultural commodity sold or offered for sale on the premises where grown or produced. (Ord. 854, 4-18-83)
(G) Persons soliciting funds or peddling or soliciting goods or publications for the sole and bona fide purpose of propagating a religious or political
faith, doctrine or belief, or for charitable purposes. In order to establish that an organization comes within the charitable purposes exception, the
solicitor or peddler may be required to provide documentation to the City or to the Chief of Police or his designee, documentation that the
sponsoring organization has a tax exempt identification number issued by the Federal government.
(H) The City Council has found and hereby declares that certain special events in the City which are designed primarily to raise money for charitable
purposes or as celebrations of significant historical events, are beneficial to the City and should continue without unnecessarily burdening the
volunteer sponsors of these events. Special event fund raising activities, in which funds are solicited and/or food or other merchandise is sold from
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 72/436
temporary, fixed place booths, which are either provided by the City or which have been approved for the purpose by the City, are hereby declared
to be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, provided that each of the following conditions is satisfied:
1. If any food products or substances for human consumption or other thing which might endanger the public heath are to be sold or peddled, then
the provisions of Section 5-7-5(A)1 shall apply.
2. Restroom facilities shall be provided to the public at any event for which the sponsors claim the benefit of this exception.
3. No event claiming benefit of this exception shall occur more frequently than once each year, nor shall any such event last for a period longer
than forty eight (48) hours.
4. The event is to take place on City owned property, either in a park or at Pioneer Village, and the normal requirements have been met with regard
to reservation of the facility for use, including but not necessarily limited to applicable requirements with regard to security, insurance, removal of
solid waste, and adequate police protection.
5. This exception shall apply to but shall not necessarily be limited in its application to each of the following events:
(a) Otherwise eligible fund raising activities which are to fund or help fund the operation of Pioneer Village and which are sponsored by either the
City, the Chamber of Commerce or some other City-related, nonprofit organization.
(b) Selma Chamber of Commerce activities and events connected with the promotion of the City which are conducted on City-owned property.
(c) Recreational activities sponsored by either the City itself or by other City-related organizations.
(d) The City Council may add to this list by resolution if it finds that any other event meets the requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 93-1, 2-1-93)
5-7-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A person shall apply, individually and in person, to the Clerk for a permit to engage in the business of peddler or solicitor on a form provided by the
Clerk. Such form shall require that it be signed under penalty of perjury as to the truth of the information provided in the form and shall require all of the
following:
(A) Name, date of birth and description of the applicant. The description shall include but is not necessarily limited to height, weight, gender, color of
hair, color of eyes, age, any birth marks or other distinguishing characteristics.
(B) Permanent home address and local address (if any), of the individual applicant.
(C) Criminal record, of any, of the applicant. If applicant has a criminal record, then information which is deemed adequate by the Chief of Police of the
City in order to verify the accuracy of the criminal history disclosed, including but not necessarily limited to the applicant's fingerprints.
(D) The name and address of applicant's business, his interest in or relationship with such business and, if applicant is employed, then each of the
following:
1. The documentation which would be adequate to complete an employment eligibility verification (Form I-9), of the U.S. Department of Justice,
Immigration and Naturalization Service and a copy of the Form I-9 completed for this employer.
2. Documentation of worker's compensation insurance coverage of this employee while engaged in the business of peddling and/or soliciting while
in the City.
3. The name and address of the employer together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between the applicant and such employer.
(E) A brief description of the nature of the applicant's proposed business and of the product or services to be peddled or solicited.
(F) If any food product or substance for human consumption is to be peddled, a statement certifying compliance with the requirements of the Health
Officer for each vehicle, cart or other equipment from which the food product or substance is to be peddled, and for the location in which such food
product or substance is prepared by applicant or applicant's employer.
(G) If the peddler is intending to engage in said activity from a motor vehicle, then each of the following shall also be required:
1. Proof of an appropriate operator's permit issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles for each of the individuals who will be driving the
vehicle while it is in the City.
2. Proof of current registration of each motor vehicle under California law, along with the vehicle identification number and license number of each
such vehicle.
3. Proof of compliance with the financial responsibility requirements of the Department of Motor Vehicles for each of the vehicles which will be
operated in the City. (Ord. 93-1, 2-1-93)
5-7-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, CONDITIONS:
(A) The issuance of a permit shall be subject to the following conditions:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 73/436
1. If the application is for a permit to engage in the business of peddling any food products or substance for human consumption or other thing
which might endanger the public health, the Clerk shall refer such application to the Health Officer who shall cause to be made such
investigation and examination of the applicant and applicant's equipment, facilities, place of business and/or manner of operation of same as it
shall deem necessary for the protection of the public health and welfare and to assure compliance with the sanitation laws of the State of
California and ordinances of the City. If, as a result of such investigation, any of the matters investigated by the Health Officer are found to be
unsatisfactory, he shall endorse on such application his disapproval thereof and the reasons, and shall return the application to the Clerk who
shall notify the applicant that his application has been disapproved and that no permit will be issued. If, as a result of such investigation, the
applicant's equipment, facilities, place of business and/or manner of operation of same are found to be satisfactory, the Health Officer shall
endorse on the application its approval and return the application to the Clerk.
2. If the application is for a permit to engage in the business of offering goods, wares or merchandise for sale or future delivery from a fixed place
of business such as a mobile home, trailer, truck, bus, automobile or wagon parked on or otherwise occupying private property for a temporary or
limited period of time, the Clerk shall cause to be made such investigation and examination of such temporary or limited place of business and its
manner of operation to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Selma General Plan and Title 11 of this Code. If the result of such
investigation discloses noncompliance with the said General Plan or Code provisions, the Clerk shall notify the applicant that his application has
been disapproved and that no permit will be issued until such time as compliance is ensured. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's
place of business and manner of operation of same are found to be satisfactory, the Clerk shall endorse on the application his approval,
including any or all such conditions as may be imposed on the operation of the applicant's business on the application. Failure of the applicant to
comply with all such condition(s) shall be considered sufficient and proper grounds for the revocation of the permit. The Clerk shall enforce
compliance with the conditions.
3. The investigation required by this Chapter shall be completed within a reasonable amount of time.
(B) If, upon completion of the investigation, the application is approved, and after payment of all fees and posting of all assurances required by this
Chapter, the Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business of peddler or solicitor,
and the Clerk shall keep a record showing the number of each permit, the purpose for which it is issued, the name and address of the person to
whom it is issued and the dates of issue and expiration thereof. A copy of said record shall be forwarded to and maintained by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 854, 4-18-1983)
(C) If the peddler or solicitor is to engage in said activity from a motor vehicle or pushcart, then the vehicle used must have readable signage on both
sides and the rear of the vehicle. Pushcarts must have readable signage on the front of the pushcart in addition to the sides and rear. The sign
must contain, at a minimum, the business name, address and phone number. (Ord. 96-8, 12-16-1996)
5-7-6: TERM OF PERMIT, RENEWAL:
All permits shall expire twelve (12) months after issuance. A permit may, without further investigation, be renewed upon payment of the appropriate fee
within one month prior to expiration, provided that renewal may be conditioned by the Clerk on appropriate review and approval as provided in
subsection 5-7-5(A) of this Chapter, execution by the applicant of a statement under penalty of perjury that none of the information provided in the
initial application has been changed, or if it has changed, that the corrected information has been provided to the Clerk, and that if any new ordinance
or regulation has been adopted by the City and has become effective since the last renewal or the initial application, that the applicant has complied
with the new requirements. The fee for renewal of a permit shall be the same as the fee for the issuance of an initial permit. (Ord. 93-1, 2-1-1993)
5-7-7: FEES; PRORATION, EXEMPTION:
(A) The Director shall charge and collect the following fees:
1. A nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a new permit or the renewal of a permit for a person acting as a peddler or solicitor
without the assistance of other persons.
2. A nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a new permit or the renewal of a permit for a person acting as a peddler or solicitor
with the assistance of other persons.
(B) All fees are payable at the time the application for permit is filed with the Clerk. (Ord. 854, 4-18-1983)
(C) Persons exempt under California Business and Professions Code sections 16001 and 16001.5, concerning certain disabled veterans shall be
exempt from the requirement of the payment of fees under this Chapter. Applicants who claim said exemption shall follow the other requirements of
this Chapter in regard to licensing and the other restrictions set forth herein with regard to peddling and soliciting. (Ord. 93-1, 2-1-1993)
(D) Exemptions:
1. Applicants whose peddling or soliciting consists exclusively of the solicitation of orders to be filled solely by interstate shipment on behalf of
businesses who do not maintain a place of intrastate business in the State of California are exempt from the fees required by this Section.
2. Said exemption shall be claimed yearly by filing by the applicant with the Clerk the following declaration, under penalty of perjury:
I declare that my business activity in the City of Selma will consist exclusively of the solicitation of orders to be filled solely by interstate
shipment from businesses who do not maintain a place of intrastate business in the State of California.
3. Applicants who claim said exemptions shall receive a permit restricted to the solicitation of orders to be filled solely by interstate shipment from
businesses who do not maintain a place of intrastate business in the State of California. Any other peddling or soliciting by such persons without
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 74/436
first having paid the permit fee and received an unrestricted permit is prohibited. (Ord. 854, 4-18-1983)
5-7-8: BOND OR INSURANCE:
The Clerk shall require of each applicant whose application has been approved, a liability insurance policy or bond executed by the applicant as
principal and surety company qualified and authorized to do business in California as surety, in the sum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to
protect adequately the interests of the City and the public. This policy or bond shall bind the obligees so that the applicant shall:
(A) Fully comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with the provisions of all other applicable regulations of the City and statutes of the State
concerning the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services subject to this Chapter.
(B) Pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for injuries to person and/or loss or damage to property resulting from the negligent operation of
the business of the applicant within the City.
(C) Pay all judgments recovered by any person against the applicant arising out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced upon any person
transacting business with the applicant as a peddler or solicitor within the City.
(D) Pay all judgments recovered by any person against the applicant arising from or connected with the applicant's activities as a peddler or solicitor
within the City. The policy or bond shall also provide that any person injured by negligent operation of the business or having a claim or cause of
action arising from the licensed activity shall have a right of action directly on the policy or bond. Such policy or bond shall remain in full force and
effect for a period of ninety (90) days after the expiration of the permit and any renewal thereof. (Ord. 854, 4-18-1983)
5-7-9: PREMISES AND HOURS, RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall peddle or solicit at or upon any premises within the City which is posted with a clearly visible sign bearing the words, "No Peddlers or
Solicitors" or similar words. Because of concern for public safety and the City's obligation to enforce the criminal laws, soliciting shall be permitted only
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. Peddling shall be permitted during the hours which shall be set by
resolution of the City Council from time to time. (Ord. 93-1, 2-1-1993)
5-7-10: SOLID WASTE GENERATED FROM PEDDLING:
The City Council finds and declares that a danger to the public health, safety and welfare is presented by the solid waste generated by peddlers in the
City. In order to minimize the negative impact of such activities, the City therefor imposes the following requirements on peddlers:
(A) Every motor vehicle used to conduct the business of a peddler in the City shall have built into it, in a location which is accessible by the customers
of the peddler, a receptacle for garbage, rubbish or refuse.
(B) Every applicant for a peddler's license (whether or not intended for use in or from a motor vehicle) shall, within ten (10) days after the issuance of
the permit or license issued pursuant to this Chapter and prior to the commencement of any business activity, furnish to the office of the Clerk a
cash bond of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such bond shall be:
1. In addition to any other bonding or insurance requirements set forth in this Chapter.
2. Held by the City to pay for the cleaning of any public street, sidewalk or alley which may be required due to the business activities of the
applicant and for security for the applicant's compliance with the provisions of Chapter 1, Title 8 of this Code, including, but not limited to,
subsections (E), (F), (G) and (H) of Section 8-1-8.
3. Held by the City during the entire duration of the license and, if any such bond amount shall be used by the City to accomplish such cleaning, the
applicant shall, within ten (10) days after receiving notice of such use, replenish the bond amount to the extent of the amount used.
(C) Every peddler shall dispose of the solid waste generated by his activities in a manner which is not inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter 1,
Title 8 of this Code including, but not limited to, subsections (E), (F), (G) and (H) of Section 8-1-8. (Ord. 93-1, 2-1-1993)
5-7-11: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Each applicant for a license must retain in his personal possession the business license issued by the Clerk at all times while engaged in the business
so licensed within the City and must produce and show the same on demand of any person solicited or any prospective customer or of any police
officer or official of the City.
(A) No person issued a license shall alter, remove or obliterate any entry made upon such license, or deface such license in any way.
(B) Each license issued under this Chapter shall be personal and not assignable or transferable, nor shall any license be used by any person other
than the licensee or the person for whom it is issued.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 75/436
(C) Every holder of a license under this Chapter, upon request of any police officer or other officer of the City, shall sign his name for comparison with
the signature upon the license or the signature upon the license application and shall produce, upon request by any police officer or other officer of
the City, adequate documentation that the person who has produced the license is in fact the person to whom the license was issued. A current,
valid driver's license or Department of Motor Vehicles Identification Card, which is consistent with the information on the license and showing the
photograph of the person who has produced the license shall be presumed to be adequate documentation for these purposes. (Ord. 93-1, 2-1-
1993)
5-7-12: NUISANCE:
No person shall, in the course of activities regulated by this Chapter, create any public nuisance or disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood.
Each of the following shall be considered to constitute a nuisance by a peddler or solicitor:
(A) The use of loud noise, brilliant lights, sound, outcry, amplified loudspeaker, radio, phonograph, horn or any other instrument or device for the
purpose of advertising to generate sales.
(B) Stopping, standing or parking any motor vehicle used in the sale of goods or services the peddler is selling at any location in the City for ten (10)
minutes or more, or an aggregate of more than one hour in any twenty four (24) hour period, during which time said vehicle is open and/or
engaged in vending operations at such location. The closure or intermittent stoppage of operations of such a vehicle while at a location shall not
extend the time during which the vehicle may stop, park or stand at such location. For this purpose, "location" shall include any spot within one
thousand feet (1,000') of such spot.
(C) The sale or offer for sale by any peddler of any goods, wares, merchandise or other products from any motor vehicle within or upon any public
street except as is herein set forth:
1. If such vehicle is parked at a curb, then from the side of such motor vehicle which is nearest to the curb of such street;
2. If such vehicle is parked at a location other than at a curb, then with the motor vehicle parked either off of the roadway surface or at least out of
the lane of travel, and the customer's vehicle, if any, parked either off of the roadway surface or at least out of the lane of travel.
(D) The sale or offer for sale by any peddler of any goods, wares, merchandise or other products in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of
any sidewalk. Such activities shall not obstruct the free passage into or out of any residence, business, office or other establishment. It shall be
considered a violation of this subsection for any peddler to place or cause to be placed on or around the location of his engaging in his commercial
activity, any tables, chairs, benches, umbrella, canopy, garbage can or any other such device or furniture which shall have the effect of suggesting
to the customer of the peddler that the customer remain at the location of the sale for any period of time longer than is necessary to conduct the
sales transaction.
(E) The sale or offer for sale of any peddler of any goods, wares, merchandise or other product in such a manner as to obstruct or obscure the line of
vision of any automobile traffic. In particular, no such activity shall be conducted at any location or in a manner which should cause or have a
tendency to cause automobile drivers to be unable to see any potential traffic hazard or to be unable to see automobile or pedestrian cross traffic.
Specifically, no motor vehicle from which a peddler is engaging in the sale of goods at the time:
1. Shall park between two (2) commercial driveways on the same side of the road, in the same City block.
2. Shall park within one hundred feet (100') (measured in a line along the edge of the roadway) from an intersection.
(F) Because of the danger to children of automobile traffic, the sale or offer for sale by any peddler of any goods, wares, merchandise or other product
within five hundred feet (500') of any school, school ground, hospital or church.
(G) The sale or offer for sale by any peddler of any goods, wares, merchandise or other product in any other manner which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this Chapter or the public health, safety and welfare.
(H) It is unlawful for any peddler/vendor and/or licensed company to sell, or attempt to sell along any particular street more than one time during a
twenty four (24) hour period. (Ord. 96-8, 12-16-1996)
5-7-13: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked at any time by the Clerk for any of the following reasons:
(A) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit, or in the interstate commerce exemption declaration.
(B) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the activity authorized by such permit.
(C) Violation of the provisions of the permit or this Chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 76/436
(D) Conducting the activity authorized by the permit in an unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to cause a breach of the peace or as to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(E) Finding of any fact which, if known, would have prevented issuance of the permit.
(F) Failure to pay any judgment arising from or connected with the activities authorized by the permit.
(G) Revocation or suspension of any permit required by the Health Officer. (Ord. 854, 4-18-1983)
5-7-14: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by an action taken by the Clerk pursuant to this Chapter shall have the right of appeal to the Council. Within seven (7) calendar
days of the date of mailing notice of the action taken to the applicant at his last known address, the appellant must file with the Council a written
statement fully setting forth the grounds for the appeal. Within twenty five (25) calendar days after filing the appeal, the matter shall be set for hearing
before the Council. Notice of the hearing shall be personally delivered or mailed, postage prepaid, to the appellant at his last known address at least
five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. The decision of the Council shall be final. (Ord. 854, 4-18-1983)
5-7-15: PENALTIES:
(A) Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the City any
material fact in procuring the license herein provided for shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or at the discretion of the City Attorney, an
infraction. A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which a violation of this Chapter is committed,
continued or permitted by the person.
(B) Penalties for infractions shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall periodically review the penalties for infractions and set
new penalties by resolution as required to maintain the effectiveness of this Code.
(C) All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and exclusive. (Ord. 96-8, 12-16-1996)
5-7-16: MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS IN OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
Notwithstanding anything set forth or provided for in this Code, if other provisions of this Code, or other applicable laws, rules, or regulations, are more
restrictive than the provisions set forth in this Code, then the other such laws, rules or regulations shall be applicable. (Ord. 96-8, 12-16-1996)
Chapter 8
PEDDLERS
(Rep. by Ord. 854, 4-18-1983)
Chapter 9
ITINERANT MERCHANTS
(Rep. by Ord. 854, 4-18-1983)
Chapter 10
REBOUND TUMBLING CENTERS
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
REBOUND TUMBLING EQUIPMENT: A fabric bed or surface designed to provide resilience by virtue of its own elasticity or that provided by an elastic
or spring suspension system or both, within a stable and tested frame and intended to be used for jumping, bouncing, or acrobatic tumbling.
REBOUND TUMBLING CENTER: A place where rebound tumbling equipment is provided and maintained for public use. (1963 Code)
5-10-2: FEE:
Every person exhibiting, showing or operating a rebound tumbling center, and charging a fee for the same, shall procure a license and pay an annual
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 77/436
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). (1963 Code; amd. Ord. 792, 6-28-78)
5-10-3: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall procure and at all times maintain in full force and effect a policy of liability insurance for each rebound
tumbling equipment insuring him against liability from personal injury with limits of not less than:
(A) Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one occurrence.
(B) Twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for any one person, per occurrence.
The operator shall file a true copy of his insurance policy with the Clerk.
5-10-4: CONDITION OF EQUIPMENT:
Rebound tumbling equipment shall be maintained in a good state of repair and equipment which has broken springs or broken webbing shall not be
used. The licensee shall take precautionary measures to prevent broken springs from disengaging from the assembly.
5-10-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The licensee shall enforce, and all customers using rebound tumbling equipment shall observe and obey the following rules and regulations which
shall be printed in clear, easily read letters not less than one inch (1") in size, and posted in one (1) or more conspicuous and well lighted locations
within the tumbling equipment center:
(A) Not over one (1) person on the apparatus at one (1) time.
(B) No flips, twists, or similar difficult routines unless under the immediate supervision of a qualified instructor, or until qualified as demonstrated by an
officially acceptable certificate or as determined by the operator. In case of dispute with a patron, the operator's ruling shall be final.
(C) No use of equipment in street shoes or in bare feet.
(D) All patrons shall strictly and promptly comply with requests or requirements of the operator.
(E) No use while under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or when not in condition to safely use the equipment, as determined by the operator.
(F) No jumping from apparatus to apparatus or to any point outside the frame of the apparatus.
(G) No actions allowed which will or may seriously distract or interfere with a performer.
(H) No children under six (6) years of age shall be allowed to use the equipment unless accompanied by a responsible person.
(I) No smoking, eating, or drinking while using the equipment.
5-10-6: SUPERVISION:
(A) A rebound tumbling center, whenever open for use, shall be under the direct supervision of as many supervisors as are necessary to comply with
the posted rules.
(B) The supervisor shall be observing all equipment units whenever they are in use.
(C) Each unit shall be numbered or otherwise clearly designated.
(D) A suitable loud speaker system shall be maintained to enforce rules except where there are less than eight (8) units.
(E) There shall be at least one (1) supervisor on active supervising duty for each twelve (12) units or fractional part which are in use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 78/436
5-10-7: QUALIFICATIONS OF SUPERVISORS:
A rebound tumbling supervisor shall be:
(A) Eighteen (18) years of age or over. (1963 Code)
(B) (Rep. by Ord. 745, 6-7-76)
(C) Trained and experienced in the supervision and control of personnel, both skilled and unskilled, in the art of rebound tumbling.
(D) Physically and otherwise fully fit to manage the facility.
5-10-8: HANDLING AND REPORTING OF ACCIDENTS:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall:
(A) Direct to competent care for handling and disposition of all accidents and injuries.
(B) Report to the Health Officer all accidents of a nature to cause unconsciousness, broken or sprained extremities or bones, removal, breaking or
loosening of teeth, hemorrhaging or lacerations which may require suturing, and eye injuries.
(C) Maintain on the premises records of all medical aid or care administered.
(D) Keep, in a place readily available at all times to himself and his employees, the telephone number of available emergency services.
5-10-9: TELEPHONE:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall maintain on the premises a telephone which shall be available for emergency at all times during which
the rebound tumbling center is in operation.
5-10-10: FIRST AID EQUIPMENT:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center at all times shall maintain on the premises and replenish as necessary an adequate first aid kit of at least
sixteen (16) units, as recommended by the American Red Cross First Aid Manual.
5-10-11: SANITATION:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall keep the premises and all facilities in a clean condition. He shall provide, as needed to prevent litter,
waste containers and appropriate signs.
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall provide on the premises drinking facilities which shall consist of either a sanitary drinking fountain or
bottled water and paper cups available in a suitable, sanitary dispenser.
5-10-12: LAYOUT OF REBOUND TUMBLING EQUIPMENT:
(A) Rebound tumbling equipment shall be located on a level surface in such a way as to be within view of the operator or attendant at all times.
(B) The spacing of equipment units shall conform to the following minimum dimensions as measured from the inside edge of the frame:
1. Three feet (3') between sides of units.
2. Four feet (4') between ends of units.
3. Five feet (5') from ends of nearest fence, building, or other similar construction.
4. Three feet (3') from sides or corners to nearest fence, building or other similar construction.
(C) The area surrounding the rebound tumbling equipment shall be surfaced to prevent a dust nuisance and have a reasonably level surface of pea
gravel or equivalent type of material from a safety and dust control standpoint.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 79/436
(D) The entire rebound tumbling center shall be completely enclosed by fencing not less than five feet (5') in height.
5-10-13: CONSTRUCTION OF PITS:
(A) Pits for rebound tumbling centers shall be so constructed that they will not interfere with the operation of the equipment and of a depth not less
than three feet (3') nor more than four feet (4') at centers.
(B) Such pits shall be so framed that the rebound tumbling equipment is held in a level position and is supported on a solid stable surface. Lumber
used as framing for pits shall be not less than two inches (2") in thickness and shall be securely connected together.
5-10-14: USE OF PADDING:
The frames of rebound tumbling equipment shall be completely padded to provide reasonable safety. Pads two inches (2") thick filled with cotton
linters shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
5-10-15: INSPECTION:
The Building Inspector shall inspect annually every rebound tumbling center. (1963 Code)
Chapter 11
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES
5-11-1: DEFINITION:
The term "self-service laundries" as used in this Chapter shall mean any establishment in which coin-operated facilities are available for washing
clothes or for drying clothes, or both, and which is open and available to the general public for use.
5-11-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate a self-service laundry in the City without first having secured a license therefor from the
Clerk. Applications for license shall comply with the general provisions relating to applications for licenses found in Chapter 1 of this Title. (1963 Code)
5-11-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 742-A, 3-15-76)
5-11-4: INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT:
Installation of all equipment in the establishment shall be in conformity with the building, plumbing and electrical regulations established by this Code.
5-11-5: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Building Inspector to see to the enforcement of this Chapter and to cause such inspection to be made
of the premises as may be necessary for that purpose. (1963 Code)
Chapter 12
AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINES
5-12-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this Chapter the following term shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to it:
AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINE: Includes and means any device or apparatus for the cleaning of clothes or fabrics, and designed to be used
or operated by any person but the owner, or an employee of the owner thereof, which machine or device makes use of or contains perchlorethylene or
any other chemical solvent or substance which may cause harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or contact. (1963 Code)
5-12-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; PERMIT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 80/436
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any automatic dry cleaning machine without first having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permit shall contain full information as to the mechanical equipment of such machine and provisions for ventilation for both the machine and the room
in which the machine will be located. (1963 Code; amd. Ord. 792, 6-28-78)
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of maintaining such machine for use by the public upon payment of a fee, without having
first secured a license therefor. The annual fee for such business license shall be set by resolution duly adopted by the Selma City Council. (Ord. 891,
3-2-87, eff. 7-1-87)
5-12-3: INSTALLATION REGULATIONS:
Each machine shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with an intake at the top and the outlet at or near the bottom of such
machine. Groups of machines may be entirely enclosed or supported on all open sides by an enclosure topped with a hood vented as provided for
each individual machine.
The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of one hundred (100) cubic feet per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the
door is open.
The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the machines are located shall extend at least two feet (2') above the level of any
window which can be opened located within fifty feet (50') of the outlet of the stack, and shall be at least fifty feet (50') away from any fresh air intake
leading to any premises.
The machines must be so constructed as to prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be
equipped with a transparent door or part to allow visual examination of the status of the cleaning cycle.
Any connection of such machine with the water supply system must be equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the
condenser; with no control valves downstream from such gap or breaker. Waste water shall be discharged through an air gap.
The room in which such machine is installed shall be ventilated so that there shall be a minimum flow of air per machine from the area to which the
public is admitted, of at least five hundred cubic feet (500 cu. ft.) per machine per minute in a room where there are no more than three (3) machines
installed four hundred cubic feet (400 cu. ft.) per minute where there are no more than eight (8) machines installed; three hundred seventy-five cubic
feet (375 cu. ft.) per minute where there are no more than sixteen (16) machines installed; and three hundred sixty cubic feet (360 cu. ft.) per minute
where there are more than seventeen (17) machines installed. For this purpose each cleaning cell shall be considered as one (1) machine.
Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent the leakage of liquids, gas or vapors.
5-12-4: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
No automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all the equipment described in the above Section is properly installed and in good
operating working conditions.
No establishment for which a license is required under the provisions of this Chapter shall be open for business, and it shall be unlawful to admit the
public or customers into the room where such machines are located unless there is on duty in the establishment at all times a competent person in
charge of the establishment and in charge of the operation of such machines. There shall be warning signs posted in places of easy observation
warning of the dangers in the event leakage of liquids, gas or vapor occurs. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any residue containing solvent
to flow into the sewer system. Tightly covered metal containers may be used for temporary storage of such wastes outside of the building. Such
containers shall bear labels indicating the contents and dangers involved in handling, and shall be locked if in an unenclosed place.
At least one (1) legible sign shall be maintained in a place available to customers giving the name, address and phone number of the owner of the
establishment, and of the service department or agency responsible for the proper maintenance of the machines.
5-12-5: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to cause such inspections to be made as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 742-A, 3-15-76)
5-12-6: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any automatic dry cleaning machine except in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter, or without complying with all of the provisions of this Code pertaining to the installation and operation of such machines herein contained; or
in violation of any other provisions of this Code relating thereto. (1963 Code)
Chapter 13
AUCTIONS
5-13-1: LICENSE:
Any person desiring a business license to conduct an auction in the City shall apply for the license with the City Clerk and shall pay a business license
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 81/436
fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day. The application for the business license shall require the name and address of the applicant; the applicant's
license number issued by the California Auctioneer Commission and the location of the auction.
5-13-2: CHARITABLE AUCTION EXEMPT:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any auction held for charitable or benevolent purposes, or for any church fair, festival or bazaar. (Ord.
857, 8-15-83)
Chapter 14
HOTELS
5-14-1: DEFINITION:
Every building maintained or advertised as a public lodging house or where more than six (6) rooms are provided for sleeping accommodations shall
be known as a hotel.
5-14-2: FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT:
The Fire Chief, or other officer designated by the Council, shall survey each hotel and specify suitable fire detecting devices or extinguishing
appliances which shall be provided.
5-14-3: MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
Fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed in compliance with any permit or order, or according to any provisions
of this Code, shall be maintained in operative condition at all times and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the
protection so required.
5-14-4: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and the Health Officer, or other officers so designated by the Council, to make periodic and regular inspections of
every hotel and to make regular reports thereon to the Council concerning regulations imposed by this Code.
5-14-5: HOTEL REGISTER:
A register shall be maintained at every hotel and each guest shall be required to register his name and home address. The date of arrival and
departure shall be clearly indicated and the register shall be maintained for a period of at least one (1) year following registration. The register shall be
open for inspection to any authorized person. (1963 Code)
Chapter 15
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
5-15-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SELMA. (Ord. 2013-4, 11-5-2013)
5-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.
HOTEL: Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or
sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment
house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The city council of the city of Selma.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portions thereof, in any hotel for dwelling,
lodging, or sleeping purposes.
OPERATOR: The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or
any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the
managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 82/436
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
RENT: The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money,
goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The city clerk.
TRANSIENT: Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel by reason of a lease, concession, permit, right of access,
license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such
person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in
writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient,
uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered.
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX REVIEW COMMITTEE: A committee composed of the following three (3) persons or officers: mayor, city clerk, and
city attorney. (Ord. 587, 6-1-1964)
5-15-3: TAX IMPOSED:
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, inn, tourist home, house, motel or other lodging, unless occupancy is for a period of more than thirty (30)
days, the transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve percent (12%) of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a
debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the
operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment.
Any unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy the space in the hotel, inn, tourist home, motel or other lodging. If for any reason
the tax bill is not paid to the operator of the hotel or other lodging, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to him or her.
(Ord. 2013-4, 11-5-2013)
5-15-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY OPERATOR; RULES FOR COLLECTION SCHEDULES:
Every operator maintaining a place of business and renting rooms in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter,
shall collect the tax from the occupant. The tax required to be collected by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city. In all cases
of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall
be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are paid or deferred payments are made in accordance with the rate of tax owing on
the amount thereof.
The tax administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith as
may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement hereof. He shall provide schedules for payment of the tax and such schedules shall eliminate
fractions of one cent ($0.01). (Ord. 587, 6-1-1964)
5-15-5: OPERATOR'S DUTIES:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator.
No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed
by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 587,
6-1-1964)
5-15-6: EXEMPTIONS:
No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon:
(A) Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
(B) Any officer or employee of the government of the United States Of America, state of California, or any subdivision thereof when on official
business;
(C) Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty;
(D) Any occupant for more than thirty (30) successive calendar days;
(E) Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than two dollars ($2.00) a day;
(F) Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin or like facility from an owner who is not regularly engaged in the business of renting such
facilities but does so only occasionally and incidentally to his own use thereof;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 83/436
(G) Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people.
No exemption shall be granted under subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and
under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 587, 6-1-1964)
5-15-7: REGISTRATION OF OPERATOR; FORM AND CONTENTS; EXECUTION; CERTIFICATION OF AUTHORITY:
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall register with the tax administrator on a form provided
by him. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than July 15, 1964, or within fifteen (15) days after commencing business
whichever is later, but such privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment
or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such
person transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of
the tax as the tax administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership,
by a member or partner; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the
registration. The tax administrator shall within ten (10) days after such registration issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to
collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of such registrant. Such certificates shall be
nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location
named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently
displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.
Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
(A) The name of the operator;
(B) The address of the hotel;
(C) The date upon which the certificate was issued;
(D) This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the
Transient Room Tax Ordinance of the City of Selma by registration with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the
room tax imposed by said City and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any
unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in any unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local
applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of said City.
This certificate does not constitute a permit.
If the Tax Administrator deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration hereunder of persons engaged in business on or prior to the date of
imposition of tax as set forth in this Chapter, he may prescribe provisions therefor other than those provided in this Section. Such provisions shall be
made to effect the purposes hereof. For such purposes, such provisions shall be in lieu of or in addition to those herein provided. Such registration and
certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided herein.
5-15-8: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
(A) Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten per cent
(10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
(B) Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten per cent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to
the amount of the tax and the ten per cent (10%) penalty first imposed.
(C) Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the
provisions thereof, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in
paragraphs (A) and (B) of this Section.
(D) Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one
half of one per cent (.5%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent until paid.
(E) Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this Section shall be merged with and
become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.
5-15-9: DUE DATE; RETURNS AND PAYMENTS:
(A) The tax imposed by this Chapter shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy. All amounts of such taxes collectible
or collected by any operator are due and payable to the Tax Administrator quarterly on the first day of the months of April, July, October, and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 84/436
January next succeeding each respective quarterly period and are delinquent after the last day of such months.
(B) On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period of three (3) months, a return for the preceding quarterly period shall be filed
with the Tax Administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the Tax Administrator may prescribe, by every operator and by every person
liable to payment of tax hereunder during such quarterly period who has not paid such tax, and who has not made return in regard to the related
occupancy which is the subject of tax.
(C) Returns show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as is required by the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, the gross
receipts of a registered returnee for such period and the explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts.
(D) The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the Tax Administrator at
his office.
(E) For good cause the Tax Administrator may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further
extension shall be granted, except by the Transient Occupancy Review Committee. Any person to whom an extension is granted who makes return
and pays the tax within the period of such extension shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one half of one per
cent (.5%) per month, or fraction thereof, on the unpaid balance for the period of such extension to the time of return and payment, which interest
shall become a part of the tax.
(F) The Tax Administrator, if he deems it necessary in order to insure payment or facilitate collection by the City of the amount of taxes in any
individual case, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods.
5-15-10: DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS:
(A) If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the City by any person, he
may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any
information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due
for one or more than one period.
(B) In making a determination the Administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods
together with interest on the overpayments, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties, and interest, on
the underpayments. The interest on underpayments and overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 5-15-13.
(C) The Tax Administrator shall give to the operator or occupant written notice if his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if
by mail, the notice shall be enclosed in a sealed envelope postage prepaid and addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the
records of the Administrator. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this Chapter the service is complete at the time of deposit in the
United States Post Office.
(D) Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this Chapter or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a timely return, every deficiency
determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period
for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period expires the later.
(E) If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make, within the time provided in this Chapter any report and remittance of said tax or any
portion thereof required by this Chapter or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise wilfully attempts to evade this Chapter, the Tax Administrator
shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the
Tax Administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this
Chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to
determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties, provided for by this Chapter. In case such determination is made, the
Tax Administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed
within three (3) years after discovery by the Tax Administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure to file return. Any determination shall become
final within thirty (30) days after giving notice thereof as herein provided.
(F) If the Tax Administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the City will be jeopardized
by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be
collected, noting that fact upon the determination. The amount determined is immediately due and payable. If the amount specified in the
determination is not paid within ten (10) days after service of notice thereof upon the person against whom the determination is made, the amount
becomes final at the expiration of the ten (10) days, unless a petition for redetermination is filed within the ten (10) days and the delinquency
penalty and the interest provided in Section 5-15-8 shall attach to the amount of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be collected.
5-15-11: REDETERMINATIONS:
(A) Any person against whom a determination is made under Section 5-15-10 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination
within fifteen (15) days after service upon the person of notice thereof. If a petition for redetermination is not filed within the thirty (30) day period,
the determination becomes final at the expiration of the period. Provided, however, a petition for redetermination under Subsection (F) of Section 5-
15-10 shall be filed within ten (10) days after notice.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 85/436
(B) If a petition for redetermination is filed within the allowable period, the Tax Administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has
so requested in his petition, shall grant the person on oral hearing and shall give him ten (10) days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The
Tax Administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.
(C) The Tax Administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination before it becomes final but the amount may be increased only if
a claim for the increase is asserted by the Tax Administrator at or before the hearing.
(D) The order or decision of the Tax Administrator upon a petition for redetermination becomes final fifteen (15) days after service upon the petitioner
of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee within fifteen (15) days after
service of such notice.
(E) No petition for redetermination or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless at or before the filing thereof the amount found due in
the original determination is paid or a bond or other security satisfactory to the Tax Administrator is filed with him guaranteeing payment of any
amount finally determined to be due.
5-15-12: SECURITY FOR COLLECTION OF TAX:
(A) The Tax Administrator, whenever he deems it necessary to insure compliance with this Chapter, may require any person subject thereto to deposit
with him such security in the form of cash, bond, or other security as the Tax Administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be
fixed by the Tax Administrator but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns,
determined in such manner as the Tax Administrator deems proper, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever amount is the lesser. The
amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the Tax Administrator subject to the limitations herein provided.
(B) If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him or in the event a determination has been made against him
which remains unpaid, the Tax Administrator may, not later than three (3) years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by
registered mail to all persons in the County having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the
delinquent, or owing any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other
disposition of the credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the Tax
Administrator consents to a transfer or disposition or until twenty (20) days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall within
five (5) days after the receipt of the notice advise the Tax Administrator of all such credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession,
under their control, or owing by them.
(C) At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three
(3) years after any determination becomes final, the Tax Administrator may bring an action in the courts of this State, or any other State, or of the
United States in the name of the City to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest.
(D) If any operator liable for any amount under this Chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold
sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that he has
been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the tax from the purchase price as required,
he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money.
Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the Tax Administrator shall either issue the certificate or
mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the Tax Administrator of the amount that must be paid as a condition of
issuing the certificate. Failure of the Administrator to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the purchase
price as above provided.
The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business or at the time
that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later.
5-15-13: REFUNDS:
Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the
Tax Administrator under this Chapter, it may be refunded provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon which the claim
is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three (3) years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the Tax
Administrator. If the claim is approved by the Tax Administrator the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any
amounts then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such persons, his
administrators or executors.
5-15-14: ADMINISTRATION:
(A) The Tax Administrator shall deposit all moneys collected pursuant to this Chapter to the credit of the General Fund.
(B) Records Required from Operators, etc.; Form. Every operator renting guest rooms in this City shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and
other pertinent papers in such form as the Tax Administrator may require. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three (3)
years and six (6) months after they come into being.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 86/436
(C) Examination of Records; Investigations. The Tax Administrator or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records
and equipment of any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of an
return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.
(D) Authority to Require Reports; Contents. In administration of the tax the Tax Administrator may require the filing of reports by any person or class of
persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be
filed when the Tax Administrator requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other
information as the Tax Administrator may require.
(E) Confidential Character of Information Obtained; Disclosure Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the Tax Administrator or any person having an
administrative duty under the provisions of this Chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information
obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate, or pay a
transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses,
expenditures, or any particulars thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any
book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Provided that nothing in this Subsection shall be
construed to prevent:
(1) The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by another City official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the
sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this Chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;
(2) The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, Federal, or State officials, or the tax officials of another City, or County,
or City and County, if a reciprocal arrangement exists; or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena;
(3) The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of
law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any business tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the City;
(4) The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors,
administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any
unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the City Attorney approves
each such disclosure and that the Tax Administrator may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his opinion the
public interest would suffer thereby;
(5) The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom Transient Occupancy Registration Certificates have been issued, the
names and addresses of officers of corporations and members of partnerships to whom such certificates have been issued, and the general
type or nature of their business;
(6) The disclosure to the legislative body by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary in order to permit it to
be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a
claim asserted against him by the City for business taxes, or when acting upon any other matter;
(7) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the City.
(F) Disclosure of Business of Operators, etc.; Limitation on Rule. Neither the Tax Administrator nor any person having an administrative duty under this
Chapter shall make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and
equipment of any operator or any person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty or the amount or source of income, profits, losses,
expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any
abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and
guarantors, if directly interested, and upon submitting written proof of their interest, may be given information as to the items included in the
measure and amount of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties.
5-15-15: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator may appeal to the Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee by filing a notice of
appeal with the Tax Administrator within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the notice of the decision. The Tax Administrator shall fix a time
and place for hearing such appeal as prescribed by the Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee in its rules and regulations and shall give the
appellant ten (10) days written notice of the time and place of hearing.
5-15-16: TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX REVIEW COMMITTEE, APPEAL, RULES, PROCEDURE:
A Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee is hereby created. The Committee shall select from its members a chairman who shall serve at its
pleasure. Any member of the Committee may deputize in writing filed with the Committee any member of his office or in the case of the Mayor, a
member of the Council, to serve in his place on such Committee for such period or in such hearing as he may desire. A majority of the members of the
Committee shall constitute a quorum. The Committee shall keep a record of its transactions. The Committee shall be deemed to be in the office of the
City Clerk, shall meet and keep its files in his office and all filing with the Committee relating to appeals, or otherwise, shall be made at such office.
Neither the members of the Committee, nor the persons deputized to serve in their places, at any time shall receive any compensation as such
members or acting members for their services on the Committee.
The Committee shall have power and it shall be its duty:
(A) To hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the Tax Administrator made upon petitions for redetermination of tax. The Committee may
affirm, modify, or reverse such orders or decisions or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as may be just, and shall prescribe such forms, rules, and
regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of the tax administrator's decision or order, the committee may take such
evidence and make such investigation as it may deem necessary. It shall give notice of its determinations in the manner prescribed for service of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 87/436
notice of a tax administrator's decision and shall file a copy of each such determination with the tax administrator with certification thereon of the
date of service thereof. Such determination shall become final ten (10) days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and payable, subject to
interest and penalties, and enforceable by the tax administrator in like manner as an order or decision of the tax administrator.
(B) To approve, modify, or disapprove all forms, rules, and regulations prescribed by the tax administrator in the administration and enforcement of this
chapter and such forms, rules, and regulations shall be subject to, and become effective only on, such approval.
(C) To hear and determine in such manner as shall be just, any protest which may be made by any person who may be interested, to any form, rule, or
regulation approved or prescribed by the committee.
(D) To grant for good cause, applications for extensions of time in excess of one month, for making any return or payment of tax, and to prescribe rules
therefor.
(E) To make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the transient occupancy tax and report its
findings to the legislative body. Act in an advisory capacity to the legislative body on matters pertaining to the transient occupancy tax and
enforcement problems and recommend to the legislative body the adoption, amendment, or repeal of legislation pertaining thereto. (Ord. 587, 6-1-
1964)
5-15-17: SAVING CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional (or
otherwise invalid), such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The legislative body hereby
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional (or otherwise invalid).
(Ord. 587, 6-1-1964)
5-15-18: VIOLATIONS:
It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required to, to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be
made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator or to render a false or fraudulent return. No
person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of
an amount due required by this chapter to be made. (Ord. 587, 6-1-1964)
Chapter 16
REAL PROPERTY TAX STAMP
5-16-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Tax Stamp". It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section
11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.
5-16-2: TAX RATE:
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted,
assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction,
when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time
of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty seven and one half cents ($.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
fractional part thereof.
5-16-3: LIABILITY DESIGNATED:
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 5-16-2 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the
tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.
5-16-4: DEBT EXEMPTION:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.
5-16-5: GOVERNMENTAL EXEMPTION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 88/436
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any State or Territory, or Political Subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not
be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be
collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.
5-16-6: PRIORITY ESTABLISHED:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or
adjustment:
(A) Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
(B) Approved in any equity receivership proceeding in a Court involving a Railroad Corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11
of the United States Code, as amended;
(C) Approved in any equity receivership proceeding in a Court involving a Corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended; or
(D) Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.
Subdivisions (A) to (D), inclusive, of this Section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within
five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.
5-16-7: SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:
(A) The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary
or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of
1935;
(B) Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
(C) Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
5-16-8: PARTNERSHIPS:
(A) In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a
partnership or otherwise, if:
1. Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954; and
2. Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
(B) If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this Chapter,
such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of
any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.
(C) Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (B), and any transfer pursuant
thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 637, 12-4-67)
5-16-9: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of part 6.7 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the
provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 637, 12-4-67)
5-16-10: REFUNDS:
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 5 (commencing with section 5096) of part 9
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 89/436
of division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State. (Ord. 637, 12-4-67)
5-16-11: COUNTY COOPERATION:
This Chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County of Fresno, pursuant to part 6.7 (commencing
with section 11901) of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, or upon the effective date of this Chapter, whichever is the later. (Ord.
637, 12-4-67)
5-6-12: FILING WITH COUNTY:
Upon its adoption the Clerk shall file two (2) copies of this Chapter with the County Recorder of Fresno County. (Ord. 637, 12-4-67)
5-16-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Chapter, inasmuch as it provides for a tax levy for the usual and current expenses of the City, shall take effect January 1, 1968. (Ord. 637, 12-4-
67)
Chapter 17
SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
5-17-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES. (Ord. 692, 6-5-1972, eff. 7-4-1972)
5-17-2: YARD, GARAGE AND SIMILAR SALES:
In the event miscellaneous items of personal property are to be offered for sale to the general public by means of a garage sale, patio sale or other
sale similarly conducted (herein collectively "yard sale"), the person(s) conducting such yard sale shall file an affidavit or declaration with the city
finance department stating that the person or persons conducting the sale are not being paid in any manner by any other person(s) for use of the
property on which the yard sale is taking place and that no more than two (2) previous such yard sales per property have been held within the
calendar year. (Ord. 2005-2, 2-22-2005)
5-17-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person may conduct a yard sale upon the premises on which they reside in the city of Selma ("city"); provided, however, that a permit is first
obtained from the city. A yard sale permit shall be valid for a maximum of three (3) consecutive days.
(A) The yard sale permit shall include the following information:
1. Full name and address of the person or persons wishing to hold the yard sale (the "permittee");
2. Address where the yard sale will be conducted;
3. Dates of yard sale;
4. Phone number of persons responsible for yard sale;
5. General description of goods to be sold;
6. An affidavit or declaration stating under penalty of perjury that the permittee conducting the yard sale is not being paid in any manner by any
other person(s) for use of the property on which the yard sale is taking place and that no more than two (2) previous such yard sales by any
person(s) have been held at that property within the calendar year.
(B) Only three (3) such yard sales per location may be conducted in any calendar year and shall be limited to not more than three (3) consecutive
days.
(C) No yard sale permit shall be issued by the finance department until the applicant has paid a permit fee in the amount set by the city council. (Ord.
2005-2, 2-22-2005)
5-17-4: LIMITATIONS:
(A) No more than three (3) yard sales may be conducted by any permittee upon the same property within the same calendar year.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 90/436
(B) The permittee must be a resident of the property on which the yard sale is to take place.
(C) Yard sales shall be held between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days.
(D) No permittee shall be entitled to receive payment in any form for allowing another person's merchandise or belongings to be sold at this yard sale.
(E) Except for handmade craft items, the items to be sold shall consist exclusively of used merchandise and personal belongings.
(F) Yard sales must be conducted within the garage, carport, front yard, side yard, back yard or patio of the permittee's residence, however, a vehicle
offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within such front or side yards. Property displayed in the front yard must
be removed from the front yard no later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. each day. (Ord. 2005-2, 2-22-2005)
5-17-5: EXCEPTIONS:
(A) This chapter shall not apply to sales of personal property made under court order or process.
(B) In the case of churches, public schools, fraternal organizations and other nonprofit entities, three (3) sales per calendar year, for charitable
purposes may be conducted on the premises or in buildings of said church, public school, fraternal organization and other nonprofit entity, by each
affiliated group having written permission to use said premises or building and upon approval of the city manager or a designated representative.
Provided further, a yard sale can be held at a residence designated therefor by the authorized representative of the applicable group and which
shall constitute one of the permitted sales per calendar year. Each yard sale shall be limited to not more than three (3) consecutive days. (Ord.
2005-2, 2-22-2005)
5-17-6: FEES AND PENALTIES:
The fee for each sale shall be set by ordinance or resolution of the city council. Fees paid shall not be refundable. Failure to obtain a valid yard sale
permit prior to the commencement of the yard sale shall double the yard sale permit fee, which permit fee is due and payable whether the yard sale
utilizes the three (3) consecutive day permit period or not and shall include the time such yard sale had been in progress prior to the issuance of a
permit. (Ord. 2005-2, 2-22-2005)
Chapter 18
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
5-18-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF SELMA MASSAGE BUSINESS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
(A) Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the
construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter, and, except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is
otherwise specifically defined in this section, the definitions and provisions contained in title I, chapter 3 of this code shall also govern the
construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the
extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be.
EMPLOYEE: Any person over eighteen (18) years of age, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and
receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons.
MASSAGE: The scientific manipulation of the soft tissues, including, but not limited to, any method of treating the superficial parts of a patron for
medical, hygienic, exercise or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the hands or any
instrument, or by the application of air, liquid or vapor baths of any kind whatever.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed location, other than a residence, where any individual, firm, association,
partnership, corporation or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on,
massages, baths or health treatments involving massage or baths as the principal function for compensation, excluding those locations where
massage is only provided on outcall basis.
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER: A person who is certified as such by the California massage therapy council (CMTC) and who administers massage
for compensation.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: A person certified as such by CMTC and who administers massage for compensation.
PATRON: Any person over eighteen (18) years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or
she will pay money or give any other consideration whatsoever therefor.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 91/436
SOLE PROVIDER: A massage business where the owner owns one hundred percent (100%) of the business, is the only person who provides
massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active certificate issued by the CMTC and has no other employees or
independent contractors. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-3: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
(A) Certificate Required: No person shall engage in or carry on the business of massage or administer massage for compensation unless such person
has a valid massage practitioner or massage therapist certificate issued by CMTC.
(B) Business License Required: In addition to the required massage practitioner or massage therapist certificate, each and every separate office or
place of business operating as a massage establishment shall pay a business license as prescribed by this code. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-4: DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE:
The massage establishment permittee shall display the original massage practitioner or massage therapist certificate issued by CMTC of each and
every person employed in the establishment, or administering massage at the establishment for compensation in an open and conspicuous place on
the premises of the establishment. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-5: KEEPING OF RECORDS:
Every person who operates a massage establishment or administers massage for compensation shall at all times keep an appointment book in which
the name of each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time, date and place of service and the service provided. Such appointment
book shall be available at all times for inspection by the city or any authorized representative of the city.
Every person who practices or operates a massage establishment, and administers massage for compensation at any location other than the
massage establishment including, but not limited to, any motel or hotel, must first give notice of his or her presence on the premises at that location
and fully identify himself or herself, the massage business operator and the patron upon whom the person intends to practice or provide a massage to
the owner, manager or person in charge of that location before rendering any service. This provision shall be deemed complied with where the location
is a motel or hotel by giving such notice and identification to the person in charge of the registration desk of such motel or hotel. A record of such
appointment shall also be kept in the appointment book hereinabove specified. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-6: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES:
Every massage establishment shall report immediately to the city any and all changes of ownership or management of the massage business,
including, but not limited to, changes of manager or other person principally in charge, stockholders holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock
of the corporation, officers, directors and partners; any and all changes of name, style or designation under which the business is to be conducted; any
and all changes of business address or telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; and any and all changes or transfers of massage
practitioners or massage therapists employed in the massage establishment or administering massage at the massage establishment whether by new
or renewed employment, discharge or termination or otherwise. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-7: SANITATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
All massage establishments shall be periodically inspected by the city or an authorized representative for safety of the structure and adequacy of
plumbing, ventilation, heating and illumination. The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold resistant paint in all rooms where water or
steam baths are given. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the massage operation shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and patients shall be clean and freshly laundered.
Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is
changed for every patron. No massage service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage
establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of
statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-8: ADVERTISING:
No person shall publish or distribute, or cause to be published or distributed, any advertising matter or business identification card that states or
depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other than a "massage" as
defined in section 5-18-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-9: SUPERVISION:
Any massage establishment shall have one person who holds a valid massage therapist or massage practitioner's certificate issued by CMTC on the
premises at all times while the establishment is open. A certificate holder shall personally supervise the business and shall not violate, or permit others
to violate, any applicable provision of this chapter or of applicable statute and any such violation by any agent or employee of the massage
establishment shall constitute a violation by the certificate holder. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-10: PERSONS UNDER AGE EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED ON THE PREMISES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 92/436
No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come into or remain on the premises of any massage establishment. (Ord.
2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-11: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED ON THE PREMISES:
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage as defined in
section 23004 of the Business And Professions Code of the state on the premises of any massage establishment. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-12: ACTIVITIES AT RESIDENCE:
No person shall, for compensation, administer the activities covered by this chapter at his private residence at any time or permanently at any
residence. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-13: INSPECTION REQUIRED:
The city or any authorized representative shall, from time to time, make inspection of each massage establishment for the purposes of determining
that the provisions of this chapter and of statute are fully complied with. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-14: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT FACILITIES:
Every massage establishment shall maintain facilities meeting the following requirements:
(A) Sign: Subject to applicable ordinances, a recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a
massage establishment.
(B) Lighting: Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building code, and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than forty
(40) watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons.
(C) Ventilation: Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the building code.
(D) Equipment: Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided.
(E) Water: Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.
(F) Linen Storage: Closed cabinets shall be provided for storage of clean linens and approved receptacles shall be provided for storage of soiled linen.
(G) Separation Of Sexes: If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the massage establishment, a separate massage room or
rooms, separate dressing facilities and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons, and each such separate facility or
room shall be clearly marked as such.
(H) Bathing, Dressing, Locker, Toilet Facilities: Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one
tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked, and a
minimum of one toilet and one washbasin shall be provided for every massage establishment.
(I) Facilities For Employees: A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees of any
such establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or close as
practical to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided sanitary towels in permanently installed
dispensers at each washbasin. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-15: MASSAGE FACILITIES OPERATION:
Every massage establishment shall comply with the following operating requirements. These requirements shall be prominently and publicly displayed
in a conspicuous place upon every premises operating under the provisions of this chapter.
(A) Bath and massage operations shall be carried on and the premises shall be open only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight.
(B) A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open, public place on the premises and shall be described in readily
understandable language. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or certificate holder shall permit and no massage
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 93/436
practitioner or massage therapist shall offer to perform any services other than those posted.
(C) Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, shower rooms and compartments, toilet rooms and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned
and disinfected as needed and at least once each day the premises are open with a disinfectant approved by the health department. Bathtubs shall
be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant approved by the health department after each use. All walls, ceilings, floors and other physical facilities
for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(D) Massages shall not be given unless patrons are wearing clothing, or are draped, fully covering their genitals and female patrons are in addition
wearing clothing, or are draped, fully covering their breasts. Where such clothing, or draping, is furnished patrons by the establishment, it shall not
be used by more than one patron unless it has first been laundered and disinfected. Massage therapists and massage practitioners shall be fully
clothed from the knee to the neck in clean clothing.
(E) No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage, nor use the same facilities as that of a school of massage. It shall be unlawful
for any person to perform massage upon a member of the general public while on the premises of a school of massage. Instructors and students of
such schools may practice massage only upon a bona fide employee of the school or student. A dummy may be used. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-16: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be reported to CMTC and shall be subject to those penalties as prescribed by title I, chapter 4
of this code for a violation of this code. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-17: CONDUCTING AS A NUISANCE:
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or of applicable statute shall be and the
same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action
hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by
law or by this code; and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or
remove such massage establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary
to the provisions of this chapter or applicable statute. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-18: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective
professions:
(A) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state of
California.
(B) Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums or other healthcare facilities duly licensed by the state of California.
(C) Nurses registered under the laws of the state of California.
(D) Barbershops and beauty parlors, barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state, provided that such massage is limited
to the head and scalp.
(E) Accredited high schools and colleges, and coaches and trainers therein while acting within the scope of their employment.
(F) Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-19: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter.
The council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
5-18-20: APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE TO EXISTING BUSINESSES:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-1, 2-17-2015)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 94/436
Chapter 19
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
5-19-1: INTENT:
(A) The City, pursuant to applicable Federal and State law, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain
and reconstruct cable television systems within the City limits.
(B) The City Council finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact
upon the residents of the City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City Council further
finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the
City or such persons as the City may designate. It is the intent of this Chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means
to attain the best possible cable television service to the public, and any franchises issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to include this
as an integral finding thereof. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-2: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
CABLE SERVICE: The total of the following:
(A) The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and
(B) Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM: "Cable television system" or "system", also referred to as "cable communications system" or "cable system", means a
facility within the City consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term
does not include:
(A) A facility that serves only to transmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
(B) A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such
facility uses any public rights of way;
(C) A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission
of video programming directly to subscribers; or
(D) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.
CHANNEL: "Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system which is
capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Selma.
FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit,
license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted,
including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.
FRANCHISE FEE: Any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the City, as grantor, on a grantee as compensation for the grantee's use of the
public rights of way. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
(A) Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
(B) Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
(C) Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance,
indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
(D) Any fee imposed under title 47, United States Code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 95/436
GRANTEE: Any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this Chapter and under the granting franchise agreement, and its lawful successors,
transferees or assignees.
GRANTOR: "Grantor" or "City" means the City as represented by the Council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES: The annual gross revenues received by a grantee from all sources of operations of the cable television system within
the City utilizing the public streets and rights of way for which a franchise is required in order to deliver such cable service, excluding refundable
deposits, rebates or credits, except that any sales, excise or other taxes or charges collected for direct pass-through to local, State or Federal
government, other than the franchise fee, shall not be included.
INITIAL SERVICE AREA: The area of the City which will receive cable service initially, as set forth in any franchise agreement.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of cable service.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in the City are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal
business hours shall include some evening hours at least one night a week and/or some weekend hours.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, limited liability company, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES: "Public educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities"
means the total of the following:
(A) Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and
(B) Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
SECTION: Any section, subsection or provision of this Chapter.
SERVICE AREA: "Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area within the City as it is now constituted or may in the future be
constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more channels.
SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee.
STATE: The State of California.
STREET: Each of the following, which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority
or by others and located within the City limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights of way and similar
public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with
the cable television system, and who is responsible for paying the charges therefor. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-4: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
(A) Grant: A franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall encompass the following purposes:
1. To engage in the business of providing cable service, and such other services as may be permitted by law, which grantee chooses to provide, to
subscribers within the designated service area.
2. To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting
structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable television system in, on, over, under, upon along and
across streets or other public places within the designated service area.
3. To maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and
radio signals and for the delivery of cable services, and such other services as may be permitted by law.
4. To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise.
(B) Franchise Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the City within any street without
a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
(C) Term Of Franchise: A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor's
adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise.
(D) Franchise Renewal: A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable State
and Federal law and of this Chapter.
(E) Franchise Territory: Any franchise shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the City, and within any area added to the City during the term of
the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 96/436
(F) Federal Or State Jurisdiction: This Chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws, and shall apply to
all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this Chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law.
(G) Franchise Nontransferable:
1. Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale,
contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the Council and
then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed;
provided that such consent shall not be required for transactions between any parent, subsidiary or commonly owned entities. Any attempt to
sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the Council shall be null and void. The granting of a
security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation solely for purposes of financing, shall not be itself be considered
a transfer for the purposes of this Section.
2. The requirements of subsection (G)1 shall apply to any change of control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major
stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. The acquisition or accumulation by any
person or group of persons acting in privity of forty percent (40%) of the voting shares or interests in grantee or any person which controls
grantee shall be presumed to constitute a change of control of grantee, but grantee shall be entitled to rebut such presumption.
3. Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the
grantee. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place and the
provisions under this Section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control of ownership shall apply.
4. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, sale, transfer, lease, assignment, sublease, disposal, or acquisition of
control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist grantor in such
inquiry. In seeking grantor's consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the transferee
completes any required application identical or substantially similar to FCC Form 394 "Application for Franchise Authority Consent to Assignment
of Control of Cable Television Franchise", or any successor form. An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than sixty (60) days prior
to the date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the qualifications and financial and technical capability to
operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the legal, financial,
character, and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall consent to the transfer of the franchise on such terms
and conditions as it determines in its discretion. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed.
5. Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the
franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable
television system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such
operation within thirty (30) days of assuming such control that will insure, to the grantor's satisfaction, continued service and compliance with all
franchise requirements of at least the same level during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial
institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion, and during
said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee.
6. Upon consummation of the transfer, grantee shall pay grantor an application fee to cover grantor's reasonable out-of-pocket processing and
review expenses in connection with the transfer of the franchise or of control of the franchise, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00). Any such application fee shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor during the term of the franchise.
(H) Geographical Coverage:
1. Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit within the public
streets and rights of way in the City, subject to any service area and line extension requirements of the franchise agreement.
2. After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any
requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights
of way necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty (30) day period on reasonable terms and conditions.
(I) Nonexclusive Franchise: Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises for a cable television system or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable State and Federal law,
provided that if the grantor grants an additional franchise on terms more favorable to the second grantee (whether by the grant of greater benefits
or the imposition of lesser obligations), then the initial grantee shall have the right to renegotiate its franchise to incorporate the more favorable
terms.
(J) Multiple Franchises:
1. Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable State or Federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted,
based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:
(a) The capacity of the public rights of way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems,
such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage.
(b) The benefits that may accrue to cable subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.
(c) The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and
the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights of way.
2. Each grantee awarded a franchise to serve the entire City shall offer service to all residences in the City, in accordance with construction and
service schedules mutually agreed upon between grantor and grantee, line extension policies, and applicable law.
3. Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two (2) cable systems.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 97/436
4. Grantor may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor's
opinion, the rights of way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-5: REGULATION OF FRANCHISE:
(A) Franchise Application: Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system shall file an application with the City. A reasonable
nonrefundable application fee established by the City shall accompany the application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing
the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants
(including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration
of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the
difference to the City within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs.
(B) Application Contents: An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable:
1. A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area;
2. A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable television field;
3. A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or of those owning or controlling over five percent (5%) of the stock, if
a corporation;
4. A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person;
5. The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole
or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;
6. The most recent financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and
correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the City;
7. A proposed construction and service schedule;
8. Any reasonable additional information that the City deems applicable.
(C) Consideration Of Applications:
1. Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the City Manager shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such
application to the Council.
2. A public hearing shall be set and noticed prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the Council. Within thirty (30) days
after the close of the hearing, the Council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the
franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The Council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to
grant any franchise.
(D) Franchise Renewal: Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into
renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. If mutually agreed to in a franchise renewal agreement, grantee shall reimburse
grantor for costs incidental to the franchise renewal award, not to exceed any maximum specified in the renewal agreement. Any such
reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to the grantor during the term of the franchise.
(E) Minimum Consumer Protection And Service Standards:
1. Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall maintain a local area office (not necessarily within the City limits) to
provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under normal
operating conditions:
(a) Knowledgeable, qualified company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries Monday through Friday
during normal business hours.
(b) Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure, on average, that a minimum of ninety percent (90%) of all
calls, measured on a quarterly basis, will be answered within thirty (30) seconds, including wait time and time required to transfer the call;
emergency telephone line capacity on a twenty four (24) hour basis, including weekends and holidays.
(c) Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the total time that the cable office
is open for business.
(d) If grantee utilizes an automated answering and distributing equipment, such equipment will limit the number of routine rings to four (4) or
fewer. If grantee does not utilize automated equipment, grantee shall make every effort to answer incoming calls as promptly as the automated
systems.
(e) A local area bill payment location open during normal business hours nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday to Friday,
excluding holidays and at least three (3) weekend hours each week which is adequately staffed to accept subscriber payments.
(f) Consumer Information: At the time service is initiated and as required by Federal or State law, of FCC regulations, each customer will be
provided written information covering:
(1) A channel lineup card.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 98/436
(2) The time allowed to pay outstanding bills.
(3) Grounds for termination of service.
(4) The steps grantee must take before terminating service.
(5) How the customer can resolve billing disputes.
(6) The steps necessary to have service reconnected after involuntary termination.
(7) The fact that customers shall have the right to speak with a supervisor, and if none is available, the supervisor shall return the customer's
call within one working day.
(8) The appropriate regulatory authority with whom to register a complaint and how to contact such authority.
(9) Any other information required by the City, or Federal or State law or by FCC regulations.
(g) Requests For Cable Service And Repairs:
(1) Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Scheduled interruptions exceeding four (4) hours between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and exceeding one
hour between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight shall be preceded by notice over the cable system to customers in
the affected area. To the extent that grantee can control them, scheduled interruptions shall occur during a period of minimum system use,
preferably between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(2) Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time
frames under normal operating conditions no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
(a) Installation: An installation staff capable of installing service to any residential subscriber within seven (7) business days after receipt of a
request, in all areas where coaxial feeder cable has been activated within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the residence, provided that grantee
is able to secure all rights of way necessary to extend service to such subscriber on reasonable terms and conditions within such seven (7)
day period.
(b) Outages: Grantee will respond to service interruptions promptly and in no event later than twenty four (24) consecutive hours after becoming
aware of such interruption. Other service problems will be responded to within thirty six (36) consecutive hours during the normal work week.
(c) Inferior Reception Quality: Grantee will respond within thirty six (36) consecutive hours during the normal work week of receiving a request for
service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.
(3) Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four (4) hour time period, appointments with subscribers for installation or service. Specifying
appointments as either "morning" or "afternoon" shall be deemed to comply with this requirement. The obligation of grantee to specify
installation or service appointments within a designated four (4) hour time period shall be consistent with grantee's scheduling calendar,
such that when available morning and afternoon appointments have been scheduled, additional subscribers requesting installation or
service on such days may be advised that grantee's service personnel may arrive at any point during the business day, the subscriber may
request grantee to make an appointment for morning or afternoon service on the next business day in which such appointments are
available.
(4) Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under provisions of this subsection when a service representative
arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. If an appointment was scheduled, per subsection (g)(3), or an appointment
was not scheduled, and a subscriber is not home when a service representative arrives (within the appointment window if one was
scheduled), response shall be deemed to have taken place if the representative leaves written notification of arrival.
(5) The term "normal operating conditions" as used in this Chapter means those service conditions which are within the control of grantee.
Those conditions which are not within grantee's control include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages,
telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are within grantee's control include, but are
not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or
upgrade of the cable system.
(F) Complaint Procedures:
1. Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The
written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's
grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor.
2. Grantor shall have the right to review grantee's response to subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee's compliance with the franchise
requirements, subject to the subscriber's right to privacy.
(G) Continuity Of Service:
1. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In
the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the
franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive service so long as the franchise remains in force.
2. In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the
grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the original grantee shall be entitled to
the revenues for any period during which it operates the system.
3. Except as reasonably necessary for system maintenance, construction, rebuild, or upgrade activity, grantee shall not intentionally terminate the
ongoing operation of the cable system so as to deny cable service to its subscribers. Because the provision of cable service to subscribers is a
unique service, money damages would not be a sufficient remedy for violation of this subsection. Grantor shall be entitled to equitable relief,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 99/436
including injunctive relief and specific performance, as a remedy for violation of this subsection. Such remedy shall not be deemed to be the
exclusive remedy, but shall be in addition to any other remedy provided for in this Chapter or the franchise agreement or at law or in equity.
(H) Identification: All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact
with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers' premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form reasonably approved by
grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly
identified as working for grantee.
(I) Additional Service Standards: Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber
complaints not otherwise provided for in this Chapter may be established in the franchise agreement, and grantee shall comply with such
standards in the operations of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of
the franchise, provided that grantee shall receive due process, including written notification and an opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being
imposed.
(J) Franchise Fee:
1. Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee in the amount set forth in the
franchise agreement.
2. The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within sixty (60) days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and
certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross annual
receipts and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon thirty (30) days prior written notice, grantor
shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee's records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures, and if
such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent (2%) or more, the grantee shall pay such underpayment within thirty (30) days
and shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit.
3. Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and
satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this Chapter or under the franchise
agreement, for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.
4. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, grantee
shall pay as additional compensation:
(a) An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prime lending rate of First Interstate Bank or any other bank
as adopted by resolution of the Council, plus one percent (1%) during the period for which payment was due; and
(b) If the payment is late by forty five (45) days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent (5%) of the amount due in order to defray those
additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of delinquent payment.
5. Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement.
(K) Security Fund:
1. Grantor may require grantee to provide a security fund in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement or a guarantee by a
corporate parent. The amount of any security fund shall be established based on the extent of the grantee's obligations under the terms of the
franchise.
2. The security fund or guarantee shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by
reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy an actual or liquidated damages arising out of a franchise breach,
subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement.
3. If the security fund is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this Chapter and the franchise agreement,
grantee shall cause the security fund to be replenished to the original amount no later than thirty (30) days after each withdrawal by grantor.
Failure to replenish the security fund shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise.
(L) Hold Harmless: Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its Council, board, commissions, officers, agents and employees harmless from
any liability, loss, claims, damages, costs or expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement.
(M) Insurance:
1. On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, workers' compensation and property insurance
from appropriately qualified insurance companies.
2. The policy of liability insurance shall:
(a) Be issued to grantee and name grantor, its Council, boards, commissions, officers, agents and employees as additional insureds;
(b) Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used
pursuant to this Chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to:
(1) Negligent acts or omissions of grantee, and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations, and/or
(2) Use of motor vehicles;
(c) Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided
for in the franchise agreement. Such insurance policy shall be noncancellable without thirty (30) days prior written notice thereof directed to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 100/436
grantor.
3. The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall comply with the laws of the State.
4. The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of
franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by
this insurance.
5. Grantee shall file with grantor prior to commencement of franchise operations a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed
by the company issuing the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a certificate, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the
following information with respect to said policy:
(a) The policy number;
(b) The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire;
(c) The names of the named insureds and any additional insured required by the franchise agreement;
(d) The subject of the insurance;
(e) The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and
(f) The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance.
If the certificate of insurance does not provide all of the above information, grantor reserves the right to inspect the relevant insurance policies.
6. Conduct of franchise operations shall not commence until grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this subsection.
7. In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty eight (48) hours notice
to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to
suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. In order to account for increases in
consumer prices, no more than once during any five (5) year period, grantor shall have the right to order grantee to increase the amounts of the
insurance provided in the franchise agreement. Such order may be made by grantor at a regular City Council meeting at which grantee has
adequate notice and opportunity to address the issue. Increases in insurance coverage shall be based upon current prudent business practices
of like enterprises involving the same or similar risks.
(N) Records Required And Grantor's Right To Inspect:
1. Grantee shall at all times maintain:
(a) A record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two (2) years, provided that such
complaints result in or require a service call, subject to the subscriber's right of privacy.
(b) A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps showing the locations of the cable television system installed or in use in the
City, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes.
(c) If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a quarterly basis.
A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days following any grantor request, in a form reasonably
acceptable to the grantor.
2. The grantor may impose reasonable requirements for additional information, records and documents from time to time, provided they reasonably
relate to the scope of the City's rights under this Chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement.
3. Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the
grantor of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within or without the City,
and all records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under this
Chapter or the franchise agreement. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-6: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other cognizant public
agencies.
(B) In those areas of the City where transmission lines or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are
underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground.
(C) In those areas of the City where the grantee's cables are located on the aboveground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility
providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground,
then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantees' cost. Certain
of grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in
aboveground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.
(D) Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as
"structures"), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and public ways shall be
made only after grantee has secured all permits required therefor and under the direction of grantor's City Engineer or a designee. The height
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 101/436
above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California Public Utilities Commission or other regulatory
body having jurisdiction thereof.
1. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be constructed and located so as not to interfere
with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights of reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places, and not to interfere with existing
public utility installations.
2. In the event that any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights of way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its
contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the right granted to the grantee pursuant to this
Chapter, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore as nearly as practicable to their former condition said
property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged, and in the event that any such property or improvement shall at any later time
become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require restoration, repair or replacement because of such disturbance or damage by the grantee, then
the grantee shall, promptly upon receipt of notice from the grantor or otherwise and at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore as nearly as
practicable to their former conditions said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall
be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be then provided for by grantor ordinance.
3. Prior to commencing any work in the public rights of way, the grantee shall obtain any and all permits lawfully required by such grantor codes
and ordinances of general application for such work. In the event that emergency work may be required by the grantee, however, the grantee
shall obtain any and all such permits within three (3) working days after the beginning of such emergency work.
4. There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights of way by the grantee in connection with any of the work herein
provided for, and the grantee shall maintain such barriers, signs and warning signals during any such work performed on or about the public
rights of way or adjacent thereto as may be required by applicable law and/or as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life
and property.
5. If at any time during the period of this franchise the grantor shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or location of any street, alley or other
public rights of way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense, and in each instance shall comply with the requirements of the grantor.
6. The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric,
telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to
comply with all ordinances of the grantor.
7. The grantee may be required by grantor to permit joint use of its poles, conduits and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys or other public
rights of way, by utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefore; provided that
in the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and
the compensation to be paid therefor, which award shall be final.
8. The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the
moving of buildings, the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting the same. The grantee shall be given not less
than forty eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes, and may require payment in advance.
9. The grantee shall have the authority, except when in conflict with applicable grantor ordinances, to trim any trees upon and overhanging the
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the
grantee, except that at the option of the grantor, such trimming may be done by grantor, or under grantor's supervision and direction.
(E) In new residential developments in which the electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the following procedure shall apply with
respect to access to and utilization of underground easements:
1. The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all franchised cable operators to ascertain which operators desire to provide
cable service to that development. The developers may establish a reasonable deadline to receive cable operator responses. The final
development map shall indicate the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development.
2. If one or two (2) cable operators wish to provide service, they shall be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory shared
cost basis. If fewer than two (2) operators indicate interest, the developer shall provide conduit to accommodate two (2) sets of cable television
cables and dedicate to the City any initially unoccupied conduit. The developer shall be entitled to recover the costs of such initially unoccupied
conduit in the event that grantor subsequently leases or sells occupancy or use rights to any grantee.
3. The developer shall provide at least ten (10) working days notice of the date that utility trenches will be open to the cable operators that have
agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are open, cable operators shall have two (2) working days to begin the installation of their
cables, and five (5) working days after beginning installation to complete installation.
4. The final development map shall not be approved until the developer submits evidence that it has, or has agreed in the subdivision agreement,
that it will:
(a) Notify each grantee that underground utility trenches are to be open as of an estimated date, and that each grantee will be allowed access to
such trenches, including trenches from proposed streets to individual homes or home sites, on specified nondiscriminatory terms and
conditions; and
(b) Receive a written notification from each grantee that the grantee intends to install its facilities during the open trench period on the specified
terms and conditions, or such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreeable to the developer and the grantee, or receive no reply from
a grantee within ten (10) days after its notification to such grantee, in which case the grantee will be deemed to have waived its opportunity to
install its facilities during the open trench period.
5. Share the joint utilities trench subject to compliance with State regulatory agency and utility standards. If such compliance is not possible, the
developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable television cables, with the entire cost shared among the developer and participating
grantees. With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and the grantees, alternative installation procedures, such as the use of
deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to applicable law.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 102/436
6. Any grantee wishing to serve an area where the trenches have been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs.
7. In the event that more than one franchise is awarded, the City may limit the number of drop cables per residence, or to require that the drop
cable(s) be utilized only by the grantee selected by the resident to provide service.
8. The City may grant an encroachment permit to a franchise applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise.
Such installations shall be at the applicant's risk, with no recourse against the City in the event the pending franchise application is not granted.
The City may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant's cost. The construction of such
separate trench, if provided, shall be coordinated with, and subject to, the developer's overall construction schedule.
(F) Technical Standards:
1. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal, State and local laws,
ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise
agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, a copy of all written reports of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of
performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines.
2. Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-7: REPORTS:
(A) Annual Reports: Within ninety (90) days after the end of the calendar year, unless grantor agrees that submission only upon request will be
satisfactory, grantee shall submit a written annual report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form reasonably approved by
grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information:
1. A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system,
including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year;
2. A list of grantee's partners, officers, members of its board of directors, and/or other principals of grantee;
3. A list of stockholders of record or other equity investors holding ten percent (10%) or more of the voting interest in grantee;
4. An indication of any residences in grantee's service area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service;
5. Information as to the number of homes passed, subscribers, additional television outlets, and the number of basic and pay subscribers; and
6. Any other information regarding franchise regulation which the grantor shall reasonably request, and which is relevant to its regulatory
responsibilities.
(B) Copies Of Federal And State Communications:
1. Upon specific request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to, as well as copies
of all decisions, correspondence and actions by, any Federal, State or local court or regulatory agency, which are nonroutine in nature and which
will materially affect its cable television operations within the franchise area. Information otherwise confidential by law and specifically designated
as such by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made
available for public inspection. In the event of legal challenge to grantor's withholding of any such information, grantee shall be responsible for
defending against such challenge and shall indemnify grantor against any costs, expenses (including attorneys' fees ), losses, judgments or
liabilities in connection therewith.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of grantee
or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor that such
information can and will be held in strictest confidence by the grantor. To the extent possible, grantee will provide grantor with summaries of any
required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on grantee to
establish the confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor.
(C) Public Reports: If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee's annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, if any, shall be
submitted to grantor within forty five (45) days of its issuance.
(D) Complaint Report And Opinion Survey: Upon request of the grantor, but not more than once annually, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber
satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in grantee's invoice for cable services. The results of
such survey shall be provided to the grantor on a timely basis. The cost of such survey shall be borne by the grantee.
(E) Privacy Report: Upon grantor's request, but no more than once annually, grantee shall submit to grantor a report indicating the degree of
compliance with the provisions contained in Section 5-19-5 herein and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been
protected.
(F) Reports; General:
1. All reports required under this Chapter or the franchise agreement, except those required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for
public inspection in the grantor's offices during normal business hours.
2. All reports and records required under this Chapter or the franchise agreement shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as
otherwise provided in this Chapter or the franchise agreement.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 103/436
3. The wilful refusal, failure, or neglect of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this Chapter or the franchise
agreement, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty (30) days after
written request therefor, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or
otherwise.
4. Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and wilfully by the grantee in any report required under this
Chapter or the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or
equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-8: SYSTEM EVALUATION:
(A) Annual Review Of System Performance: Each year throughout the term of the franchise, if requested by the grantor, grantor and grantee shall
meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to this Chapter, results of technical
performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee's response to complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber
surveys, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either
orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of a system performance review meeting, grantor may
issue findings with respect to the cable system's franchise compliance and quality of service. If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance
with the requirements of this Chapter or the grantee's franchise, grantor may direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a
reasonable period of time. Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the areas of noncompliance within the period specified therefor or to
commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter, shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and
grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this Chapter and the franchise agreement.
(B) Special Review Of System Performance: When there has been a pattern of complaints made or where there exists other evidence which, in the
judgment of the grantor, casts reasonable doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service to the effect that the grantee is not in compliance with
the requirements of this Chapter or its franchise, the grantor shall have the right to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report on the
performance of the system in order to protect the public against substandard cable service. Grantor may not compel grantee to provide such tests
or reports unless and until grantor has provided grantee with at least thirty (30) days notice of its intention to exercise its rights under this Section
and has provided grantee with an opportunity to be heard prior to its exercise of such rights. Such test or tests shall be made and the report shall
be delivered to the grantor not later than thirty (30) days after the grantor notifies the grantee that it is exercising such right, and shall be made at
grantee's sole cost. Such report shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests, what
system component was tested, the equipment used and procedures employed in said testing, the results of such tests, and the method by which
such complaints were resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special test also shall be reported.
(C) Special Evaluation Sessions: The grantor may hold special evaluation sessions at any time during the term of a franchise, provided such sessions
are held no more often than once every three (3) years. The grantee shall be notified of the place, time and date thereof and the topics to be
discussed. Such sessions may be open to the public and, if so, shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least thirty (30) days
before each session. The sessions may include an evaluation of any items considered relevant to the cable system, the subscribers and the
grantor. Either the grantor or the grantee may propose items for discussion or evaluation. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-9: FRANCHISE BREACHES:
(A) Remedies For Franchise Violations: If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this Chapter or a franchise
granted hereunder, following notice from the grantor and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of
subsection (B) below and the franchise, grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion:
1. Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the grantee and/or the security fund established herein if such violation is not cured
within thirty (30) days after written notice to the grantee of the violation;
2. Assess against and recover from grantee damages to the extent allowed by law for any such violation(s) if such violation is not cured, or (except
where the violation is failure to pay any sum due) if grantee has not commenced a cure, on a schedule acceptable to grantor, within thirty (30)
days after written notice to the grantee of the violation. Such assessment may be withdrawn from any security fund, but such withdrawal shall not
constitute a waiver by grantor of any right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including without limitation, its right to
recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney's fees, as may have been suffered or
incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such breach of the franchise.
(B) Procedure For Remedying Franchise Violations: Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this Chapter or the
franchise agreement, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures:
1. Grantor shall first notify grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction within a
reasonable time, which shall not be less than five (5) days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the
grantor under this Chapter or the grantee's franchise and thirty (30) days in all other cases. If grantee fails to correct the violation within the time
prescribed or (except where the violation is failure to pay any sum or other amount) if grantee fails to commence correction of the violation within
the time prescribed and diligently remedy such violation thereafter, the grantor shall then give written notice of not less than twenty (20) days of a
public hearing to be held before the Council. Said notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred.
2. At the public hearing, the Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision.
3. In the event the Council finds that the grantee has corrected the violation or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice
thereof from grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or that no material violation has occurred, the proceedings shall
terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.
4. In the event the Council finds that a material violation exists and that grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or has not
diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from grantor and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 104/436
the Council may impose one or more of the remedies provided in this Chapter or the franchise agreement as it, in its discretion, deems
appropriate under the circumstances.
(C) Grantor's Power To Revoke: Grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter and revoke all rights and
privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and a material violation under the
franchise:
1. If grantee shall default in the performance of its obligations under this Chapter or the franchise agreement and (except where the default is
failure to pay any sum or other amount) shall continue such default after receipt of due notice and reasonable opportunity to cure the default;
2. If grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect any insurance coverage or security fund as required in this Chapter or franchise
agreement;
3. If grantee shall violate any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee's franchise, unless
such order or ruling is being contested by grantee by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith;
4. If grantee practices any fraud or deceit upon grantor.
As provided for in subsection 5-19-10(E) the termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to
pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law, including this Chapter.
(D) Force Majeure; Grantee's Inability To Perform: In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this
Chapter or its franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed
excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a
grantee from the obligations imposed by this Chapter pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this Section,
causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, restraints imposed by
order of a governmental agency (other than the grantor acting pursuant to this Chapter or the franchise agreement) or court, explosions, acts of
public enemies, natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, and similar causes, but shall not include financial inability of
the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use
the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies,
services, or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable communications system where the grantee has
failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
5-19-10: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
(A) Abandonment Or Removal Of Franchise Property:
1. In the event that the use of any franchise property of grantee within the public rights of way is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months, grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other
parts of the system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been
abandoned because of its lack of use.
2. Grantor, upon such terms as grantor may impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment
laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise.
3. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned aboveground facilities
and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore any affected street or other public ways or public places to its former
state at the time such facilities and equipment were removed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment,
grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all streets, public ways and places in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles,
or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the streets, public ways, public places, cables, wires,
attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this Chapter and the franchise agreement
and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee
with the terms and conditions of this Section.
4. Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument,
satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the franchise property abandoned.
5. At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided herein, in any such case
without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aboveground portions
of the cable television system from all streets, public ways and public places within the City within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be
less than one hundred eighty (180) days or more than three hundred sixty five (365) days.
6. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long
as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights of way or place in which such property is located or with the use
thereof by any public utility or other grantee.
(B) Restoration By Grantor; Reimbursement Of Costs: In the event of a failure by grantee to complete any work required herein or by any other law or
ordinance, and if such work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice thereof from grantor or (except in cases of
emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare), if more than thirty (30) days are reasonably required therefor, if grantee does
not commence such work within such thirty (30) days period and diligently complete the work thereafter, grantor may cause such work to be done
and grantee shall reimburse grantor the costs thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs. Without relieving grantee
of such obligation, grantor may recover all or a portion of such costs through the security fund provided by grantee.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 105/436
(C) Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services: Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to grant a
short-term license in lieu of a franchise to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for a specific period of time, not to
exceed twelve (12) months. Grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the license and to
provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to
continue to receive all available services, provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable
efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transition periods following franchise
expiration or termination.
(D) Receivership And Foreclosure:
1. A franchise shall, at the option of grantor, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or
trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or
proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or
unless: a) such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all
the terms and provisions of this Chapter and the franchise, and the receivership or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have
remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan, satisfactory to grantor, for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to
the grantor; and b) such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the
court having jurisdiction whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of
the franchise granted.
2. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise property, or any material part thereof, grantor may serve notice of termination
upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall
cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless: a) grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in
the manner that this Chapter provides; and b) such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound
by all terms and conditions of the franchise.
(E) Rights Reserved To Grantor:
1. In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this Chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required
to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise.
2. The grantor may waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by Federal or State regulation, if the grantor determines: a) that it is
in the public interest to do so, and b) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. To
be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any
provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other
provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites.
(F) Rights Of Individuals:
1. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of
race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex or sexual orientation. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable Federal, State and
local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination.
2. Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of Federal, State and local regulations, as now written or as
amended from time to time.
3. Neither grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber's consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line,
signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection or investigation of
unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where
individual viewing behavior cannot be identified.
4. In the conduct of providing its services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable
steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general citizen's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such
rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. Grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority utilize the
system's interactive two (2) way equipment or capability for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen.
5. No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber's premises,
other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon
subscriber's property shall be presumed.
6. The grantee and its agents and employees shall not sell or otherwise make available to any party without consent of the subscriber pursuant to
State and Federal privacy laws:
(a) Any list containing the names and addresses of subscribers who request in writing to be removed from such list; and
(b) Any list which identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers, without the prior written consent of such subscribers. This does not
prohibit the grantee from providing composite ratings of subscriber viewing to any party.
(G) Separability: If any provision of this Chapter is held by any court or by any Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as
conflicting with any Federal or State law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect or for any other reason, or is held by such court or agency to
be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate,
distinct, and independent part of this Chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the
event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision thereof which had
been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation or otherwise invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full
force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee, provided that grantor shall give grantee thirty (30) days written notice of
such change before requiring compliance with said provision of such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply
with such provision.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 106/436
(H) Notices: Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, a local address for service of notices by mail.
(I) Captions: The captions to sections throughout this Chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference. Such captions shall not affect the
meaning or interpretation of this Chapter.
(J) No Recourse Against The Grantor: The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor or its Council, officials, boards,
commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, costs, expenses, or damage arising out of any provision of the franchise or because of the
enforcement of the franchise.
(K) Nonenforcement By The Grantor: The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter by reason
of any failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance. (Ord. 95-10, 7-25-95)
Chapter 20
FORTUNE TELLING
5-20-1: PURPOSE AND DEFINITION:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the business of fortune telling to protect users of such services from, among other things, fraud.
(B) Definition: As used in this chapter, the term "fortune telling" shall mean and include the practice of astrology for compensation, palmistry,
phrenology, life reading, fortune telling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, medium shift, prophecy, augury, divination,
necromancy, and graphology. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person may engage in fortune telling for compensation in the city of Selma without a license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2012-
2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person who desires a license for fortune telling shall file an application with the city manager on a form furnished by the city. The form shall
require the applicant to furnish, at a minimum, the following:
(A) Name of the applicant;
(B) Permanent home address of applicant;
(C) Present or proposed address where applicant will engage in fortune telling business;
(D) A brief description of the proposed business;
(E) A statement, under penalty of perjury, as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of violating section 332 of the California Penal Code or
a crime involving moral turpitude, the nature of the offense and the penalty imposed. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-4: APPLICATION FEE:
When an application is filed, the applicant shall pay a fee as fixed and amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city council for the cost of
processing the application. The application fee is nonrefundable and is in addition to any/all other fees prescribed by this chapter or any other fee
required by this code or any other statute or regulation. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-5: INVESTIGATION, RIGHT TO REFUSE, AND APPEAL:
(A) Investigation: Upon receipt of an application, the city manager shall have an investigation made of the applicant's criminal and/or business record,
which may include any civil judgments against the applicant. The city manager may refer the applicant to the chief of police for a report and
recommendation.
(B) Right To Refuse: If the city manager finds and determines that the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude and/or Penal
Code section 332, or is subject to a civil judgment for fraud or similar acts of deception the city manager shall refuse to issue a license. Upon
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 107/436
determining to refuse to issue a license, the city manager shall notify the applicant of his or her decision in writing, mailed to the applicant at the
address provided by the applicant via first class mail, postage prepaid within forty five (45) days after the filing of the application. The decision of
the city manager shall be final fifteen (15) days from the date the notice of denial is mailed unless the applicant files an appeal as described in
subsection (C) of this section.
(C) Appeal From Denial Of Permit To The City Council: The applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to deny a fortune telling license by
filing with the city clerk a written request for an appeal to be heard by the city council. The applicant shall file the request and pay a fee as fixed and
amended from time to time by resolution of the city council within fifteen (15) days from the date of the mailing of the notice of the city manager
denying the application. Upon receipt of the request for appeal, the city manager shall fix a time and place for a hearing by the city council of the
appeal within forty five (45) days but not less than fifteen (15) days after receipt of the request for appeal and shall give written notice of the hearing
to the applicant by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address provided by the applicant. The city council shall hear the appeal and make a
decision within thirty (30) days after close of hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. The city council shall notify the applicant of its
decision in writing.
(D) Conditional Approval: If the city manager finds that the applicant has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude and the applicant's
business record is satisfactory, the city manager shall notify the applicant of the city's intent to issue a license conditioned upon the applicant
obtaining a land use permit pursuant to section 5-20-6 of this chapter within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of conditional approval.
(E) Failure To Give Notice: If the city manager fails to give notice to the applicant of denial or conditional approval of a fortune telling license within
forty five (45) days after the filing of the application the application will be deemed denied and may be appealed to the city council pursuant to
subsection (C) of this section. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-6: LAND USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) Application: If the city manager, pursuant to section 5-20-5 of this chapter, decides that a license may be issued to the applicant, the applicant shall
file with the planning commission an application for a land use permit for a particular location. The applicant shall pay a fee for the application for a
land use permit that is equal to the fee charged for a site plan review as set by resolution of the city council.
(B) Consideration And Conditions Of Approval: In addition to any other provision of this code, the planning commission in considering an application
for a land use permit for fortune telling shall have the discretion to:
1. Consider and fix and/or prescribe advertising and signs;
2. Consider and approve exterior appearance and elevations of the premises;
3. Limit the number of employees in fortune telling and/or prohibit persons convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude from engaging in fortune
telling on the premises;
4. Limit the hours of operation, and other business conducted on the premises.
(C) Permanent Premises Required: The planning commission shall not issue a conditional use permit for the operation of a fortune telling business
from a trailer, vehicle or temporary structure.
(D) Zoning Requirements: The planning commission shall not consider or approve any application for a land use permit for the conduct of the business
of fortune telling in any land use or zoning district other than the commercial districts.
(E) Appeal: Any party aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission whether or not to issue a land use permit may appeal said decision to the
city council pursuant to the procedure prescribed by section 11-16-5 of this code relating to conditional use permits. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-7: ISSUE OF LICENSE:
If the city manager notifies the applicant of his or her intent to issue a license pursuant to section 5-20-5 of this chapter and the planning commission
approves a land use permit pursuant to section 5-20-6 of this chapter, then the city manager shall issue a license for fortune telling to the applicant
subject to the terms and conditions of the land use permit and any other terms and conditions the city manager may impose if the city manager finds
that it is necessary to do so in order to protect the general public from the threat of fraud or misrepresentation or public nuisance. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-
2012)
5-20-8: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
A license for fortune telling in the city of Selma may not be assigned or transferred. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-9: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
(A) Expiration: A license for a fortune telling business shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 108/436
(B) Renewal: The holder of a fortune telling license may file an application for renewal with the city manager on a form provided by the city and paying
the license renewal fee which shall be set by resolution of the city council in an amount necessary to cover the costs to the city of processing the
license renewal. In determining whether or not the holder of a license shall have the license renewed, the city manager may deny renewal of the
license if the city manager, in his or her discretion, finds that any of the conditions for revocation or suspension as described in section 5-20-10 of
this chapter exist.
(C) Appeal: The holder of the license may appeal the decision of the city manager to deny renewal of the license in the same manner described in
subsection 5-20-5(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-10: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
(A) Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: The city manager may suspend or revoke the fortune telling license for one or more of the following
grounds:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application;
2. Violation of an ordinance or regulation of the city, or the conditions of the conditional use permit;
3. Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
4. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of engaging in the fortune telling business;
5. Conducting the fortune telling business in violation of a term or condition of the license, or in a manner that is in breach of the peace or a
nuisance or endangers the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(B) Duration Of Suspension: The city manager shall have the authority to determine the duration of any suspension he or she deems necessary and to
impose new or additional terms and conditions upon the license when the suspension is terminated. The suspension or revocation will be effective
immediately upon personal service of the notice of suspension or revocation or three (3) days after mailing a notice of suspension or revocation to
the licensee.
(C) Appeal: The licensee may appeal a decision by the city manager to suspend or revoke the license to the city council in the manner described in
subsection 5-20-5(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-11: TAXES AND RECORDS:
The licensee shall keep and maintain records and pay or have levied taxes in accordance with this title. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-12: PENALTY:
A person who violates this chapter shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in title I, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-2012)
5-20-13: PROTECTED SPEECH:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with any person's exercise of free and open speech or religion. (Ord. 2012-2, 5-7-
2012)
Chapter 21
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS
5-21-1: DISPLAY OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation doing business within the incorporated city limits of the city of Selma to store, stock, keep or
display for sale or transfer any product containing pseudoephedrine in an area other than a place that is locked and secure or is otherwise made
unavailable to the public and which is accessible only to employees of such businesses. (Ord. 2005-11, 12-5-2005)
Chapter 22
STREET VENDORS OF FOOD PRODUCTS
5-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 109/436
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city of Selma or his or her designee.
CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Selma or the city clerk's authorized designee.
FOOD PRODUCTS: Food and any substance intended for human consumption.
PERSON: Shall mean and include the singular and plural and shall also mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association, club,
copartnership, joint venture or any other organization.
STREET VENDOR: Any person selling or offering to sell or causing the sale of or offering for sale of any food products from any vehicle parked,
stopped, standing upon, within or adjacent to any curb along any public street within any residential zone of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2012-1, 5-7-2012)
5-22-2: STREET VENDING OF FOOD PRODUCTS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall sell or offer for sale, from any vehicle parked, stopped, standing upon or within any public street or adjacent to any curb thereof food
products within any residential zone of the city of Selma without first obtaining a permit as required in this chapter. The total number of permits that
may be issued in any year shall not exceed two (2) except that if, on April 1, 2012, there were more than two (2) valid permits issued by the city, those
persons holding said permits, and only those persons, may, if they meet all other requirements, be issued a permit even if the issuance thereof causes
the total number of permits issued in that year to exceed two (2). If a person holding a valid permit on April 1, 2012, as described herein, fails to apply
for a permit as required in any given year, then that person shall not thereafter be entitled to a permit if the issuance thereof would cause the total
number of permits to exceed two (2). (Ord. 2012-1, 5-7-2012)
5-22-3: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS, LIMITS AND CONDITIONS; FEES:
(A) The issuance of a permit for a street vendor of food products within any residential zone of the city shall be subject to those conditions prescribed
by section 5-7-5 of this title. In addition, the number of permits issued in any given calendar year shall be determined by the city manager pursuant
to section 5-22-2 of this chapter. The city manager is hereby authorized to adopt any and all policies and procedures necessary to implement the
permitting process including, but not limited to, the designation of an application period, an annual date for the issuance and expiration of permits,
and a procedure for selecting the persons to be issued permits. Such selection procedure may be random or based upon an applicant's history of
engaging in street vending of food products from a vehicle in the city's residential zones and may give preference for issuance of any permit
according to the length and quality of such street vending services provided within the city of Selma.
(B) The city council may, by resolution, establish and amend, from time to time, any fee or fees to be charged in connection with this chapter including,
but not limited to, a permit application fee, permit fee, or fee for the issuance of a permit placard or decal. (Ord. 2012-1, 5-7-2012)
5-22-4: TERM OF PERMIT; RENEWAL:
No permit issued shall be valid for a period of more than one year. The term and expiration date of all permits shall be determined by the city manager
or his or her designee as set forth in section 5-22-3 of this chapter. The city manager or his designee shall allow a five (5) business day grace period
following the expiration date for any permit to timely submit an application for renewal of the permit. (Ord. 2012-1, 5-7-2012)
5-22-5: PERMIT RETENTION; DISPLAY:
(A) Each permit holder shall retain in his or her possession the permit issued by the clerk at all times while engaged in the street vending of any food
product within any residential zone of the city and must produce and show the same on demand of any prospective customer or any police officer
or official of the city.
(B) Each permit holder shall display the permit or placard or decal issued by the clerk on the vehicle used by the street vendor at all times while
engaged in the street vending of any food product within any residential zone of the city in a manner to be determined by the city manager or his or
her designee. (Ord. 2012-1, 5-7-2012)
5-22-6: PENALTIES:
(A) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city of
Selma any material fact in procuring the permit herein provided for shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor or, at the discretion of the city
attorney, an infraction. A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by the person.
(B) Penalties for infractions shall be set by resolution of the city council. The city council shall periodically review the penalties for infractions and set
new penalties by resolution as required to maintain the effectiveness of this code.
(C) All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and nonexclusive. (Ord. 2012-1, 5-7-2012)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 110/436
Chapter 23
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES
5-23-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
BUSINESS: Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, or other entity formed for profitmaking purposes.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE: An electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, or any other product name or description.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE PARAPHERNALIA: Cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tips, atomizers, electronic smoking device
batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic smoking
devices.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed or retained as an independent contractor by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary
wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer.
EMPLOYER: Any business or nonprofit entity that retains the service of one or more employees.
NOMINAL COST: The cost of any item imposed for the transfer from one person to another for less than the total of: a) twenty five percent (25%) of
the fair market value of the item exclusive of taxes and government fees; plus b) all taxes and government fees previously paid and all taxes and
government fees still due on the item at the time of transfer.
NONPROFIT ENTITY: Any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code section 5003 as well as any corporation,
unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net
proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A government agency is not a
nonprofit entity within the meaning of this chapter.
NONSALE DISTRIBUTION: To give, furnish, or cause or allow to be given or furnished within the jurisdictional limits of the city, an electronic smoking
device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia at no cost or at nominal cost to a person who is not a retailer.
PERSON: Any natural person, cooperative association, employer, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity
including a government agency.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place within the city or county, public or private, that is open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement,
including, for example, bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, stadiums, parks, playgrounds, taxis, and buses and means any place used by a membership
association or club at which nonmember guests are present or permitted, including, for example and without limitation, fraternity and sorority houses.
RETAILER: Any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, electronic smoking devices or electronic
smoking device paraphernalia. "Retailing" means the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of the electronic
smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY: The open display or storage of electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia in a manner that is
physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of a retailer or employee of a retailer and a direct person to person
transfer between a retailer or employee of a retailer and any other person. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.
SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted, heated, or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic smoking device, or
any plant product intended for human inhalation. (Ord. 2016-1, 3-7-2016)
5-23-2: PROHIBITION OF ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE USE IN SMOKE FREE PLACES:
(A) It shall be a violation of this chapter to use an electronic smoking device in any place within the city where smoking of tobacco products is
prohibited by law.
(B) No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit the use of electronic smoking devices in an area under the legal or de facto control
of that person, employer or nonprofit entity and in which smoking of tobacco products is prohibited by law. (Ord. 2016-1, 3-7-2016)
5-23-3: RETAILING REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS:
(A) Sale To Minors Prohibited: It shall be a violation of this chapter to sell, give or furnish, or cause to be sold, given or furnished, an electronic
smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia to a natural person under eighteen (18) years of age in any place within the city.
(B) Positive Identification Required: No retailer shall sell, give or furnish an electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia to a
natural person who appears to be under the age of thirty (30) years without first examining identification to confirm that the recipient is at least
eighteen (18) years of age.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 111/436
(C) Self-Service Displays: Self-service displays of electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia are prohibited.
(D) Nonsale Distribution Prohibited: No person, motivated by an economic or a business purpose, shall engage in the nonsale distribution of any
electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia in any public place.
(E) Exception: No provision in this chapter shall apply to any product specifically approved by the United States food and drug administration for use in
the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease. (Ord. 2016-1, 3-7-2016)
5-23-4: NONRETALIATION:
No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another
person who or which seeks to attain compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2016-1, 3-7-2016)
5-23-5: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
(A) The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
(B) Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(C) Violations of any provision of this chapter are subject to administrative, criminal, civil or other penalties and enforcement pursuant to title I, chapter
4 of this code. (Ord. 2016-1, 3-7-2016)
5-23-6: PREEXISTING NONCONFORMING USE:
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, all other provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, title XI, chapter 28 of this code
relating to signs, are applicable to persons subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-1, 3-7-2016)
Chapter 24
SMOKE SHOPS AND SMOKING LOUNGES
5-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE: An electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE PARAPHERNALIA: Cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tips, atomizers, electronic smoking device
batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic smoking
devices.
HOOKAH: Glass or metal water pipe usually decorated and shaped somehow like a bottle or small tank with a long flexible core pipe also known as a
shisha, nargile, hubble bubble, nag, or Turkish water pipe.
HOOKAH LOUNGE: An area of a commercial establishment, whether enclosed, indoor or outdoor, designated specifically for the use of hookahs, but
does not include private use of hookahs in personal residences, if otherwise in compliance with applicable law.
SMOKE SHOP: A retail or wholesale business or any person that sells, offers for sale or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco,
tobacco products, electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia or tobacco paraphernalia and has ten percent (10%) or more
of its square feet in the establishment used for the sale or display of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia, electronic smoking devices
or electronic smoking paraphernalia or advertising.
SMOKING LOUNGE: A commercial establishment or portion thereof where electronic smoking devices, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia,
hookah pipes or any of these are used by persons on the premises, but does not include any private residence.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: Any device, product, equipment or material of any kind that is intended or designed for use for smoking, inhaling or
ingesting tobacco, notwithstanding that the device, product, equipment or material may also be used for smoking, inhaling or ingesting any controlled
substances. Tobacco paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, metal, ivory, wooden, or acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes; water pipes,
bongs, cigarette papers or wrappers, cigarette rolling machines, blunt wraps as defined in section 308 of the Penal Code, hookahs or similar devices
constructed with a receptacle or container in which water or some other liquid may be placed into which smoke passes and is cooled in the process of
being inhaled or ingested.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 112/436
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco,
dipping tobacco, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically detectable amounts of nicotine
that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human
body, but does not include any product specifically approved by the federal food and drug administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product
dependence. (Ord. 2016-02, 3-7-2016)
5-24-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) Conditional Use Permit: Smoke shops and smoking lounges shall only be permitted in the C-3, M-1 or M-2 zones of the city and shall be subject to
the issuance, existence and validity of a conditional use permit as provided for in title XI, chapter 16 of this code (commencing with section 11-16-1
of this code) and full compliance with each and every condition thereof. Such conditional use permit shall be issued only if the applicant has
submitted a site plan showing the location of the use and the following findings have been made:
1. That the proposed use is either a "smoke shop" or "smoking lounge" as defined in section 5-24-1 of this chapter;
2. That the establishment of the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses;
3. That the proposed use does not have a detrimental effect on the public health, safety or general welfare.
(B) Locational And Operational Requirements: Smoke shops and smoking lounges shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The use is being established outside of six hundred feet (600') of a residential zone of the city, or any public or private daycare, kindergarten,
elementary school, middle school, high school, public library, church or public park or any other smoke shop or smoking lounge;
2. Written approval from the property owner where such use is to be established, authorizing same;
3. Each smoke shop and smoking lounge shall hold a valid California cigarette and tobacco products retailer's license issued by the state board of
equalization, in accordance with state law, which shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the establishment;
4. Each smoke shop and smoking lounge shall have an on site manager who is a minimum of twenty one (21) years of age;
5. No person who is younger than the minimum age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to sell, display, market, barter, trade, or exchange
any combination of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia;
6. A fully functional color digital video camera system must be in place to record the activities of the premises. Each smoke shop and smoking
lounge owner/operator along with staff are required to consult with and comply with directions of the Selma police department for placement of
such equipment. The camera storage capacity should be for at least one week (7 calendar days), and a minimum of one terabyte (TB). The
system must continuously record, store, be capable of playing back images and be fully functional at all times. Any recordings of criminal activity
shall be provided to the Selma police department within twenty four (24) hours of the initial request;
7. All other applicable requirements of the provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, title XI, chapter 28 of this code relating to signs, will
be observed. (Ord. 2016-02, 3-7-2016)
5-24-3: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
Except as otherwise authorized by law, no person shall maintain or operate any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or
offered in any manner, sold, furnished or transferred or given away. For the purposes of this section, the word "drug paraphernalia" shall be defined by
reference to the California Health And Safety Code section 11014.5, as it now exists or may hereinafter be amended. (Ord. 2016-02, 3-7-2016)
5-24-4: PREEXISTING NONCONFORMING USES:
Prior to the effective date of this chapter, a smoke shop or smoking lounge lawfully existing and holding a valid business license in the city of Selma,
may remain in existence until such time as there is a substantial change in the mode or character of operation. For purposes of this section, a
substantial change of mode or character of operation shall include, but not be limited to, structural changes by expansion of usable floor space or
remodeling, a pattern of conduct violates any other law or provision of this code, or a period of closure for more than thirty (30) days. Transfers of
ownership shall not be considered a substantial change of mode or character of operation. When a substantial change of mode or character of
operation occurs, lawfully existing smoke shops and smoking lounges must obtain a conditional use permit and shall be otherwise subject to all of the
provisions of this chapter and may not be reestablished unless there is full compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter. Prior to the effective
date hereof, an inventory of existing smoke shop and smoking lounges shall be conducted by city staff and filed with the community development
department. Upon completion of the inventory, only those businesses listed in the inventory shall be deemed to be smoke shops or smoking lounges
lawfully existing as set forth in this section. (Ord. 2016-02, 3-7-2016)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-1-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 113/436
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard the life, health, property, and public welfare in keeping with the
character of the city by establishing and maintaining standards. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-2: ASSAULT OR BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "assault" or "battery" which is hereby defined as any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the
person of another. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-3: ASSEMBLY, UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble together for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing an
unlawful act and not to disperse upon the command of an officer to do so. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-4: CONCEALING KNOWLEDGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal knowledge of the commission of any offense or to conceal knowledge of any unlawful act as defined in
this code. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any illegal or improper diversion or to use insulting, indecent or immoral language, or to be guilty of any
indecent, insulting, or immoral conduct or behavior. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-6: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, wilfully, maliciously, intentionally or unnecessarily, to disturb the peace and quiet of another or of any neighborhood
or family or religious congregation or other assembly by loud or unusual noises or indecent behavior or by offensive or unbecoming conduct or for any
person to threaten, quarrel, fight or provoke an assault or battery or curse or swear or utter any obscene or vulgar or indecent language in the
presence of another. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-7: DRUNKENNESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found drunk, intoxicated or under the influence upon any public thoroughfare or other public place. (Ord. 2001-
8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-8: ESCAPE, AID IN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to escape from lawful confinement or to assist any person to escape from the custody of
any peace officer. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-9: ESCAPES:
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-
2001)
6-1-10: EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALK OR IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or upon the floor of any public building or room used for public assemblies.
(Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-11: FALSE PRETENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call
for refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received
the food, goods, wares and merchandise. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-12: FALSE REPRESENTATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 114/436
It shall be unlawful for any person to represent himself to be an officer of the city or who shall attempt to impersonate any such officer or who shall,
without authority, perform any official act therein on behalf of an officer. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-13: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deal, play or conduct, either as owner, employee or lessee, whether or not for hire, any game played with cards,
dice or any other device for money, checks, credit or other representative of value. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-14: GENERAL OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or required by state law, insofar as such
laws are applicable to municipal government. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-15: HYPNOTISTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice hypnotism or for any person to be a subject for such hypnotist provided that this shall not apply to
hypnotism as used in the treatment of patients by an accredited doctor of medicine or doctor of dentistry nor shall it prohibit the teaching of hypnotism
in any state accredited educational institution which maintains an academic standard of the college level. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-16: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity, or in any indecent or lewd dress or condition in any public place or in any such place
to make any indecent exposure of his or her person or private parts thereof, or the private parts of another, or to conduct himself in a lewd or lascivious
manner, or to appear in any such place in a dress not belonging to his sex. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-17: LOTTERY:
(A) Engaging In Lottery Or Scheme Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any lottery or scheme for the disposal or distribution of
property by chance among persons who have paid or promised to pay any valuable consideration for the chance of obtaining such property or
portion of it, or for any share or interest in such property upon any agreement, understanding or expectation that it is to be distributed or disposed
of by lot or chance whether such scheme be called lottery, raffle or gift enterprise, or by whatever name the same be known, and no person shall
contrive, prepare, set up or establish any such scheme or lottery.
(B) Traffic In Lottery Tickets: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or in any manner whatsoever furnish or transfer to or for any other person,
any ticket understood to be or to represent any ticket, chance, share or interest in any property or thing involved, in any enterprise mentioned in the
preceding subsection or depending upon the event of any such scheme, lottery or enterprise. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-18: LOTTERY, ASSISTING IN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist either by printing, writing, advertising, publishing or otherwise, in setting up, managing or drawing
any lottery or scheme, or in selling or disposing of any ticket, chance or share therein, or for any person to let or permit to be used any building or
premises for any of said purposes. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-19: OBSCENE CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or stool in any place open to the public view, or to be guilty of any lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct or
to sing any lewd or obscene song, ballad or other words in any public place or any other place where other persons are present or indecently to exhibit
any animal. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-20: OBSCENE LITERATURE, DISTRIBUTION OF:
It shall be unlawful or any person to exhibit, pass, give, or deliver to another any obscene, lewd or indecent book, pamphlet, picture, card, print, paper,
writing, mold, cast, or figure or to have same in his possession. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-21: OFFENSE, AID TO AN:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet, counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense hereby defined. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 115/436
6-1-22: PETIT THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "petit theft" which is hereby defined as a larceny when the property taken is of a value not exceeding two
hundred dollars ($200.00), or in the case of domestic fowls, fruits, or nuts, not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-23: POLICE OFFICERS, ASSISTANCE TO:
It shall be unlawful for any male citizen over the age of eighteen (18) years to refuse, or neglect to render assistance to any police officer when called
upon for such assistance, or aid in the suppression of riot, or other unlawful assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense.
(Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-24: PROSTITUTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in any manner her location as a prostitute, or for any person to advertise the profession of a
prostitute, or solicit for a prostitute. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-25: PROSTITUTION, HOUSE OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or assist in the keeping of a house of ill fame or prostitution or knowingly to reside therein or knowingly to
rent, lease or permit any person to occupy any house or room owned, leased or controlled by him for this purpose. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-26: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere wilfully with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or threaten any officer of the city in the exercise of his or her
official duties. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-27: RIOT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, when three (3) or more persons
are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace, or for the purpose of committing any unlawful act. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-28: SWINDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, who by color, or aid of any trick or sleight of hand performance, or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice or
device, to win for himself, or for another, any money or property or a representative of either. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-29: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take down any fence, or to let down any bars, or to open any gate in or on the property of another without the
consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-30: VAGRANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person without visible means of support and the physical ability to work not to seek employment or labor, or to refuse to
work when employment is offered him; for any person to seek alms as a business; for any person to roam about from place to place without any lawful
business; for any vile or dissolute person or associate of known thieves to wander about the streets at a late and unusual hour of the night, or to lodge
in any other place than is kept for lodging purposes without the permission of the owner of the property or the person in possession thereof; or for any
person to consort habitually with common prostitutes, habitual drunkards or any user of narcotics. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-1-31: WEAPONS, FURNISHING TO PRISONERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, or attempt to furnish, or take into jail, or to deliver, or attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein confined,
or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquors, drug or other article without the consent of the officer in charge. (Ord. 2001-8,
11-19-2001)
6-1-32: LOITERING IN OR ABOUT SCHOOL GROUNDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, not a student of the school involved, to return to any school grounds, school buildings or streets, sidewalks, or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 116/436
public ways adjacent thereto, without lawful business therein, within a period of ninety (90) days if the person has been asked to leave the school
grounds, school buildings or streets, sidewalks, or public ways adjacent thereto, by the chief administrative officer of said school, or by any certified
school employee designated as the agent of the chief administrative officer or by any police officer for any of the following reasons:
(A) Misconduct on or about any of the above described premises; ("misconduct" is to be defined by local school regulations regarding conduct on
campus, and/or by Penal Code section 415);
(B) Conviction of any offense requiring registration under section 290 of the Penal Code;
(C) Conviction of any offense included in division 10 or division 10.5 of the Health and Safety Code;
(D) Repeated and/or frequent loitering in or about the above described premises, without having lawful business at said premises. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-
19-2001)
6-1-33: UNLAWFUL SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No person, persons, or entity shall engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverage on any public park, public recreation area, or playground, public
building, public street, sidewalk, or alley within the city. "Alcoholic beverage" shall include alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, and beer. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-
2001)
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
ANIMAL: Any living vertebrate member of the animal kingdom, excluding man.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any persons designated by the State of California, City of Selma, or Fresno County as an animal control officer who is
authorized to perform such duties under the laws of this State.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility that is on property owned by the City of Selma, operated by a humane society, or a public agency, or its authorized
agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this Chapter or State law.
AT LARGE: Shall mean off the premises of the person owning or having the possession, charge, custody, or control of the animal and not under the
immediate control of a person by means of an enclosure, leash, rope, or other means of immediate effective physical control.
AUCTION: A place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this Chapter. This
Section does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners.
BIRD: Any member of the bird family, including, but not limited to, parakeets, cockatiels, macaws, parrots, finches, conures and swans, domesticated
to serve as a pet.
BREEDER: Any person, persons or business who breeds two (2) or more litters of dogs in one year for sale or profit.
CAT: Any member of the feline family, wild and domesticated, and shall be intended to mean both male and female.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal
exhibit, or boarding kennel.
DOG: Any member of the canine family, wild or domesticated, and shall be intended to mean both male and female.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS: Such as are habituated to live on or about the habitations of persons or such as to contribute to the support of a family or the
wealth of the community.
FOWL: Any chicken, duck, goose, turkey, guinea, pigeon, peacock or other fowl.
HEARING OFFICER: The Pound Master or any designee of the Pound Master.
IMPOUNDMENT: Shall mean the taking up and confinement of any animal in an animal shelter, veterinary hospital, or other facility.
KENNEL: Any premises, wherein any person keeps six (6) or more dogs more than four (4) months of age except commercial animal establishments.
LITTER: A litter shall be defined as two (2) or more offspring from one or more female dogs located at the same premises.
LIVESTOCK: Any large animal kept or raised for use, pleasure or profit.
OWNER: Any person, partnership, firm or corporation owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if
it is fed or sheltered for three (3) consecutive days or more.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, joint venture or entity.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 117/436
PET: Any domesticated dog, cat, bird, potbelly pig, guinea pig, hamster or aquarium kept for pleasure rather than utility.
PET SHOP: Any person, partnership, firm or corporation whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise except for
licensed kennels, that buy, sell, or board any species of animals.
POUND MASTER: Shall mean the person appointed by the City Manager. That person may be the party with whom the City has contracted for the
performance of pound services. Whenever the term "Pound Master" shall be used in this Chapter, it shall include his or her designee.
PREMISES: Shall mean a house, other dwelling, a yard or other area so enclosed as to prevent a dog from escaping.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: That property on which a person or persons have the exclusive rights of disposition.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any animal or animals which:
(A) Molests passersby or chases passing vehicles.
(B) Attacks other animals.
(C) Trespasses on school grounds.
(D) Is repeatedly at large.
(E) Damages private or public property.
(F) Barks, whines, or howls or makes any other noise that disturbs the comfort and quiet of any neighborhood or any person.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any park, public building, playground, street, road, alleyway, or other place open to the general public.
RESTRAINT: A leash not in excess of eight feet (8'), a tethered lead, or a fenced enclosure which keeps the animal under the control of a responsible
person or within the real property limits of its owner.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases
and injuries of animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal, wild or domesticated, that attacks or bites any person or animal upon any public or private property within the City.
WILD ANIMAL: Any nondomesticated animal living in a feral state. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-2: POUND MASTER:
The Chief of Police, in addition to his other duties, shall perform the duties of Pound Master, in the absence of a pound master specially appointed.
The Chief of Police shall designate a police employee as the Animal Control Officer. In addition, all police officers of the City are required to perform
the duties of the Animal Control Officer as may be required by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-3: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
The Pound Master, or his designee, shall take up, impound and safely keep any dog which is found running at large contrary to the provisions of this
Chapter within the incorporated territory of the City. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-4: TRESPASSING; SEIZURE:
Any animal, including, but not limited to, dogs found trespassing on private property may be taken up by the owner of the private property and turned
over to the Pound Master to be disposed of as provided by law. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-5: RECORD OF IMPOUNDMENT:
The Pound Master shall keep a record of all impounded animals, including a description of the animal, the date of receipt, the date and manner of
disposal, the name of the person redeeming or purchasing, and the fees, charges and proceeds of sales received on account of said animal, and such
additional records as may be required by the City Council from time to time. The Pound Master shall provide the necessary subsistence for all animals
that are impounded. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-6: DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
The duties of the Animal Control Officer shall be as follows:
(A) To take up and impound any dog or other animals (except cats), found to be running at large, staked, tied or being herded or pastured in any public
place within the City or upon the premises of any person other than the owner of such dog.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 118/436
(B) To make a complete registry of impounded dogs, showing in detail in the case of each dog, the date of receipt, the breed, color, and sex of such
dog, and if licensed, the number of such license and the name and address of the owners.
(C) To notify by mail the owner of any animal, bearing identification, impounded by the Animal Control Officer, stating that such animal is confined at
the City Animal Shelter, and specify the amount necessary to reclaim or redeem the same and the period which the animal will be held before
destroying or otherwise disposing of the same. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-7: AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
(A) Authority: Each animal control officer shall have, and is hereby vested with the authority of a public officer. The animal control officers may, in the
performance of their duties, enter upon any property pursuant to law, to ascertain if any of the provisions of this Chapter or any State laws relating
to disease, care, treatment, or cruelty to animals are being violated. Each animal control officer may issue citations for the violation of the
provisions of this Chapter, any State law, or City ordinance in the manner prescribed by the ordinance, and remove animals from said premises if
they deem necessary. The authority to issue citations in the manner prescribed by the City shall be alternative to any other authority provided by
law.
(B) Police Powers: Any animal control officer of the City shall have police powers in the enforcement of this Chapter and no person shall interfere with,
hinder, molest or abuse any animal control officer of the City in the exercise of such powers.
(C) Animal Control Devices: In the performance of duties for the control of animals, the Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to employ the
use of the tranquilizer gun or other animal control devices in common use within the State of California.
(D) Quarantine Of Suspected Animal: Whenever the owner of any animal shall observe or learn that the animal has rabies; has symptoms of rabies;
has been exposed to rabies or has acted in a manner which would lead him to suspect that it might have rabies, the owner shall immediately notify
the Pound Master and shall allow the Pound Master to make an inspection or examination of the animal. Whenever it appears to the Pound Master
that the animal has rabies or has been exposed to rabies, he shall quarantine the animal until it shall be established to his satisfaction that the
animal has or does not have rabies.
(E) Destruction Of Rabid Animals: If it appears to the Pound Master that an animal has rabies, he shall cause same to be destroyed in a lawful
manner, which may include destroying the animal immediately if this is the only method available to contain the animal. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-8: ANIMAL CARE:
It shall be unlawful for the owners or persons having custody of any animal to permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care or control,
any cruel acts upon any animal. "Cruel acts" are defined as follows:
(A) To place, leave or expose, making accessible to animals, any poisonous substance.
(B) To have, keep, or harbor any animal which is infected with any dangerous or incurable or painfully crippling condition, except as hereinafter
provided. All such diseased or crippled animals with an incurable ailment taken into custody of the City shall be transferred to the Pound Master for
impoundment. This Section shall not apply to animals within veterinary hospitals or under the care of a veterinarian, or having been diagnosed with
any common, incurable disease where impoundment or quarantine is not recommended by a doctor of veterinary medicine.
(C) To fail, refuse, or neglect to provide any animal in their charge or custody as owner or otherwise, with food, drink, shade or weatherproof housing
facilities, or to carry any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner.
(D) To wilfully, or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, tease, torture, beat with a stick, chain, club, or other object, mutilate, burn, scald with any substance,
overdrive or other cruelty set upon any animal, except that a reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals.
(E) To hobble livestock or other animals by means of chains which are composed of tempered or other permanent wire links.
(F) To drive or work any animal in a cruel manner when such animal is unfit for such work.
(G) To promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on, or attend any game, exhibition, contest, or fight in which one or more animals are engaged for
the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming, or destroying themselves or any other animal or person.
(H) No person shall keep upon any premises, any animals in a foul, offensive, obnoxious, filthy or unsanitary condition. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-9: LIMITS ON NUMBER OF DOGS:
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain upon his premises within the City more than a total of five (5) dogs over the age of four (4) months unless
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 119/436
said person shall obtain a kennel permit in addition to obtaining a license for each dog more than four (4) months of age and shall comply with the
kenneling permit requirements of this Chapter, unless said person comes within one of the following conditions:
(A) Upon reasonable showing of necessity to the Animal Control Officer, a person may be permitted to keep a dog for a period of time not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
(B) A person who had on or before the effective date hereof six (6) or more licensed dogs in the City shall be required to obtain a yearly kennel permit
pursuant to Section 6-2-25 of this Chapter. The requirement of obtaining a kennel permit shall be effective ninety (90) days after the effective date
hereof. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-10: EXCESSIVE NOISE; NUISANCE:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any dog to be kept in the City, which dog shall by loud or excessive barking, howling, whining or making any other noise
disturb the comfort or quiet of any neighborhood or any person; provided that said owner has been made aware of the disturbance created by the
dog.
(B) No person shall keep or maintain, or cause or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises, any dog which by habitual and continual
barking, howling or whining shall disturb the peace and comfort of any neighborhood or interfere with the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of
life or property by any person.
(C) No person shall keep or maintain, or cause or permit to be kept or maintained, any dog owned by him or in his possession or under his control
which habitually commits a nuisance upon the property of any other person. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-11: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person having the care or possession of a dog or any other animal to allow or permit the dog or other animal to run at large
within the City. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-12: ANIMAL BITES:
Whenever it is shown that any animal has bitten any person, the owner thereof shall, upon the order of the Pound Master, quarantine it and keep it tied
up or confined for a period of ten (10) days, and shall allow the Pound Master or other authorized official to make an examination of the animal at any
time during the period of quarantine. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-13: ANIMALS BITTEN BY OTHER ANIMALS:
Whenever any animal shall be bitten by another animal having rabies or showing symptoms of having rabies, the owner of the animal so bitten, shall
upon being informed thereof, either destroy the animal, quarantine it and keep it confined for a period of six (6) months, or place the animal in the care
of a duly licensed veterinarian for the purpose of having the standard anti-rabies treatment administered and keep the same confined for a period of
three (3) weeks after the treatment has been completed. The Pound Master shall have the power to either destroy, quarantine or treat the animal so
bitten in case the owner thereof shall fail to do so immediately, or in case the owner is not immediately available. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-14: BRINGING ANIMAL INTO CITY:
No person shall bring an animal or permit an animal to enter the City in which rabies exists, or has existed within the previous six (6) months unless
the animal has been vaccinated with anti-rabies vaccine, and the owner of the animal has an official tag or other receipt showing that the animal has
been vaccinated by a duly licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-15: DOGS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
(A) An owner of a dog shall secure a license for their dog within thirty (30) days after they acquire ownership of the dog. However, if a dog is less than
four (4) months of age when the owner acquires it, the owner shall secure a license for the dog within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches four (4)
months of age. Any person who enters the City intending to reside in the City beyond a period of thirty (30) days, and who has brought a dog with
them from outside the City, shall secure a license for the dog within thirty (30) days after the person first enters the City. Prior to issuing a license
for a dog, the owner shall present for filing with the Finance Department, a certificate signed by a duly licensed veterinarian showing that the dog
has been vaccinated against rabies and owner shall pay the annual City license fee.
(B) The license shall be renewed on January 1 of each year thereafter; provided, however, if the license fee is not paid on or before March 31 of each
year, there shall be a penalty due in addition to the regular license fee.
(C) Provided further that should the license fee not be paid before June 30 of each year, there shall be an increased penalty for the late payment in
addition to the regular license fee.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 120/436
(D) The annual license fee and any penalties due shall be payable to and collected by the Finance Department. The license fee and penalties shall be
set by resolution of the City Council and shall be prorated the first year based on the remaining months in the calendar year. Any application
received after December 1 shall be issued a license for the following year. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-16: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon payment of the license fee and any penalties due, the Finance Department shall issue to the person making the payment a license and a tag
bearing the serial number and year for which the license is issued.
The license tag must, in all cases and at all times, be fastened to a substantial collar worn around the neck of the dog for which it was issued.
Whenever a tag issued for the then current year has been stolen or lost, the owner of the dog for which the tag was issued may, upon the payment of
a fee in an amount which shall be set by resolution of the City Council, obtain a replacement tag for the animal. Fees for replacement shall be set on
an annual basis upon the recommendation of the Finance Department. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-17: IMPOUNDMENT OF UNLICENSED DOGS:
Any dog upon which the license fee is unpaid, or upon which the owner refuses to pay the license fee, or refuses to have the dog vaccinated as herein
required, may be lawfully taken up and impounded by the Pound Master, his designee, or any peace officer of the City, and it shall be lawful for such
officer to enter upon the property of any person for the purpose of enforcing this Section.
Any dog taken up and impounded as provided shall be held at the City Pound for five (5) days and if the requirements of this Section are not met
within five (5) days, the Pound Master shall cause the dog to be disposed of as required by law.
In addition to the requirements for the license fees, the owner shall also pay redemption and impoundment fees. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-18: CONFINEMENT OF DOGS LESS THAN FOUR MONTHS OF AGE:
All dogs less than four (4) months of age shall be confined to the premises of, or kept under physical restraint by the owner, keeper, or harborer.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent the sale or transportation of a puppy four (4) months old or younger. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-19: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
The owner or person(s) entitled to the control of any animal, which is impounded, may at any time prior to the lawful disposal of the animal redeem the
animal by paying all applicable fees. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-20: IMPOUNDMENT FEES:
The fees for impoundment and redemption of all animals impounded under this Chapter shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord.
97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-21: PROHIBITION OF FOWL, LIVESTOCK AND WILD ANIMALS:
No person shall keep, harbor, maintain upon his premises within the City any fowl, livestock or wild animals, except for pets. If a person has any fowl,
livestock or wild animals on the effective date hereof, the person shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date hereof to come into compliance
with this Section. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-22: DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
All animals impounded under the provisions of this Chapter shall be disposed of as provided by law; provided that no impounded dog shall be
disposed of until after written notice has been given by the Pound Master or his designee to the owner of said dog as provided herein. If the dog is
licensed under the provisions of this Chapter and there is affixed to the collar of the dog a City license tag, the notice shall be given to the owner at the
address set forth in the City licensing records. If the dog is not licensed and there is no license tag attached to the collar of the dog, no notice need be
given. The notice shall contain a description of the dog impounded, the breed, sex and the date the dog was impounded. The notice shall be served by
mailing a copy thereof by United States mail to the owner of the dog at the last address of the owner as shown on the City's records. If no person
appears and redeems the dog within five (5) days from the date of mailing of the notice or within five (5) days after the dog was impounded, whichever
is later, the Pound Master shall cause the dog to be disposed of as provided by law. Provided however, that any interested person may redeem the
impounded dog or any other animal upon payment of all applicable fees. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-23: COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or association to erect, establish, maintain any commercial animal establishment or pet shop without
first obtaining a business license from the City. After inspection and approval of the conditions of the commercial animal establishment by the Pound
Master, the required business license may be issued by the City. Such license shall be issued pursuant to City licensing regulations, provided any
inspection by the Pound Master and other City officials does not reveal any violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the City Building Codes and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 121/436
Zoning Ordinances and any other ordinances, rules or regulations.
Every person within the City who owns, conducts, manages, a commercial animal establishment for which a City business license or special use
permit is required shall comply with each of the following conditions:
(A) Housing facilities shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict entrance of other
animals.
(B) All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(C) All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require.
(D) Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent escape of animals.
(E) All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and the animals from the public.
(F) Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling
shall be provided as required according to the physical needs of the animals.
(G) All animal rooms, cages, and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing for animals kept therein.
(H) All animal runs shall be of concrete and provided with adequate drainage into an approved sewer or individual sewer disposal installation.
(I) All animals shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for an examination and treatment if so ordered by the Animal Control Officer.
(J) Every violation of applicable regulation shall be corrected within reasonable time to be specified by the Animal Control Officer.
(K) Commercial animal establishments shall comply with all other applicable Selma codes and ordinances.
(L) All commercial animal establishments may be inspected from time to time by an animal control officer to investigate any complaints of violations of
the provisions of this Section.
Failure of the applicant for a license or special use permit to comply with any one of the foregoing conditions shall be deemed just cause for the denial
of any business license, whether original or renewal and/or the issuance of a citation for violations pursuant to provisions of this Section. (Ord. 97-5, 8-
18-1997)
6-2-24: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Application for all kennel or breeder permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be filed with the Police Department on a form prescribed by the Police
Department. Fees charged for these permits shall be set annually by resolution of City Council. The kennel and breeder permits shall be issued for the
calendar year or any part thereof and are effective from January 1 of each year and expire on December 31 of that same year. Renewal and payment
of the permit are due and payable on January 1 of each year. The Finance Department shall collect a delinquent penalty in an amount equal to the
amount as established for license penalties. Any or all of the permits within this Code may be immediately suspended for any violations of the permit.
(Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-25: KENNEL PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to own, maintain, or harbor any more than five (5) dogs combined within the City limits without first obtaining a
kennel permit from the Pound Master. A kennel permit shall permit no more than ten (10) dogs to be kept, harbored or maintained upon a person's
premises within the incorporated area of the City subject to approval of the Pound Master. The kennel permit fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council. The applicant for a kennel permit must comply with the following conditions before issuance of a permit:
(A) Zoning conformance must first be established for each kennel construction/use proposal prior to proceeding with environmental health, sanitation,
and construction evaluations of the proposal.
(B) Complete plans and specifications of the kennel facilities shall be submitted to and be approved by both the Building Official and the Health Officer
prior to the construction.
(C) Kennel buildings (pens) shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of any property line nor forty feet (40') from any habitable building.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 122/436
(D) Unless served by a public sewer, separate sewage disposal systems for kennels with a one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallon septic tank must
be installed to serve the manure flushing process.
(E) Leach lines or seepage pits must meet all minimum setback requirements, and an area for one hundred percent (100%) replacement of leach
system must be set aside which must also meet all minimum setback requirements.
(F) Kennel buildings must be constructed with masonry walls, sloped to drain concrete floors, soundproofing, including double pane windows and
adequate ventilation as determined by the Building Official.
(G) Dogs must be placed in the masonry kennel building from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
(H) The entire kennel and pen area must be screened from view by a solid six foot (6') high fence. Dogs may at no time run loose or be outside of this
fenced area unless on a leash.
(I) Minimum dog run size (horizontal dimension) will be four feet by ten feet (4' x 10') inside kennel area and four feet by twelve feet (4' x 12') outside
kennel area.
(J) Feed storage, medicated feed, medicine and supplies must be kept safe from children and others in a separate locked rodent-proof room or
secured place. All feed shall be kept in rodent-proof containers which are placed eighteen inches (18") above the floor surfaces.
(K) Separate hand washing and toilet room facilities must be available in the kennel area.
(L) Pens must be clean and sanitary at all times with an effective fly and odor control program submitted to the Animal Control Officer for staff's
approval.
(M) No portion of the kennel or its dog occupants will be allowed to become a nuisance.
(N) No exterior lighting shall interfere with neighboring residential properties.
(O) Maximum dog occupancy of each and all portions of the kennel facilities shall be as determined by the Health Officer or any special land use
persons.
(P) In lieu of any the foregoing requirements, the owner may propose an alternative which meets the intent of these requirements. The owner must
prove the equivalent adequacy of the alternative. The approval of alternatives is required prior to issuance of a permit.
Upon completion of the above requirements and final construction approval by the Building Division of the Community Development Department, a
kennel license shall be obtained from the Finance Department of the City.
The permit will be for a calendar year, or any part thereof in which the permit is required, with the permit fee due and payable on January 1 of each
year. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-26: BREEDER PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to breed two (2) or more litters of dogs in one calendar year from one premises without first obtaining a breeder
permit. The fees for a breeder permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council and must be submitted to the Department of Finance. Breeding
permit requirements are as follows:
(A) No offspring can be sold/adopted until they reach between six to eight (6-8) weeks of age;
(B) No offspring can be sold/adopted until vaccinated against common diseases;
(C) The breeder permit holder must display the permit number when advertising the animals for sale/adoption. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-27: BREEDER ADVERTISING:
It shall be unlawful for any breeder to advertise for the sale/adoption of a litter of dogs in the City without including in the advertisement a City breeder
permit number. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 123/436
6-2-28: REPORTING OF DOG RECORDS:
Every commercial animal establishment, breeders, kennels and others who sell or adopt animals must keep permanent records of all dogs sold or
adopted and forward such information on a monthly basis to the Pound Master for licensing and confirmation of rabies vaccination. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-
1997)
6-2-29: SPAY/NEUTER COMPLIANCE FOR SHELTER ANIMALS:
A spay or neuter deposit will be required upon the purchase of any unaltered dog from the City Animal Shelter pursuant to Food and Agriculture Code
section 30503. The deposit will be applied to the spay or neuter surgery of the animal.
Any dog sold from the City Animal Shelter shall be spayed or neutered within thirty (30) days of adoption for animals more than six (6) months of age.
For animals less than six (6) months old, they shall be spayed or neutered within thirty (30) days of reaching six (6) months of age for females and
within thirty (30) days of reaching eight (8) months of age for males. An extension of time to perform surgery may be granted by the Pound Master if a
veterinarian provides a medical determination that the surgery cannot be performed as scheduled and must be postponed. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-30: POTBELLIED PIGS AS HOUSEHOLD PETS:
Under the following conditions, potbellied pigs may be kept as household pets:
(A) An owner of a potbellied pig shall secure a license for their potbellied pig in the same manner as specified in Section 6-2-15 of this Chapter.
(B) Potbellied pigs may only be kept as pets at single-family detached residential dwelling units with individual fenced yards.
(C) A maximum of one potbellied pig may be kept at any residence as described above. A potbellied pig will substitute for a dog when enumerating the
permissible total number of dogs per residence under Section 6-2-9 of this Chapter or other applicable section.
(D) Yards and other enclosing structures where potbellied pigs are kept shall be built and maintained so as to keep the animals effectively confined.
(E) Yards and structures where potbellied pigs are kept shall be maintained free of nuisances such as odors, flies, and accumulated waste material.
(F) Tusks (canine teeth) of potbellied pigs shall be removed or kept trimmed below the level of adjacent teeth.
(G) Female potbellied pigs shall be spayed prior to five (5) months of age and male potbellied pigs shall be neutered prior to seven (7) weeks of age;
or, if older animals are brought to a residence in the City for pet purposes, spaying and neutering shall be done within two (2) weeks of being
brought to residential property within City limits. No breeding of, nor raising litters of, potbellied pigs shall be allowed at any residence.
(H) Potbellied pigs shall be registered/certified by the Potbellied Pigs Registry Service, Incorporated or the North American Potbellied Pig Association
as purebred potbellied pigs.
(I) Each pet potbellied pig shall annually be examined by a licensed veterinarian, who will certify the following and prepare a written record of these
certifications:
1. Documentation showing that the animal is registered or certified by either the Potbellied Pig Registry Service, Incorporated or the North
American Potbellied Pig Association, accompanied by a photograph which can be used to identify the animal described in the
registration/certification papers;
2. The age of the potbellied pig;
3. Verification that the animal has been neutered (if male) or spayed (if female);
4. Verification that the potbellied pig has current negative blood tests for brucellosis and pseudorabies;
5. Verification that the animal's tusks have been removed, or have been trimmed so that the ends of the tusks will remain below the height of
adjacent teeth until the next scheduled trimming;
6. Verification that the potbellied pig has a current negative test for ova and parasites and/or the animal is being treated with an effective
deworming program to prevent tapeworm infection;
7. Verification that the potbellied pig is in good health, with no symptoms of communicable swine diseases or zoonoses;
8. The actual weight of the potbellied pig. This certification document or veterinary record shall be legibly signed by the veterinarian, and shall
include the printed name, address, license number and business telephone number of the veterinarian.
(J) The most recent veterinary certification, as described in subsection (H) of this Section, shall be kept at the premises where any pet potbellied pig is
being maintained, and shall be promptly presented upon request, so that the elements in this documentation may be verified by representatives of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 124/436
City Code Enforcement, County or State Health Services, animal health/veterinary, and/or animal welfare agencies.
(K) The weight of a pet potbellied pig shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) pounds. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-31: PROHIBITION OF DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for a person to keep a dangerous or vicious animal. Any animal which has been found to be dangerous or vicious pursuant to the
Ordinance Code of the City, or any other county or city ordinance or any state statute, shall be conclusively presumed to be dangerous or vicious.
(Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-32: PROCEDURE TO DETERMINE IF ANIMAL IS DANGEROUS/VICIOUS:
(A) The Animal Control Officer shall determine whether an animal is dangerous or vicious whenever it has attacked, bitten or caused injury to any
human or other animal. Within two (2) business days after an animal which is wearing a license tag is impounded pursuant to this Chapter, the
Animal Control Officer shall mail a notice of the Animal Control Officer's determination that the animal is dangerous or vicious and of the owner's
right to a hearing on the issue of whether or not the animal is dangerous/vicious. The Hearing Officer shall be the Pound Master or his designee.
(B) The owner of an animal confined or impounded pursuant to this Section may, within the time period provided for application for redemption of the
animal, request a hearing to determine whether or not the animal is dangerous/vicious.
(C) When a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (B) of this Section, the Animal Control Officer shall set a date and time for such a hearing and
send a notice thereof by regular mail at least five (5) business days, including Saturday, before such date to the owner at the address set forth on
his or her request and shall also notify the victim and the Hearing Officer. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-33: IMPOUND NOTICE:
Within two (2) business days after an animal which is wearing a license tag is impounded, the Animal Control Officer shall mail a notice of the
impounding to the owner of the animal at the address shown on the application for the license which is on file in the office of the Pound Master, and
advise the owner of the procedure whereby he may regain custody of the animal. A fee shall be paid by the owner to the City any time that the Animal
Control Officer transports an animal to the City Animal Shelter. A fee for boarding the animal shall also be charged. The fees shall be determined by
City resolution based upon the cost of providing the service. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-34: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
(A) A hearing requested in accordance with subsection 6-2-32(B) of this Chapter shall be conducted before a person appointed a Hearing Officer. The
Animal Control Officer shall send notice to victims requesting this hearing.
(B) The hearing shall be open to the public. The owner may be represented by counsel. The Hearing Officer shall hear all pertinent evidence offered
by all interested persons. The technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, except that the Hearing Officer's decision may not
be based wholly on hearsay evidence. Each side shall have the right to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine
opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues at the hearing even though the matter was not covered in the direct examination; to
impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him or her to testify, and to rebut the evidence against him or her. If the owner does not
testify on his or her behalf, he or she may be called and examined as if under cross-examination, except where criminal charges under Section 6-
2-38 of this Chapter are pending against the owner or if it is possible that such charges may be brought against the owner. All persons giving
evidence shall be sworn before testifying. The owner may employ a shorthand reporter to record the hearing.
(C) Any animal which has attacked, bitten or caused injury to a human being or other animal is presumed to be dangerous or vicious and the burden is
on the owner to present evidence that the animal is not dangerous/vicious.
(D) In making a determination that an animal is or is not dangerous/vicious, evidence of the following shall be considered:
1. Any previous history of the animal attacking, biting or causing injury to a human being or other animal;
2. The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of victims involved;
3. The place where the bite, attack or injury occurred;
4. The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack or injury;
5. The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;
6. Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics of being trained for fighting or attack or other evidence to show such training or fighting;
7. Whether the animal exhibits characteristics or aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings or dogs or
other animals;
8. Whether the animal can be effectively trained to change its temperament or behavior;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 125/436
9. The manner in which the animal has been maintained by its owner or custodian;
10. Any other relevant evidence concerning the maintenance of the animal; and
11. Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner or custodian to protect the public safety in the future if the animal is permitted to
remain in the City. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-35: HEARING DECISION:
(A) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer may determine:
1. That the animal is not a dangerous or vicious animal and should be returned to its owner;
2. That the animal is not dangerous or vicious, but the attack, bite or injury was the result of improper or negligent training, handling or
maintenance and that the license should be revoked and proper training of the owner and the dog be required pursuant to Section 6-2-37 of this
Chapter.
3. That the animal is a dangerous or vicious animal and it should be humanely destroyed no sooner than the fifth business day following the
mailing of notice of the Hearing Officer's decision, pursuant to Section 6-2-36 of this Chapter.
(B) The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be in writing and shall be delivered personally to the owner or mailed to him or her by regular mailing at
the address appearing on the request for hearing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the Animal Control Officer.
(C) Judicial review of a decision of the Hearing Officer made after a hearing pursuant to section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure where
and to the extent said section may be applicable. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-36: DISPOSITION OF A DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor or keep any animal declared to be dangerous or vicious pursuant to Section 6-2-31 of
this Chapter and subsection 6-2-35(A)3 of this Chapter.
(B) Any animal declared to be dangerous/vicious, if not already impounded, shall be immediately surrendered to the Animal Control Officer, and it is
the duty of the Animal Control Officer to take up and impound any such animal.
(C) Any animal declared to be dangerous or vicious shall be humanely destroyed. The Animal Control Officer shall sign an order authorizing the
destruction of the animal within two (2) business days after the time for judicial review, as provided by Section 6-2-35 of this Chapter, has passed
without a request for judicial review being filed, or after the fifth business day after the Hearing Officer's decision affirming that the animal is
dangerous or vicious has been served upon the Animal Control Officer. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-37: PROCEDURE IF ANIMAL IS NOT FOUND DANGEROUS/VICIOUS:
If it is determined that the animal is not dangerous or vicious, but that the bite, attack or injury was the result of improper or negligent training, handling
or maintenance, then the following conditions will be enforced:
(A) Training will be required of the owner and the animal.
(B) The current license will be revoked and a "provisional" dog license will be issued during a probationary period.
(C) After successful completion of the probationary period, the dog shall be issued a current City dog license.
(D) Any violation of the probation terms set forth by the Hearing Officer will result in immediate impoundment. The animal will be declared to be
dangerous or vicious and humanely destroyed no sooner than five (5) business days after mailing a notice of violation of probation and
impoundment. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-38: PENALTIES FOR ANIMAL BITES AND ATTACKS:
(A) In any case wherein an animal attacks a human being or another animal, then such act shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, and shall
be punishable as follows:
1. Any person whose animal attacks a human being without causing bodily injury, or attacks another animal, shall be guilty of an infraction and
shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for a second conviction within a period of one year by a
fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and for a third or subsequent conviction within one year, by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
2. Any person whose animal attacks a human being causing bodily injury shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 126/436
3. After each attack or bite, the Animal Control Officer shall determine whether a dog is dangerous or vicious pursuant to Section 6-2-32 of this
Chapter. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
6-2-39: PENALTIES:
(A) Except as otherwise provided in Section 6-2-37 of this Chapter, any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and shall be subject to the following fines:
1. Fifty dollars ($50.00) upon the first offense.
2. One hundred dollars ($100.00) upon the second offense in a twelve (12) month period.
3. Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) upon the third offense in a twelve (12) month period.
If any violation is continued, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. Any person found guilty of more than three (3) violations of
this Chapter within a twelve (12) month period shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days for each misdemeanor conviction. The person shall also pay any and all expenses, including
shelter, food, veterinarian expenses for identification or certification or boarding associated with the seizure of the animal. (Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
Chapter 3
APPOINTMENT OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
6-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize a duly appointed animal control officer that has been appointed by the Humane Society, Society For
Prevention Of Cruelty To Animals or public pound with which the city of Selma has a contract for the impoundment, care and protection, and
prevention of cruelty to animals within the limits of the city of Selma to exercise all of the powers and responsibilities and duties of an "animal control
officer" as defined in section 6-2-1 of this title and, in connection therewith, to issue appropriate citations in accordance with this code, including
administrative citations and the power to serve warrants as specified in sections 1523 and 1530 of the Penal Code during the course and within the
scope of the employment of the animal control officer who has been certified as meeting the requirements of Corporations Code section 14502 by the
Humane Society, Society For Prevention Of Cruelty To Animals and/or public pound which the city of Selma has contracted to provide the same or
similar services. (Ord. 2014-8, 9-2-2014)
6-3-2: AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
(A) The city of Selma hereby specially appoints and authorizes the animal control officer employed by Second Chance Animal Shelter Of Selma
(SCAS), a California nonprofit corporation organized and operating as the Humane Society, Society For The Prevention Of Cruelty To Animals
and/or a public pound within the city of Selma to enforce, in any manner permitted by this code, those provisions that currently exist in chapter 2 of
this title, or as they may be hereafter amended. The animal control officer is hereby designated by the city of Selma as an animal control officer
authorized to perform such duties. The chief of police may designate the animal control officer employed by SCAS to perform all of the duties
prescribed by chapter 2 of this title for a poundmaster and animal control officer to include the power to serve warrants as specified in Penal Code
sections 1523 and 1530 and to issue administrative citations for violation of any or all of the animal control provisions in chapter 2 of this title. In
performing these duties, the animal control officer employed by SCAS shall contact and defer any such enforcement or other animal control activity
as deemed necessary by any peace officer of the Selma police department with respect to each and all of the following:
1. Where an animal presents a threat to the public safety;
2. When an animal bites any persons;
3. When an animal is creating a traffic hazard;
4. When the owner/handler of the animal has been arrested by the Selma police department; or
5. When the animal has been gravely injured.
(B) Further, all complaints of animal cruelty shall initially be investigated by the Selma police department or an officer thereof and shall be dealt with by
the animal control officer in the manner prescribed by the police department. Nothing in this chapter or section is intended to or shall affect the
authority of the chief of police of the city of Selma, or of any peace officer employed by the city of Selma to enforce state and local animal control
laws and ordinances as deemed necessary by the chief of police or the peace officer. (Ord. 2014-8, 9-2-2014)
Chapter 4
DEADLY WEAPONS
6-4-1: LOITERING WHILE CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPON PROHIBITED:
(A) As used in this Section, but in no wise limited thereto, "Dangerous or Deadly Weapon" shall mean any knife with a blade three inches (3") or more
in length; any spring-blade, switch-blade, or snap-blade knife or other similar type knife; a knife any blade of which is automatically released by a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 127/436
spring mechanism or other mechanical device; any ice pick, or similar sharp, stabbing tool; any straight edge razor or any razor blade fitted to a
handle; any cutting, stabbing, bludgeoning weapon or device capable of inflicting grievous bodily harm.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, while carrying concealed upon his person any dangerous or deadly weapon, to loaf or loiter upon any public
street, sidewalk, or alley, or to wander about from place to place, with no lawful business thereby to perform, or to hide, lurk or loiter upon or about
the premises of another.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person who has concealed upon his person or who has in his immediate physical possession any dangerous or deadly
weapon to engage in any fight or to participate in any other rough or disorderly conduct upon any public place or way or upon the premises of
another.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person who has concealed upon his person any dangerous or deadly weapon to loiter about any place where
intoxicating liquors are sold or any other place of public resort.
(E) The foregoing restrictions shall not be deemed to prohibit the carrying of ordinary tools or equipment carried in good faith for uses of honest work,
trade or business or for the purpose of legitimate recreation.
6-4-2: SALE, TRANSFER, OR POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
Notwithstanding any provision in this Chapter to the contrary, no person shall sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, keep, carry, possess, loan, transfer or
give to any other person, any spring-blade, switch-blade, snap-blade knife, or other similar type knife or any knife any blade of which is automatically
released by a spring mechanism or other mechanical device. (Ord. 492; 12-17-56)
6-4-3: FIREARMS; SALE TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give to any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, any revolver or pistol of any kind from or by means
of which any bullet, shot or other missile of any kind may be fired or projected by means of percussion caps, cartridges or any explosive substances
whatever.1
6-4-4: DEFINITIONS:
The word "Firearm" as used in Sections 6-4-5, 6-4-6 and 6-4-7, shall mean any gun, rifle, shotgun, air gun, B-B gun, pellet gun, crossbow, bow and
arrow, tube,launcher, sling, or any other instrument used for discharging projectiles capable of doing bodily harm.
6-4-5: DISCHARGE UNLAWFUL, EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge a firearm within the City limits of the City of Selma, except in the case of (a) a public officer or
member of the armed forces in the lawful discharge of his duties, or (b) a person necessarily acting in the lawful defense of person or property, or (c) a
shooting gallery, practice range, or skeet field conducted at a fixed location and with adequate safeguards, for which a permit has been issued by the
Chief of Police, or (d) a pistol for shooting blank cartridges when used as a starting gun for athletic contests or as a stage property for a dramatic
production, or (f) a construction gun, rivet gun or "driveit" gun, or (g) in connection with a parade or other military ceremonial events, and the like.
6-4-6: POSSESSION OF FIREARMS BY PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to have a firearm in his possession within the City limits of the City of Selma at
anytime, except when (a) he is in the company of one of his parents, or (b) within the walls of his home, or (c) he is handling merchandise in the
course of services of a carrier or the post office or a licensed retail merchant, or (d) in connection with starting guns, he is acting as an equipment
athletic manager or starter in an athletic contest, or (e) in connection with stage properties for dramatic productions, or (f) in connection with a drill,
demonstration, or parade under the jurisdiction and control of a public school or a branch or reserve force of the armed forces of the State of California
or the United States, or (g) in connection with a shooting gallery, practice range, training school, or skeet field conducted at a fixed location and with
adequate safeguards, for which a permit has been issued by the Chief of Police, and under the control of qualified supervisors or instructors approved
by the Chief of Police, or (h) when he is in the company of a police officer, or qualified supervisor or instructor approved by the Chief of Police.
Chapter 5
PICKETING
6-5-1: UNLAWFUL PICKETING OR HARASSMENT:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to watch, beset or picket the premises of another where any person is employed or any approach thereto, or any
place where such employee lodges or resides, or any approach thereto for the purpose of inducing any such employee, by compulsion, threats,
coercion, intimidation, or by any act of violence, or by putting the employee in fear, to quit his employment or to refrain from seeking or freely
entering into employment.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 128/436
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to watch, beset, or picket the premises of another, or any approach thereto, for the purpose of inducing others to
refrain from entering the premises, or from patronizing, transacting business within or negotiating with the owner or occupant of the premises.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person, in association or agreement with one (1) or more persons, to assemble, congregate, or meet together in the
vicinity of any premises where other persons are employed or upon the streets, approaches or places adjacent thereto, for the purpose of inducing
any such employee, by compulsion, threats, coercion, intimidation, or by any act of violence, or by putting the employee in fear, to quit his
employment therein, or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment therein.
(D) It shall, be unlawful for any person, in association or agreement with one (1) or more persons, to assemble, congregate, or meet together in the
vicinity of the premises of another, or upon the streets, approaches, or places adjacent thereto, for the purpose of inducing others to refrain from
entering the premise or from patronizing, transacting business with, or negotiating with the owner or occupant of the premises.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to utter to, or within the hearing of, another, any derogatory, profane, indecent, opprobrious epithets or language,
or to use any gesture, or to make demonstrations of any kind, for the purpose of inducing any persons, by means of compulsion, coercion,
intimidation, threats, acts of violence, or fear, to quit his employment, or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment, or to refrain
from patronizing, negotiating with or transacting business, with any other person.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person to form or to aid in forming, or to ride in, any parade, or procession of two (2) or more vehicles formed or moving
along the public streets for the purpose of inducing any person, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation or fear from entering into, or
carrying on his employment, upon or about any place of business, packing shed, dwelling or any other premises or place of employment.
(G) It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, stand or sit upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk so as to in any manner hinder or
obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing or attempting to pass along or over the same, or so as to in any way or
manner annoy or molest persons passing along or over the same. (Ord. 306, 7-12-37)
Chapter 6
CURFEW
6-6-1: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
(A) No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised
place between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day. The provisions of this Section do not apply
when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is
upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the
minor is returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment, recreational activity, dance or when the person is going directly to or returning
directly from work.
(B) Any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years found in violation of this Chapter shall be immediately apprehended and taken to the proper
detention place or parental pickup station for minors and there detained until the arrival of the parent, guardian or proper person to care for said
minor. (Ord. 94-4, 4-4-94)
6-6-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor to permit the minor to loiter, idle,
wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public
buildings, places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following day unless the minor is lawfully upon the streets or places as permitted by the preceding Section of this
Chapter.
(B) Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who permits
such person to violate the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having a minor in his or her charge, after receiving notice of the apprehension, arrest or
detention of said minor, to fail or neglect to go in person or send some suitable person after said minor so detained.
(D) Every parent, guardian or other having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) who is convicted of violating
this Chapter shall be liable for the expense of a police response and the cost of transporting the minor to a parental pickup station. The expense of
police response shall include, but will not be limited to, the costs of providing police, firefighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the
scene of the incident, as well as the salaries of the personnel responding to the incident. (Ord. 94-4, 4-4-94)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 129/436
Chapter 7
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
6-7-1: AUCTION BY CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Chief of Police shall from time to time hold a public auction at which lost or unclaimed property in the possession of the City may be sold to the
highest bidder.
6-7-2: PROPERTY TO BE HELD SIX MONTHS:
Only those articles or items of lost or unclaimed property of which the City has had possession for a period of not less than six (6) months shall be sold
at public auction.
6-7-3: NOTICE OF AUCTION:
The Chief of Police shall give notice of the holding of a public auction by one (1) publication of a notice thereof, at least five (5) days before the time
fixed therefor, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
6-7-4: DISPOSITION OF RECEIPTS:
All funds realized at such public auction shall be delivered with an accounting thereof to the Treasurer who shall then deposit the funds in the General
Fund of the City.
6-7-5: DISPOSAL OF UNSOLD PROPERTY:
Any item or article of lost or unclaimed property upon which no bid was made at public auction may be given away or destroyed at the option of the
Chief of Police. (1963 Code)
Chapter 8
ABANDONED CONTAINERS
6-8-1: UNLAWFUL ACT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or
abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other
container which has a door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door or lid,
snap lock or other locking device.1 (1963 Code)
Chapter 9
PLASTIC BAGS OR COVERINGS
6-9-1: DEFINITION:
The words "plastic coverings", "plastic pag", or "plastic package" when used in this Chapter shall mean any covering, package or bag made of plastic
material sufficiently thin and pliable to respond to static electricity created by contact with the human body to the extent that it clings to the human skin
or body. (1963 Code)
6-9-2: WARNING REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or to deliver as a cover or wrapper, any plastic bag that is of sufficient size to fit over a
child's head, or any bag which, when open has an opening larger than twenty five (25) square inches or a capacity of more than one hundred twenty
five (125) cubic inches, unless there is at all times clearly printed on such bag or covering, or on a paper attached to such bag or covering, words in
letters at least one-fourth inch (1/4") high as follows:
WARNING:To avoid danger of suffocation keep this bag (or covering) away from babies and children. Do not use in cribs, beds, carriages or play
pens. This is not a toy.
(1963 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 130/436
6-9-3: CERTAIN BAGS A NUISANCE:
Any plastic bag, covering or package not carrying or accompanied by the printed warning as provided in Section 6-9-2 of this Chapter is hereby
declared a nuisance. (1963 Code)
Chapter 10
PUBLIC DANCES
6-10-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this Chapter the term "public dance" shall mean any dance or ball to which the general public is admitted and shall include, but is
not limited to any live performance by a musician, including a live performance by a singer. In the case of societies or clubs the term shall mean any
dance or ball to which persons are admitted other than bona fide members of the society or club. (Ord.93-2, 3-1-93)
6-10-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person in control of any room, place or hall situated within the City to conduct, engage in or permit a public
dance in such place, room or hall without a permit so to do from the Chief of Police.
(A) The Chief of Police shall establish rules and regulations concerning the granting of a permit for a public dance. Those rules shall be consistent with
the provisions of this Chapter, including but not limited to each of the following:
1. No permit shall be issued for a public dance to be held on property upon which a public dance has already been held within the preceding ninety
(90) days, if both of the following conditions apply:
(a) The property is in a zone which allows for lounges, bars or nightclubs, if a conditional use permit were obtained; and
(b) The property does not have a conditional use permit which allows for the type of public dance activity requested in the permit application, but
does have a conditional use permit for a bar.
2. While a permit shall be required for a public dance which is conducted by an organization described in subsection 5-7-3(H), for the purposes
described and, which is described in that subsection and which would otherwise require such a permit, the fee for obtaining a public dance
permit by such entity for such an activity shall be waived.
3. The circumstances under which private security will be required to be provided as a condition to the issuance of a permit for a public dance.
(B) Said applicant shall comply with all fire, zoning and police regulations of said City. If the property upon which the public dance is to be held is
subject to a conditional use permit, then the applicant shall comply with applicable conditions set forth in the conditional use permit, if any, in
holding said public dance. Notwithstanding the foregoing or any other provision of this Chapter, it shall not be necessary for a public dance permit
to be obtained in order to hold a public dance under any of the following circumstances:
1. If the public dance is sponsored by and held on the property of a church, mosque, temple, synagogue or other place of worship; or
2. If the public dance is sponsored by and held on the property of a public or private school for minor children; or
3. If the public dance is upon property which meets both of the following requirements:
(a) The property is zoned either Central Commercial (C-2), Commercial Zone (C-3), Pioneer Village Zone (PV), or any other zone which allows
for the use as a "lounge, bar or nightclub"; and
(b) The property has been issued and still has in effect a conditional use permit which specifically, affirmatively states that it allows the type of
activity for which the public dance permit would otherwise be required.
(C) Should any proposed holder of such a permit for a public dance or holder of such a permit wish to appeal the ruling of the Chief of Police regarding
the granting of a permit or revocation of a permit or of enforcing any of the rules established by the Chief of Police, said person may appeal to the
Council by giving written notice of said appeal to the Clerk setting forth therein the reasons for said appeal, and the Clerk shall thereupon set the
matter for hearing before the Council, and the decision of the Council in said matter shall be final. (Ord. 93-2, 3-1-93)
6-10-3: UNLAWFUL TO ASSIST AT UNLICENSED DANCE:
No person shall act as floor manager, doorkeeper or in any official capacity at any public dance or hall unless a permit has been procured from the
Chief of Police as herein provided. (1963 Code)
6-10-4: OBSCENE DANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dance in an obscene or vulgar manner or for any person holding a permit to conduct a public dance to allow any
obscene or vulgar dance to be performed. (1963 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 131/436
Chapter 11
USE OF PUBLIC FLAG POLES AND STAFFS
6-11-1: MISUSE UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to raise or display any flag, banner, standard, device, emblem or other article except the flag of the United States of
America or the official bear flag of the State of California upon or from any flag pole or staff designed and intended for the display of the flag of the
United States of America or the official bear flag of the State of California and located upon any public grounds or within any public buildings belonging
to or in the possession of the United States of America, the State of California, the County of Fresno, City of Selma, or any public district or agency.
6-11-2: EXCEPTION:
The prohibition of Section 6-11-1 shall not apply to those ceremonial occasions when the flag or other colors of a friendly foreign power, the United
Nations, any other state of the United States, or the official flag or colors of any military organization of the United States or the State of California, are
displayed with the authorization of the public agency owning or in possession of the flag pole or staff involved and in strict accordance with the laws or
regulations of this State, the United States of America or any department or agency thereof relating thereto. (Ord. 683; 4-5-71; Eff. 5-5-71)
Chapter 12
BINGO
6-12-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to authorize the playing of the game of chance generally known as "bingo" subject to and pursuant to the
restrictions contained in Article IV, Section 19c of the Constitution of the State of California and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State of
California. Definitions, conditions and restrictions set forth in the Chapter are intended to comply with and implement the Constitutional and Penal
Code provisions. To the extent that any provision of the Chapter is substantially the same as that contained in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and
violation thereof be deemed a violation of the Penal Code and punishable hereunder, such provision of this Chapter shall be deemed explanatory only.
6-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
BINGO: A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or
symbols selected at random.
CITY CLERK, CHIEF OF POLICE, PLANNING AND BUILDING INSPECTOR or FIRE CHIEF: The City Clerk, Chief of Police, Planning and Building
Inspector or Fire Chief of the City or their respective authorized agents.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any tax-exempt organization or senior citizens organization as such terms are defined in this Section.
SENIOR CITIZEN: Any person of age sixty (60) or older or any person age fifty (50) or older who no longer engages in full-time employment.
SENIOR CITIZENS ORGANIZATIONS: Any organization meeting the following criteria:
(A) Purpose. The purpose of the organization is to improve the social, recreational, economic, medical and/or housing conditions of senior citizens.
(B) Membership. The membership in the organization shall be limited to senior citizens and their spouses.
(C) Formal Organization. The organization shall have a duly adopted constitution or by-laws stating the purpose of the organization and the
qualifications of membership and providing for the election of officers.
TAX-EXEMPT ORGANIZATION: Any organization exempted from the payment of bank or corporation taxes by Section 23701b (fraternal beneficiary
societies, orders or organizations) or Section 23701d (religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational and humanitarian corporations) of the
California Revenue and Taxation Code.
6-12-3: BINGO PERMITTED:
A nonprofit organization having in effect a permit therefor from the City Clerk pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter may conduct a bingo game for
charitable purposes subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and this Chapter. (Ord. 789, 6-5-
78)
6-12-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
A nonprofit organization may apply to the City Clerk for a permit to conduct a bingo game. Each such organization must have its principal and
permanent meeting place in the corporation limits of the City; must maintain a bonafide membership of at least twenty (20) members; and, must have
been organized and established in the City's corporate limits for a minimum of one year continuously preceding the filing of the application for the
permit. The application shall be upon a form provided therefor by the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee equal to the actual cost of issuing
such permit as may be determined from time to time by the City Council. Notwithstanding the actual cost of issuing such permit, the fee shall not
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 132/436
exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), unless a higher maximum fee is authorized by law. If the applicant is a tax-exempt organization, it shall accompany the
application with a certificate or letter from the State Franchise Tax Board stating that the applicant is exempt from the payment of the bank or
corporation taxes. If the applicant is a senior citizens organization, it shall provide proof to the satisfaction of the City Clerk that it satisfies the criteria
for a "senior citizens organization" as set forth in Section 6-12-2. Such proof may include but is not limited to a copy of the organization's constitution
and/or by laws.
No organization may receive more than one permit at any one time. One permit may be issued to two (2) or more qualifying applicants as a joint
venture. (Ord. 869, 7-2-84)
6-12-5: CONTENT OF APPLICATION:
(A) The application for a permit for conducting bingo games shall contain the following:
1. The name of the organization proposing to conduct such games together with the names, signatures and addresses of all the officers of the
organization;
2. The address of the premises where the bingo games are proposed to be conducted;
3. The names of the owner(s) and, if any, lessee(s) of the premises where the bingo games are proposed to be conducted;
4. The principal purpose for which the premises are used by the organization together with the length of time for which the premises have been so
used;
5. The name and address of the person responsible for the operation of the bingo game and name and address of those persons assisting therein;
6. The day and hours of proposed operation of bingo games; and
7. Such further information as may be required by the City Clerk.
(B) Said application shall be signed by a principal officer of the applicant under penalty of perjury.
6-12-6: CONSENT TO INVESTIGATION:
The filing of an application for a permit shall be deemed a consent by the applicant for the Chief of Police to make an investigation to determine if all
the statements on the application are true, to investigate the officers of the applicant and the person who will be responsible for the operation of the
bingo games and those persons who will assist therein as to any criminal record which they may have, and to disclose such information to the City
Clerk and, upon appeal, to the Council. The application shall also be deemed consent for the Fire Chief and the Planning and Building Inspector to
inspect said premises and report thereon.
6-12-7: REFERENCE OF APPLICATION:
Immediately upon receipt of a proper application, the City Clerk shall furnish copies thereof to the Chief of Police, Planning and Building Inspector and
the Fire Chief, each of whom shall make an investigation as specified in this Chapter and report back to the City Clerk within forty five (45) calendar
days after the receipt by the City Clerk of such application with a recommendation thereon. Failure of the Chief of Police, Planning and Building
Inspector or Fire Chief to report back to the City Clerk within the forty five (45) day period shall be treated by the City Clerk as a recommendation to
issue the permit.
6-12-8: INVESTIGATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Chief of Police shall determine if all the statements on the application are true and shall obtain the criminal record, if any, of the principal officers of
the organization, each person who will be responsible for the operation of the bingo game and those persons who will assist therein. He shall
recommend the issuance of the permit, except:
(A) In the event that he finds any of the statements on the application to be false, he may recommend against its issuance; and
(B) In the event that he finds any officer of the organization or any person who will be responsible for the operation of the bingo game or any person
who will assist therein to have been convicted within the last ten (10) years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery,
extortion or fraud, he shall recommend against its issuance.
6-12-9: INVESTIGATION BY THE PLANNING AND BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The Planning and Building Inspector shall investigate the premises and surroundings for the safety of the structure, adequacy of parking facilities and
any other condition which, in the opinion of the Inspector might endanger the public health, safety or well-being or constitute a nuisance. Should he
find that such a potential danger or nuisance exists, the Inspector may at his discretion recommend denial of the permit or the attachment thereto of
such conditions as will in his opinion adequately protect the public health, safety and well-being and preclude the existence of a nuisance; otherwise
he shall recommend its issuance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 133/436
6-12-10: INVESTIGATION BY FIRE CHIEF:
The Fire Chief shall investigate the premises as to the safety of the structure and for fire hazards and shall determine the maximum number of persons
who may be present in the premises during the conducting of bingo games. In the event he finds any condition to exist which might endanger the
public health, safety or well-being from the standpoint of structural safety or fire danger, he may recommend against the issuance of the permit or
recommend the attachment thereto of such conditions as will in his opinion adequately safeguard the public health, safety and well-being; otherwise
he shall recommend its issuance.
6-12-11: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
In the event the Chief of Police, Planning and Building Inspector or Fire Chief recommends against the issuance of the permit, the City Clerk shall
refuse to issue such permit and one-half (1/2) of any permit fee paid shall be refunded to the organization that filed the application.
6-12-12: APPEAL:
(A) Any applicant or permittee may appeal to the City Council from any order or action of the City Clerk respecting the issuance, denial, modification,
suspension or revocation of any permit.
6-12-13: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
In the event the City Clerk does not receive a recommendation against the issuance of the permit, he shall issue the same for a period of one year,
which permit shall contain the following information:
(A) The name and nature of the organization to whom the permit is issued;
(B) The address where the bingo games are authorized to be conducted;
(C) The maximum occupancy of the room in which the bingo games are to be conducted;
(D) The date of the commencement of the permit;
(E) The date of the expiration of the permit;
(F) The days and hours during which bingo may be conducted; and
(G) Such conditions as may have been recommended by the City Clerk, Chief of Police, Planning and Building Inspector or Fire Chief.
6-12-14: POSTING OF PERMIT:
A permittee shall keep the permit posted in a conspicuous place within the room in which bingo is being played during the conduct of any such game.
The permittee shall produce and exhibit the same whenever requested to do so by the City Clerk, Chief of Police, Planning and Building Inspector or
Fire Chief.
6-12-15: PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE:
Any permit granted under this Chapter shall not be transferable either as to the permittee or the location. Any use of the permit other than by the
named permittee or other than at the address where the bingo games are authorized to be conducted shall render the permit invalid.
6-12-16: CONDITIONS OF OPERATION:
It is unlawful for any bingo game to be operated in violation of any of the following conditions:
(A) All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the nonprofit organization;
(B) No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is
being conducted; (Ord. 789, 6-5-78)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 134/436
(C) The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or
both, for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 841, 5-17-82)
(D) Attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room as set forth in the permit;
(E) No permittee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or a loan, including but not limited to IOU's and checks to be held, nor shall patrons
be allowed to play on credit;
(F) No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game; (Ord. 789, 6-5-78)
(G) No permittee shall conduct any bingo game except between the hours of twelve noon and twelve midnight, nor shall any permittee conduct bingo
games for more than six (6) hours during any twenty four (24) hour period, nor shall any permittee conduct bingo games more than ten (10) days in
any one month. (Ord. 841, 5-17-82)
(H) No person shall violate any condition attached to the permit;
(I) The permittee shall post and keep posted in a conspicuous place within the room in which bingo is being played the rules and regulations of said
game;
(J) No person shall conduct any bingo game after the permit therefor has expired or during any period which it is suspended;
(K) The permittee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or
for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require that the property
owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.
(L) The permittee shall keep a written record of the name, address, phone number and date of birth of each person receiving a prize, valued at more
than ten dollars ($10.00), for three (3) years, which records shall be made available to the Chief of Police upon request.
6-12-17: OPERATORS:
Any bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the permittee. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any
bingo game. Only the permittee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, advertising, supervision, or other phase of the game, and no
wage, salary or other payment may be made on account thereof from funds received from such games.
6-12-18: OWNERSHIP OF EQUIPMENT:
All equipment used by the permittee in conducting the bingo game shall be owned by the permittee.
6-12-19: FINANCIAL INTEREST:
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the permittee authorized to conduct the bingo game shall have or hold a financial
interest in the conduct of such bingo game or the proceeds therefrom.
6-12-20: SPECIAL FUND REQUIRED:
With respect to organizations exempt from payment of bank or corporation taxes by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits
derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be
used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this Chapter, all proceeds
derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall
be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:
(A) Such proceeds may be used for prizes.
(B) A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses.
6-12-21: RECORDS:
Each permittee conducting a bingo game shall maintain detailed records of all proceeds, profits, expenditures, prizes and other expenses relating to
the operation of the bingo game. Such records shall be retained for a period of three (3) years and as long thereafter as may be required by any State
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 135/436
or Federal law. Such records, including related bank accounts, shall be open for inspection at any time by the Chief of Police, City Clerk or any State
or Federal official in the performance of his duties.
6-12-22: QUARTERLY REPORT:
Within fifteen (15) days after March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 during the permit period, the permittee shall file a report under the
penalty of perjury with the City Clerk containing the following information:
(A) Any changes in or additions to the information required in the application;
(B) The total amount of money received from the operation of bingo games during the previous three (3) month period;
(C) The total amount paid out in prizes;
(D) Detailed costs to the permittee of the operation of the bingo games; and
(E) All disbursements from the fund.
6-12-23: CHANGES IN CONDITIONS DURING PERMIT PERIOD:
Any change during the permit period in the organization of the permittee, its principal officers, the staff operating or assisting in the operation of the
bingo game, or the condition of the premises shall be immediately reported to the City Clerk who shall refer such changes to the appropriate official
who shall make an investigation thereof and, if he deems appropriate, recommend the suspension and revocation of the permit or the imposition of
additional conditions thereto, which suspension, revocation, or additional conditions shall be appealable to the City Council.
6-12-24: RESTRICTIONS ON TIME FOR CONDUCTING BINGO GAMES:
Any permit issued under this Chapter may be modified to further restrict the time for conducting bingo games as set forth in subsection (G) of Section
6-12-16 by the City Clerk upon the Clerk's own recommendation or upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Planning and Building
Inspector or the Fire Chief, which recommendation must be based upon good cause. The modified permit shall have the same force and effect as a
new permit. Such modification shall take effect and shall result in the automatic revocation of the prior permit fifteen days after the notice thereof
unless the permittee appeals the modification to the City Council. The original permit shall remain in effect pending decision by the Council.
6-12-25: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Any permit issued under this Chapter shall be immediately suspended by the City Clerk upon the Clerk's own recommendation or upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Planning and Building Inspector or the Fire Chief, based upon either a violation of this Chapter by the
permittee or its agent or the discovery of some condition which would have been grounds for denial of the permit application. Such suspension shall
result in the automatic revocation of the permit fifteen (15) days after the notice thereof unless the permittee appeals the suspension and revocation to
the City Council. The suspension shall remain in effect pending decision by the Council.
6-12-26: RENEWAL:
A permittee desiring to continue conducting a bingo game shall at least forty five (45) calendar days before the expiration of the permit make
application to the City Clerk for a renewal. The application for renewal shall be accompanied by the same fee and proofs and shall be processed in all
respects as an original application. (Ord. 789, 6-5-78)
Chapter 13
PARADE REGULATIONS
6-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following term is defined:
PARADE: Any march or procession consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulation or controls.
6-13-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, manage or participate in any parade without a written permit from the Chief of Police. "Persons" shall include corporation or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 136/436
association. All applications for permits shall be filed with the Chief of Police at least ten (10) days prior to the proposed date.
6-13-3: PERMIT, ISSUANCE OF:
(A) No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade which the Chief of Police finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise, or event, and is designed to be held purely for private profit.
(B) The Chief of Police shall issue the permit if he finds that:
1. The conduct of such parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
2. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police protection to the City;
3. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire;
4. The conduct of such parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
5. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; and
6. Such parade shall move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without stopping en route.
7. The applicant has executed and filed with the Chief of Police a written guarantee to save the City harmless from all liability and/or damage as a
result of granting the permit.
(C) Contents of Permit:
1. Date.
2. Organization applying for.
3. Event.
4. Route.
5. Starting time.
6-13-4: NOTICE OF REVOCATION OF PERMIT; APPEALS:
The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within five (5) days after filing thereof. If the Chief of Police disapproves the
application, he shall send by certified mail or personally deliver to the applicant within five (5) days after the date upon which the application was filed a
notice of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to
the City Council by filing a written notice thereof with the City Clerk within five (5) days of the notice of such action. The decision of the Council after a
hearing on such appeal shall be final. (Ord. 808, 11-5-79)
Chapter 14
CRIMES AGAINST PRIVATE PROPERTY
(Rep. by Ord. 97-5, 8-18-1997)
Chapter 15
POLICE DEPARTMENT CANINE UNITS
6-15-1: UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH CANINE UNITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously by any means, torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, or kill any
dog used by the City Police Department while any such dog is in the performance of the functions or duties of the Police Department or to wilfully
interfere with any such dog while it is being used in the performance of any of the functions or duties of the Department. (Ord. 823, 5-4-81)
Chapter 16
POOL HALLS
6-16-1: POOL HALL REGULATIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 137/436
The place where the billiard, bagatelle or pool table(s) are kept, shall be, at all times, quiet and orderly. No person(s) under the age of fifteen (15)
years shall be permitted to engage in any game of any kind therein, or to be in such place unless accompanied by a parent or guardian; that all
entrance doors containing glass are so constructed that they afford persons outside the place a clear and unobstructed view of the interior of the place
and the business therein conducted at all hours of the day and night, both when the same is open for business and when closed, and that no curtain,
screen, ground glass or frosted glass, blinds, shutters, partition, or any obstruction shall at any time be permitted or maintained in any room or part of
the building used for the business of the aforesaid, which shall in any manner obstruct or interfere with such view; and that the person(s) in charge of
each business shall not permit any person(s) under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain in said business after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of any day;
and that the place shall be closed at the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of each day; and that no business or games shall be conducted
therein during the hours while closed. (Ord. 835, 12-21-81)
Chapter 17
NOISE REGULATIONS
6-17-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the NOISE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SELMA. (Ord. 840, 4-19-1982)
6-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the particular provisions or the context requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning
and application of words and phrases used in this chapter, and except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in
this section, the definitions and provisions contained in title I, chapter 3 of this code shall also govern the construction, meaning and application of
words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or
phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be.
AMBIENT NOISE: The all encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near
and far. For the purpose of this chapter, "ambient noise level" is the level obtained when the noise level is averaged over a period of fifteen (15)
minutes, without inclusion of the offending noise, at the location and time of day at which a comparison with the offending noise is to be made. Where
the ambient noise level is less than that designated in this section, however, the noise level specified herein shall be deemed to be the ambient noise
level for that location.
District
Time
Sound
Level
Decibels
Residential 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 50
Residential 7:00 P.M. to 10:00 P.M. 55
Residential 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. 60
Commercial 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 60
Commercial 7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 65
Industrial Anytime 70
DECIBEL: A unit of sound level when the base of the logarithm is the tenth root of ten (10) and the quantities concerned are proportional to power.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to repair structures or
otherwise protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger or damage, or work by private or public utilities when restoring or repairing
utility service.
FREQUENCY: "Frequency" of a function periodic in time means the reciprocal of the primitive period. The unit is the hertz and shall be specified.
HERTZ: The complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs during a period.
MICROBAR: A unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics and is equal to one dyne per square centimeter.
PERIOD: "Period" of a periodic quantity means the smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself.
PERIODIC QUANTITY: Oscillating quantity, the values of which recur for equal increments of time.
SOUND LEVEL (Noise Level): In decibels (dB) is the sound pressure level as measured with the "A" weighting and slow response by a sound level
meter.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement
of sound levels which satisfies the pertinent specifications published by the American National Standards Institute, New York, New York, in "American
Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds". S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Includes, but is not limited to, minibikes and go-carts.
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound amplifying
equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios or tape players when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the
automobile radio is installed. "Sound amplifying equipment", as used in this Chapter, shall not include warning devices or radios on authorized
emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle, which are used only for traffic safety purposes.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 138/436
SOUND TRUCK: Any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or
attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.
6-17-3: DECIBEL MEASUREMENT CRITERIA:
Decibel measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be based on a reference sound pressure of 0.0002 microbars as
measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighted network.
6-17-4: MONITORING PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be employed for monitoring and evaluating noise in the community unless otherwise specified in this Chapter:
(A) The evaluation shall be conducted anytime of the day or night when the offending noise source is being operated.
(B) For outside measurements, the location selected for monitoring shall be at a point at least ten feet (10') from any building, wall or obstruction
(trees, bushes, etc.) whenever possible. In cases where no point on the property line satisfies this criteria, readings will be taken as far as possible
from the nearest obstruction and such distance will be noted. For inside measurements, the monitoring location shall be at least three feet (3') from
any wall.
(C) The sound level meter shall be equipped with an omnidirectional microphone.
(D) No individual other than the operator shall be within ten feet (10') of the sound level meter during the sample period.
(E) The ambient noise level shall be determined with the offending noise source not in operation, in the following manner:
1. Calibrate the sound level meter in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
2. Set the sound level meter on the "A" weighted network at slow response.
3. Without the offending noise source in operation, set the microphone in a vertical position on the complaint party's property with the microphone
head approximately four feet (4') above the ground or floor. The operator shall face the noise source and record the meter's instantaneous
response (reading) observed at fifteen (15) second intervals for a period of fifteen (15) minutes. The arithmetical average (mean) reading is
interpreted as the ambient noise level of that sampling point.
(F) With the offending noise source in operation, the operator shall again record the instantaneous response at the same location at fifteen (15)
second intervals for a fifteen (15) minute period, or for a noise source of less than fifteen (15) minutes, the operator shall record the instantaneous
response at fifteen (15) second intervals for the time the offending noise source is in operation. The arithmetical average (mean) response level
recorded while the offending noise source is in operation is interpreted as the offending noise level.
6-17-5: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED:
No person shall make, cause or suffer or permit to be made or caused upon any premises or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or place within the
City, any sound or noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing or working in the area,
unless such noise or sound is specifically authorized by or in accordance with this Chapter. The provisions of this Section shall apply to, but shall not
be limited to, the control, use and operation of the following noise sources:
(A) Radios, musical instruments, phonographs, television sets, tape decks or other machines or devices used for the amplification, production or
reproduction of sound or the human voice.
(B) Animals or fowl creating, generating or emitting any cry or behavioral sound.
(C) Machinery or equipment, such as fans, pumps, air conditioning units, engines, turbines, compressors, generators, motors or similar devices,
equipment or apparatus.
(D) Construction equipment or work, including the operation, use or employment of pile drivers, hammers, saws, drills, derricks, hoists or similar
construction equipment or tools.
6-17-6: PRIMA FACIE VIOLATION:
Any noise or sound exceeding the ambient noise level at the property line of any person offended thereby, or, if a condominium or apartment house,
within any adjoining living unit, by more than five (5) decibels shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of Section 6-17-5.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 139/436
6-17-7: SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS AND CHURCHES:
No person shall create any noise on any street, sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning or church while the same is in
use, or adjacent to any hospital, which noise unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients
in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such street, sidewalk or public place indicating the presence of a school, church or
hospital.
6-17-8: PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS:
No person, other than personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies, shall install, use or operate within the City a loudspeaker or sound
amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks,
addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any person or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public property
without first filing an application statement and obtaining approval thereof as set forth in this Section.
(A) Application Statements; Filing: Every user of such sound amplifying equipment shall file an application statement with the Police Chief five (5) days
prior to the date on which the sound amplifying equipment is intended to be used, which statement shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and user of the sound amplifying equipment;
2. The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment which shall include the wattage to be used, the volume in decibels of
sound which will be produced, and the approximate distance for which sound will be audible from the sound amplifying equipment;
3. The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used;
4. A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used;
5. The dates and times such equipment is intended to be used;
6. A statement as to the purpose for which the sound amplifying equipment is to be used.
(B) Application Statements; Approval: The Police Chief shall return to the applicant within five (5) working days an approved copy of the application
statement unless he finds that:
1. Use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic or pedestrian safety; or
2. The application statement required reveals that the applicant would violate any provisions of this Chapter or City Code.
(C) Disapproval: In the event the application statement is disapproved, the Police Chief shall endorse upon the statement his reasons for disapproval
and return it forthwith to applicant.
(D) Revocation or Suspension: Any application statement approved hereunder shall be revocable and may be revoked by the Police Chief when a fact
is found to exist which would have been a ground for refusal to approve same or when there has been a violation of any of the terms of this
Chapter. Said statement may be reinstated by the Police Chief upon terms or conditions reasonably calculated to alleviate the dereliction.
(E) Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any action of the Police Chief regarding an application statement may appeal such decision to the Council by
filing a written appeal within ten (10) days with the City Clerk, who shall deliver a copy thereof to the Police Chief and set the matter for public
hearing. The hearing shall be formal, except that the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The Council may continue the hearing from time to
time and shall render its decision within three (3) days after the close thereof. The Council may:
1. Reinstate or approve the application statement;
2. Delete, alter or improve any term or condition reasonably calculated to alleviate any dereliction; or
3. Revoke the approval of the application statement.
(F) Regulations: The commercial and noncommercial use of such sound amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. The only sound permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both.
2. The operation of such sound amplifying equipment shall only occur between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
each day.
3. No sound emanating from such sound amplifying equipment shall exceed fifteen (15) decibels above the ambient noise as measured at any
property line.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 3 of this subsection, such sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated within two hundred feet
(200') of churches, schools or hospitals.
5. In any event, the volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or cause annoyance or
discomfort to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness within the area of audibility.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 140/436
(G) Duration of Application Statement: Application statements approved pursuant to this Section shall be valid for the period specified thereon by the
Police Chief, which period shall not exceed one year. Statements approved hereunder for a full year shall be automatically renewed from year to
year without further application or filing; provided, that the Police Chief may fix an earlier termination date for any such statement at any time
following the initial renewal thereof, whenever he deems it in the public interest to do so, by mailing, at least five (5) days prior to the date so fixed,
a written notice of such fact to the applicant at the address shown in his application.
(H) Any application statement requesting approval for the use of a loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment in any City park, shall be filed with and
approved by the Director of Recreation, rather than the Police Chief. In all other respects, the procedures set forth in this Section shall be followed.
The Director of Recreation shall notify the Police Chief of each such application statement he approves.
6-17-9: EXCEPTIONS:
(A) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
1. Construction, repair or remodeling work accomplished pursuant to a building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or other construction permit
issued by the City or other governmental agency, or to site preparation and grading, provided such work takes place between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any day.
2. Emergency work.
3. Any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the State of California or the United States.
(B) Machinery and equipment installed in or affixed to realty on the effective date of this Chapter and having a fair market value of five hundred dollars
($500.00) or less on said date need not be brought into conformity herewith until __________. All other machinery and equipment installed in or
affixed to realty on the effective date of this Chapter need not be brought into conformity herewith until _____________.
6-17-10: PERMITS:
A permit may be issued authorizing noises prohibited by this Chapter whenever it is found that the public interest will be served thereby or that
extreme hardship will result from the strict enforcement hereof, as follows:
(A) Application for Permit: Application for permits shall be in writing, and shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
2. A general description of the equipment, apparatus, or other sound sources to be utilized, and the area in which it will be utilized.
3. An estimate of the maximum sound level which will be generated by the equipment, apparatus or sound source to be utilized and the basis for
such estimate.
4. The inclusive dates and times between which the sound will be generated.
5. Facts showing that the public interest will be served by the issuance of such permit or that extreme hardship will accrue to the applicant if such
permit does not issue.
(B) Criteria: Applications shall be filed with the city administrator, who shall approve or disapprove same within five (5) working days of the date of
filing. The criteria which shall be considered by the city administrator in determining whether the requested permit shall be issued will include, but
not be limited to, the following:
1. The level of the noise for which the permit is sought.
2. The ambient noise level in the vicinity where the sound source will be utilized.
3. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
4. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise will emanate.
5. The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise will emanate.
6. The time of day or night the noise will occur.
7. The duration of the noise.
8. Whether the noise will be recurrent, intermittent or constant.
(C) Issuance Of Permit: The city administrator shall issue the requested permit unless he finds, considering the aforementioned criteria, that the public
interest will suffer thereby and that such public detriment exceeds the hardship to be suffered by the applicant if the permit is not issued. In the
event the city administrator disapproves the application, he shall return same to the applicant with a statement of the reasons for such action.
In approving a permit hereunder, the city administrator may impose such conditions as he deems necessary to protect the public interest.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 141/436
(D) Revocation Or Suspension: Any permit issued hereunder shall be revocable and may be revoked by the city administrator when a fact is found to
exist which would have been a ground for refusal to approve same or when there has been a violation of any of the terms or conditions thereof.
(E) Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any action of the city administrator denying, revoking or imposing any condition on a permit may appeal such
decision to the city council by filing a written appeal within ten (10) days of such action with the city clerk. When a proper appeal has been filed, the
decision of the city administrator shall be set aside and a hearing shall be set before the council, noticed, and held, all in accordance with the rules
of a public hearing. The council may continue the hearing from time to time and shall render its decision within three (3) days after the close
thereof. The council may:
1. Direct the issuance of the permit;
2. Delete, alter or impose any term or condition on the permit reasonably calculated to alleviate any dereliction or protect the public interest; or
3. Uphold the denial of the permit. (Ord. 840, 4-19-1982)
6-17-11: PENALTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-17-12: INJUNCTION:
In addition to other remedies provided by law, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any
provision of this chapter, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which
endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject
to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 840, 4-19-1982)
Chapter 18
PUBLIC SAFETY ALARM SYSTEMS
6-18-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as the PUBLIC SAFETY ALARM SYSTEMS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2008-9, 11-17-2008)
6-18-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing burglary, robbery, disturbance, fire, and medical alarm systems within the city to
reduce false alarms and to provide the authority to establish fines for false alarms. (Ord. 2008-9, 11-17-2008)
6-18-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALARM SYSTEM: Any equipment designed or intended to notify persons of an emergency at a particular location to which the police department is
expected to respond; or for detection of an unauthorized entry or attempted entry into premises or a structure; or for alerting others to the commission
of an unlawful act, or both.
Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, silent alarms, audible alarms, and direct dial telephone devices. The following devices shall not
constitute alarm systems within the meaning of this chapter:
(A) Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles, trailers or trailer coaches1, vessels or aircraft;
(B) Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police department.
ALARM USER: Any person who owns or is entitled to the possession of any premises or structure on which an alarm system has been installed.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on, or an attempted entry into premises or a structure; or for alerting
others of the commission of an unlawful act, or any equipment designed or intended to notify persons of an emergency at a particular location to which
the police department is expected to respond, and which, when activated generates an audible sound on or off the premises.
AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEM: Any alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
DIRECT CONNECT ALARMS: An alarm system that is capable of transmitting a signal to an agency maintained by a local governmental entity,
including the city of Selma or its police department.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 142/436
EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS: Those false alarms exceeding one within a calendar year.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance, or the negligence of
the owner, lesser or his or her employees or agents, which activates a response by law enforcement or other emergency response providers when an
emergency condition does not exist; provided, however, alarms caused by acts of nature, bona fide power outages, or fire shall not be considered
false alarms. (Ord. 2008-9, 11-17-2008)
6-18-4: UNLAWFUL ALARMS:
(A) Excessive False Alarms: It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or maintain an alarm system within the city that emits excessive false
alarms.
(B) Unlawful Alarms In Excess Of Fifteen Minutes: It shall be unlawful for any audible alarm to not automatically cease transmission within fifteen (15)
minutes of activation. Should the alarm fail to silence after twenty (20) minutes, and the police department is unable to contact the user or his
representative, the police department will cause an alarm agent or company to respond and silence the alarm. All costs for silencing the alarm shall
be the responsibility of the alarm user. The costs to silence the alarm shall be a charge against the alarm user and shall constitute a debt of that
person and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied.
(C) Direct Dial Or Connection To Police Department: It shall be unlawful for automatic dialing systems, direct connection alarms or other direct dial
alarms to dial or connect to the Selma police department directly. (Ord. 2008-9, 11-17-2008)
6-18-5: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) False Alarms: Three (3) or more false alarms in any calendar year shall result in the imposition of a fine as determined by resolution of the city
council. All fines shall be payable to the city of Selma. An invoice shall be mailed to the alarm user within thirty (30) days of the false alarm. The
fine is due and owing not later than thirty (30) days after the date of mailing of the invoice. The date of mailing shall appear on the invoice.
(B) Violation Of Chapter: Except as otherwise specifically provided, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code section 36900, violation of any of
the provisions contained in this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by fines as determined by resolution of the city council.
(C) Remedies Cumulative: All remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and use of one or more remedies shall not bar the use of any other
remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-9, 11-17-2008)
Footnote 1: As defined in Veh.C. 415, 630 and 635.
Chapter 19
ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
6-19-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
Pursuant to the determination made and the authority granted by the state legislature under section 22660 of the Vehicle Code of the state to remove
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from private and public property as public nuisances, the city council hereby
makes the following findings and declarations:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including
highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering,
to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and
insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute
a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ABANDON: To desert, surrender, forsake or cede voluntary relinquishment of possession of a thing by the owner with intention of terminating his
ownership, but without vesting it in any other person.
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS: The costs to the city of performing the acts required under this chapter. The city council hereby determines that the
administrative costs are in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each vehicle removed if the vehicle is removed by or on behalf of the city
without a hearing pursuant to section 6-19-10 of this chapter. In those cases in which the enforcement authority conducts a hearing pursuant to section
6-19-11 of this chapter, he/she shall fix and determine the administrative costs which shall be the actual cost to the city of performing all of the acts
pertaining to the specific vehicle which is the subject of the hearing.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 143/436
CITY: The city of Selma.
COST OF REMOVAL: The actual cost to the city of having the vehicle removed.
DISMANTLED VEHICLE: Any vehicle that is partially or wholly disassembled.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY: Shall be the city of Selma's designee from code enforcement and Selma police department to conduct any inquiries
and all hearings.
HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term
"highway" includes streets.
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE: One which:
(A) Has no engine; or
(B) Has no operative cooling system; or
(C) Has no transmission; or
(D) Has no drive shaft; or
(E) Has no gasoline tank; or
(F) Is missing one or more wheels; or
(G) Has no windshield; or
(H) Cannot be started and caused to move under its own power a distance of at least two hundred (200) yards within twenty four (24) hours.
(I) Is not currently registered with the department of motor vehicles.
Where the owner or other person in possession of any vehicle described above contends that such vehicle is inoperative only due to the fact that it is
under repair, proof that missing parts have been ordered within a reasonable time, or are being repaired, may be accepted by the enforcement
authority as a basis for withholding further action under the provisions of this chapter for a reasonable time.
OWNER OF LAND: The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment.
OWNER OF VEHICLE: The last registered owner and the legal owner of record.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Property that belongs absolutely to an individual and that person has the exclusive right of disposition. Property of a specific,
fixed, and tangible nature, capable of being possessed and transmitted to another, such as houses, lands, vehicles, etc.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Does not include "highway".
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term "vehicle" also includes any part or portion of a vehicle which is less than a whole vehicle, and
all of the provisions of this chapter apply to a part or portion of a vehicle which is less than a whole vehicle. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
(A) A vehicle which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner so that it is not visible from the street or other public or private property.
(B) A vehicle which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle
dealer or a junkyard, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.
(C) Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than chapter 10
(commencing with section 22650) of division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the state and this chapter. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-4: OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in
addition to the other regulatory statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the state, the city, or any other legal entity or agency having
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-4.1: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY VISIBLE FROM PUBLIC STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to park or store a vehicle on any portion of private property visible from a public street or from private property, unless said vehicle
is operative and is parked on a driveway. For the purposes of this section, the word "driveway" shall mean and refer to a poured in place asphalt or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 144/436
concrete slab which covers less than fifty percent (50%) of the required front yard area and is connected to a public right of way by a curb cut. A
driveway may also be considered to be that portion of the property by which a reasonable and prudent observation, is designed or clearly intended to
be used for off street parking on private property. (Ord. 2007-13, 11-19-2007)
6-19-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the enforcement authority or other persons
authorized by him/her to administer and enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-6: ENTERING PROPERTY:
(A) Right To Enter: The enforcement authority and other persons authorized by him/her may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle
and to obtain information as to the ownership and identity of a vehicle when enforcing this chapter.
(B) Contract To Remove: If the city enters into a contract with any person to remove or cause the removal of vehicles which have been declared to be
public nuisances pursuant to this chapter, such persons may enter upon private or public property to remove such vehicles.
(C) Misdemeanor: Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who in any way denies, obstructs or hampers the entrance of the persons mentioned in
this section upon private or public property to carry out the aforementioned duties or who denies, obstructs or hampers the performance of such
duties by such persons after they have entered the property. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-7: VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE:
If it appears to the enforcement authority that an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle is located on private or public property,
he/she may follow such administrative procedures to secure voluntary removal of such vehicle as appear advisable in each individual case prior to
giving a notice of intention to abate pursuant to section 6-19-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-8: NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE:
If the enforcement authority cannot secure voluntary removal of the vehicle, pursuant to section 6-19-7 of this chapter, he/she shall give written notice
of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. The ten (10) day notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the vehicle. The
statement shall include notice to the property owner that the property owner may appear in person at a hearing or may present a sworn written
statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land with reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to
abate shall be mailed, certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal
owners of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notice
of intention to abate will also be mailed to the office of the department of the California highway patrol as per section 22669 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord.
2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-9: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
The registered or legal owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may request a hearing on the question of
abatement and removal of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and on the question of assessment of the administrative costs
and cost of removal against the property on which it is located. Such request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed with the enforcement
authority not more than ten (10) days after the date on which the notice of intention described in section 6-19-8 of this chapter was mailed by the
enforcement authority. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located files with the enforcement authority a sworn statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within said ten (10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a
hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting said statement. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-10: FAILURE TO REQUEST HEARING; REMOVAL; COSTS:
If no hearing is requested within the time limits specified in section 6-19-9 of this chapter, the enforcement authority shall cause the vehicle to be
removed and taken to a junkyard, automobile dismantling yard or refuse disposal site. In addition, the owner shall be required to pay the administrative
costs and the cost of removal, in the amounts set forth in section 6-19-2 of this chapter. The enforcement authority shall send a request for payment of
said costs to the owner of the property by regular mail and if he/she does not pay said costs within thirty (30) days after the date on which the letter
was mailed, the procedure set forth in subsection 6-19-18(B) of this chapter shall be followed. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-11: PUBLIC HEARING:
If a public hearing has been requested in accordance with the provisions of section 6-19-9 of this chapter, a public hearing shall be held on the
question of abatement and removal of a vehicle as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the
administrative costs and cost of removal against the property on which it is located. The enforcement authority shall cause notices of the time and
place of the hearing to be sent by regular mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized county assessment roll, the last registered and
legal owners of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 145/436
the California highway patrol, identifying vehicle. Said notices shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-
1-2004)
6-19-12: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
The public hearings under this chapter shall be conducted by the enforcement authority. The enforcement authority shall hear all pertinent evidence
offered by all interested persons, including testimony on vehicle condition and its location on private or public property. The technical rules of evidence
shall not be applicable to the hearing. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn
written statement for consideration at the hearing. The owner of the land may deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with
his/her reasons for such denial. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-13: DECISION BY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
(A) Order To Remove: At the conclusion of the public hearing, the enforcement authority may find that a vehicle has been abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of, in
accordance with section 6-19-15 of this chapter, and may determine that the administrative costs and the cost of removal are to be charged against
the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located.
(B) Costs Waived: If it is determined by the enforcement authority that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and
that he/she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the enforcement authority shall not assess administrative costs and the cost of
removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such landowner.
(C) Other Action: The enforcement authority may impose such conditions and take such other action as he/she deems appropriate under the
circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter if, in his/her opinion, the circumstances justify such action.
(D) Written Notice: Code enforcement officer or appointed designee of enforcement authority shall give written notice of his/her decision to all of the
interested persons to whom the notice of hearing was mailed. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-14: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after notice of the decision of the code enforcement officer has been mailed to
the interested parties, any person affected by the decision may file with the clerk of the city council a written notice of appeal from said decision. The
city council shall thereafter set the matter for hearing. The clerk of the city council shall give written notice of the hearing to all of the persons
mentioned in section 6-19-8 of this chapter. At the time and place set for the hearing, the city council shall hear the matter de novo and all of the
provisions of section 6-19-12 of this chapter shall be applicable to said hearing. The decision of the city council after such hearing upon the appeal is
final and conclusive as to all things involved in the matter. The clerk of the city council shall give written notice of the decision of the city council to all of
the persons to whom notice of the hearing was mailed. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-15: REMOVAL OF VEHICLE:
(A) Order To Remove: At any time after the enforcement authority orders an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle to be removed,
pursuant to section 6-19-13 of this chapter, any interested party may cause such vehicle to be removed. If the enforcement authority has assessed
administrative costs and the cost of removal against the property on which the vehicle is located, and the vehicle is voluntarily removed without the
cost to the city, only the administrative costs shall thereafter be collected from the owner of the land.
(B) City To Remove:
1. If no appeal has been filed and the vehicle has not been removed within ten (10) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after
the notice of the decision of the enforcement authority was mailed to the interested parties, the enforcement authority shall cause the vehicle to be
removed and taken to a junkyard, automobile dismantling yard or refuse disposal site.
2. If an appeal has been filed, and the vehicle has not been removed within ten (10) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after
the notice of the decision of the city council was mailed to the interested parties, the enforcement authority shall cause the vehicle to be removed
and taken to a junkyard, automobile dismantling yard or refuse disposal site. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-16: RECONSTRUCTION OF VEHICLE:
After a vehicle has been removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it
qualifies as a historical vehicle, pursuant to section 5004, California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-17: NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the enforcement authority shall give notice of the
removal to the department of motor vehicles of the state identifying the vehicle removed and transmit to said department any evidence of registration
available, including, but not limited to, registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 146/436
6-19-18: COLLECTION OF COSTS:
(A) Notice To Owner: If the enforcement authority has caused the vehicle to be removed from the property, and he/she has assessed administrative
costs and the cost of removal against the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located, the enforcement authority shall mail a notice to the
owner of the property of the administrative costs to be paid by the owner of the property. If the vehicle is voluntarily removed by any interested
party prior to the date of hearing, there shall be no administrative costs assessed or charged.
(B) Unpaid Costs: If the costs referred to in subsection (A) of this section are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date on which the notice referred
to therein is mailed to the owner of the property, the city council may direct the county auditor to place the unpaid costs on the county tax roll as a
special assessment against the property pursuant to section 25845 of the Government Code of the state. The assessment shall be transmitted to
the tax collector for collection. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-19: UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY:
Prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as provided in this chapter, the enforcement authority shall inventory any unclaimed personal
property found in such vehicle. The inventory shall be conducted in the presence of the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land upon which the
vehicle is located, if such persons can be located with reasonable effort. The enforcement authority shall retain and dispose of such property in the
same manner as any property found or abandoned in the city of Selma. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
6-19-20: PENALTIES:
(A) Failure To Remove: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an inoperative, abandoned, wrecked or
dismantled vehicle or part thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this
chapter or state law where such law is applicable. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an
action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney and with the
consent of the defendant, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction pursuant to section 19(c) of the California Penal
Code.
(B) Misdemeanor: Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
(C) Infraction: Any person convicted of any infraction of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that
a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. (Ord. 2004-12, 11-1-2004)
Chapter 20
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
6-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively described to them:
ALLEY: Every way set apart for public travel except streets.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines set aside for pedestrian travel.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: A way or place, of whatever nature, publicly maintained for purposes of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 93-8, 10-4-1993, eff. 11-4-
1993)
6-20-2: POSSESSION OF OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession or on his person any bottle, glass, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage
including wine or beer, which has been opened or a seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed, on any street, highway, alley or
sidewalk within the city. This section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the state. (Ord. 93-8,
10-4-1993, eff. 11-4-1993)
6-20-3: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages, as defined in the California Business And Professions Code: a) upon any public
place; b) while on private property opened to public view without the express permission of the owner, his agent, or the person in lawful possession
thereof. This section shall not be construed or interpreted as applicable to any act or acts prohibited or punishable by state law, but shall be limited to
permitted subjects of local regulation not preempted by state law.
For purposes of this section only, "public place" shall mean any alley, street, highway, sidewalk, park, parkway, city parking lot, playground, school
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 147/436
grounds, bus station, or in any place on public property opened to the general public, which place is not licensed for the consumption of such alcohol
on the premises. (Ord. 93-8, 10-4-1993, eff. 11-4-1993)
6-20-4: PIONEER VILLAGE; ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No person shall have in his or her possession, or consume any beer, wine, or other intoxicating beverage on the grounds of Pioneer Village or in any
of the structures therein. No organization shall sponsor or hold an event, gathering, or public function which permits the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in violation of this section. A community organization may apply to the council for permission to sponsor or hold an event, gathering, or
function involving the consumption of alcoholic beverages otherwise prohibited by this section. The council and chief of police may impose conditions
to protect the public health and safety. Any organization requesting an approval under this section must present written evidence that the organization
has obtained from the internal revenue service an exemption determination under internal revenue code section 501. This section shall not be deemed
to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the state. (Ord. 93-8, 10-4-1993, eff. 11-4-1993)
6-20-5: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION AT THE SELMA ARTS CENTER:
The city of Selma or a nonprofit corporation duly organized and existing for the purpose of soliciting funds, donations, grants, and/or charitable
contributions for the improvement or operation of the Selma Arts Center, or for promoting the activities or functions to be carried on at the Selma Arts
Center, or for any other reason related to the operation of the Selma Arts Center, shall be permitted to sponsor, conduct and hold events, gatherings
and functions that involve the possession, consumption or service for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the Selma Arts Center or
any adjacent or accessible sidewalk, street, alley, or city owned parking lot or other public property owned by the city of Selma that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter. The chief of police may impose any condition deemed necessary to protect the public health and safety including, but not
limited to, the establishment of appropriate barricades, safety controls or establishment and implementation of any regulation deemed necessary to
protect the public health and safety. (Ord. 2013-1, 2-19-2013)
Chapter 21
GRAFFITI
6-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms and phrases as used in this chapter shall mean:
AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CONTAINER: Any aerosol or pressurized container of paint and/or any wide tipped marker pens exceeding four (4)
millimeters in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water when dry.
GRAFFITI: Any unauthorized inscription, work, figure, design, writing or picture which is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted upon any public
property or any structure, wall, fence, sidewalk, sign, public utility box or any structural component of any building, bridge, structure or any facility in
public view to any person utilizing any public street in the city, including, but not limited to, any roadway, parkway, sidewalk or alley. (Ord. 93-11, 1-18-
1994)
6-21-2: SALE, EXCHANGE OR TRANSFER OF AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINERS OR WIDE TIPPED MARKER PENS TO
MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise transfer or cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, given, loaned or
otherwise transferred any aerosol spray paint container or wide tipped marker pen, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 93-11, 1-
18-1994)
6-21-3: POSSESSION BY MINORS:
It is unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is in a public place or on private property, without the consent of the owner,
tenant or operator thereon, and who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, to possess an aerosol spray paint container or wide tipped marker
pen. (Ord. 93-11, 1-18-1994)
6-21-4: DISPLAY OF AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CANS BY LICENSED BUSINESS PERSONS:
Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint containers, or wide tipped
marker pens, shall store or cause such aerosol spray paint containers or marker pens to be stored in an area viewable by, but not accessible to the
public in the regular course of business without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such marker pens or paint containers. (Ord.
93-11, 1-18-1994)
6-21-5: SIGNS REQUIRED:
Any person engaged in the retail sale of aerosol spray paint containers and/or wide tipped marker pens, shall display at the location of retail sales a
sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers which states as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 148/436
It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend or give to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is not accompanied by a responsible
adult, an aerosol or pressurized container of paint or wide-tipped marker pens exceeding four (4) millimeters in width, containing anything other than a
solution which can be removed with water when dry.
(Ord. 93-11, 1-18-1994)
6-21-6: REMOVAL:
(A) General: Any person applying graffiti within the City shall have the duty to remove same in a manner approved by the City and the property owner
within twenty four (24) hours after notice by the City or a public or private owner of the property involved. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti
shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Consistent with Civil Code section 1714.1, where graffiti is applied by minors, the parent or
guardian shall be responsible for such removal or payment of cost thereof.
(B) Public Property: Whenever the City Manager or his designee representative determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the City, it shall
be removed as soon as possible. When the property is owned by a public entity, other than the City, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized by
the City Manager or his representative, and removal undertaken by the City only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction
over the property.
(C) Property Owner Responsibility: It is unlawful for any person who is the owner of or in possession and control of real property or who is otherwise
primarily responsible for control of the property or repair or maintenance of property in the City of Selma to permit property that has been defaced
with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of seventy two (72) hours after service, by personal delivery or by certified mail or following the posting,
at a conspicuous place on the property where graffiti is located, written notice to the owner and to any lessee, occupant or other person having
possession of real property within the City that graffiti must be removed within seventy two (72) hours of the date of the service of the notice. The
notice shall apprise the property owner or other lessee or person in possession of the real property that the graffiti must be removed, repaired or
painted over and that a failure to do so is cause for the City or its contractor to enter upon the property and to abate the public nuisance by
removing or painting over the graffiti located on the property. If the property owner or responsible party in possession fails to remove the offending
graffiti within the time specified by this section, the City may paint, repair or otherwise remove the graffiti and the cost thereof shall be assessed
upon the property as a lien in the manner provided for by this section.
(D) Cost Recovery: Whenever the City is required to abate graffiti as a public nuisance as allowed by this section, the City may recover pursuant to
California Government Code section 38773, the cost of such abatement through the assessment of a lien against the property on which the
nuisance was maintained. Prior to the recordation of a lien against such property for the recovery of abatement and related administrative costs,
the City shall, in accordance with section 38773.1 or 38773.5 of the Government Code provide written notification, by registered or certified mail, to
the property owner that a lien will be assessed against the property and such costs will continue as a lien upon the property until it is paid. On
receipt of such notification, a property owner may, within the time and in the manner prescribed by title I, chapter 20 of this Code appeal the
proposed assessment of the lien on the property by filing an appeal with the City Manager in the manner specified by section 1-20-8 of this Code
and may pursue all appeal rights provided for by that chapter. Following the conclusion of any such appeal, or if the notice is not timely appealed,
the lien as proposed by the notice shall be recorded against the real property.
(E) Responsible Party For Real Property: Notwithstanding any term or provision to the contrary in any oral or written lease or rental agreement,
property management, maintenance or similar agreement granting possession or control of the real property to another, an owner or owners of real
property in the City of Selma in the possession or under the control of any other person, leasee, tenant, property manager, caretaker or custodian
of any type shall be deemed to have consented to the removal of graffiti from the real property by such leasee, tenant, property manager,
caretaker, custodian or other person in possession or control of the real property, upon the issuance of a notice to remove the graffiti to such
person, leasee, tenant, property manager, caretaker or custodian. The property owner or owners shall be deemed to have constructive knowledge
of a notice to remove graffiti from the real property that has been posted on the property or served on any person lawfully in possession or control
of the property including any leasee, tenant, property manager, caretaker or custodian. It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property in the City
of Selma to take any adverse action against a person lawfully in possession or control of the property for having complied or attempted to comply
with a notice to remove graffiti on the property issued by the City of Selma. (Ord. 2018-5, 5-7-2018)
6-21-7: RESPONSIBILITY:
Any individual who is found guilty of violation of subsection 6-21-6(A) of this chapter shall pay restitution to the property owner, in addition to
authorized penalties. If the violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for payment of restitution. If unable to pay, the juvenile may
be permitted to work off his/her payment under the direction of at least one parent or guardian by painting out any graffiti. (Ord. 93-11, 1-18-1994)
6-21-8: PENALTIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-21-9: ALTERNATIVES:
Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent the City from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under
applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. (Ord. 93-11, 1-18-1994)
6-21-10: EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON STATE PENAL CODE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 149/436
No portion of this chapter is intended to supersede any California Penal Code sections which govern similar actions, such as section 594.1 of the
Penal Code. It is intended that this chapter be construed as supplementing State law concerning graffiti and the sale and possession of aerosol spray
paint containers. (Ord. 93-11, 1-18-1994)
Chapter 22
MINORS
6-22-1: LIABILITY OF PARENTS FOR WILFUL MISCONDUCT OF MINOR:
Any act of wilful misconduct of a minor which results in injury or death to another person or in any injury to the property of another shall be imputed to
the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes of civil damages, and the parent or guardian having custody and
control shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for all damages resulting from the wilful misconduct.
The joint and several liability of the parent or guardian having custody and control of a minor under this Section shall not exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for each tort of the minor, and in the case of an injury to a person, imputed liability shall be further limited to medical, dental and hospital
expenses incurred by the injured person, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The liability imposed by this Section is in addition to any
liability now imposed by law. (Ord. 94-5, 4-4-94)
6-22-2: DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY WITH PAINT; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
Any act of wilful misconduct of a minor which results in the defacement of property of another with paint or a similar substance shall be imputed to the
parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes of civil damages, including court costs and attorney's fees, to the prevailing
party, and the parent or guardian having custody and control shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any damages resulting from the
wilful misconduct, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each tort of the minor. (Ord. 94-5, 4-4-94)
Chapter 23
RECOVERY OF EXPENSE FOR RESPONSE TO ALCOHOL OR DRUG RELATED
INCIDENTS
6-23-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
It is the intent of this Chapter for the City to recover the expenses of an emergency response to any incident involving persons who operate a motor
vehicle, a boat or vessel, or a civil aircraft while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic
beverage and any drug, as authorized under Government Code sections 53150_53158. (Ord. 94-4, 4-4-94)
6-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer or any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contain
one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or
combined with other substances.
DRUG: Includes any controlled substance or immediate precursor which is listed in any schedule in California Health and Safety Code section 11054,
11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058.
EXPENSE OF A POLICE RESPONSE: The costs incurred by the City in responding directly to an incident involving persons who operate a motor
vehicle, a boat or vessel, or a civil aircraft while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic
beverage and any drug. It includes the cost of providing police, firefighting, rescue and emergency medical services, together with the salaries of the
responding police personnel, damages and clean up to City property and injuries to City personnel.
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property which may be propelled or moved, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle, a boat or vessel,
or a civil aircraft. (Ord. 94-4, 4-4-94)
6-23-3: LIABILITY FOR CITY EXPENSE:
(A) A person who operates a vehicle, while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic
beverage and any drug, whose negligent operation of the vehicle caused by that influence proximity causes any incident resulting in an appropriate
emergency response, and any person whose intentional wrongful conduct proximity causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency
response, is liable for the expense of the police response.
(B) The expense of police response is a charge against the person liable for the expense. If the person liable is a minor, the parents or guardian of the
minor are liable.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 150/436
(C) The charge is a debt and the City may collect the debt in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under an express or implied contract.
The debt bears interest at the rate of nine percent (9%) a year. Interest accrues from the due date stated on the billing. (Ord. 94-4, 4-4-94)
6-23-4: LIMIT ON LIABILITY:
The liability under this Chapter for the expense of police response may not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 94-4, 4-4-94)
6-23-5: EVIDENCE NOT ADMISSIBLE IN CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS:
The testimony, admission or statement made by a person in a proceeding to collect the expense of a police response is not admissible in a criminal
proceeding arising out of the same incident. (Ord. 94-4, 4-4-94)
Chapter 24
EXPOSURE OF MINORS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS
6-24-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard the life, health, property, and public welfare in keeping with the character of
the city by establishing standards to control exposure of minors to tobacco products and to regulate the manner in which tobacco products are sold.
(Ord. 99-6, 5-17-1999)
6-24-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases shall be given their customary and usual meanings and shall be interpreted and construed
accordingly, unless a different meaning is expressly ascribed thereto.
E-CIGARETTE OR VAPOR CIGARETTE: Battery powered devices that convert liquid nicotine and/or propylene glycol and/or vegetable glycerin into a
mist or vapor that is inhaled.
EMPLOYEE: Any person in the service of another under any contract of hire, express or implied, oral or written, where the employer has the power or
right to control and direct the employee in the material details of how the work is to be performed. Employee also includes any person volunteering his
or her time or service.
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: Any device, product, equipment or material of any kind that is intended or designed for use for smoking, inhaling or
ingesting tobacco, notwithstanding that the device, product, equipment or material may also be used for smoking, inhaling or ingesting any controlled
substances. Tobacco paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, metal, ivory, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes; water pipes,
bongs, cigarette papers or wrappers, cigarette rolling machines, blunt wraps as defined in section 308 of the Penal Code, hookahs or similar devices
constructed with a receptacle or container in which water or some other liquid may be placed into which smoke passes and is cooled in the process of
being inhaled or ingested.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco,
dipping tobacco, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically detectable amounts of nicotine
that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human
body, but does not include any product specifically approved by the federal food and drug administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product
dependence.
TOBACCO STORE OR TOBACCO SHOP: A retail or wholesale business or any person that sells, offers for sale or offers to exchange for any form of
consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia and has fifteen percent (15%) or more of its square feet in the establishment used
for the sale or display of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia.
VENDOR ASSIST: Only store employees have access to the tobacco product and assist a customer by supplying the product. The customer does not
take possession of the product until it is purchased. (Ord. 2013-11, 12-2-2013)
6-24-3: CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO, SALE OF TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or indirectly, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any cigarettes, tobacco
or any compounds of tobacco used in filling up or making up of a cigarette or to give or sell any cigarette papers to minors. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
6-24-4: E-CIGARETTES, SALES TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or indirectly, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any e-cigarette or any
compound used to consume vapor from e-cigarettes. (Ord. 2013-11, 12-2-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 151/436
6-24-5: USE OF ELECTRONIC OR VAPOR CIGARETTES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use e-cigarettes or vapor cigarettes anywhere in the city where the use of tobacco is prohibited. (Ord. 2013-11,
12-2-2013)
Chapter 25
SOCIAL HOST; CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY UNDERAGE
PERSON(S)
6-25-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the SOCIAL HOST ORDINANCE. When used in this chapter, "this chapter" means the social host ordinance.
(Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-2008)
6-25-2: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
The council finds and determines as follows:
(A) The occurrence of parties on private property where alcohol is served to or consumed by underage person(s) is harmful to the underage person(s)
and a threat to public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of property, and the general welfare, of the communities where such parties are held.
(B) Underage person(s) often obtain alcoholic beverages at parties held at private residences or at rented residential and commercial premises that
are under the control of a person who knows or should know of the underage service and/or consumption. Person(s) responsible for the
occurrence of parties on private property over which they have possession or control have failed to ensure that alcoholic beverages are neither
served to nor consumed by underage person(s) at these parties.
(C) Control of parties on private property where underage person(s) are being served or consuming alcohol is necessary because such activity poses
a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the public. Police ability to abate gatherings where alcohol is served to or consumed by
underage person(s) on private property will result in a decrease in abuse of alcohol by underage person(s), physical altercations and injuries,
neighborhood vandalism, and excessive noise disturbance thereby improving public safety.
(D) Problems associated with such parties at which alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by underage person(s) are difficult to prevent and
deter unless law enforcement has the legal authority to direct the host to disperse the party.
(E) Law enforcement, fire and other emergency response services personnel have and are required to respond, sometimes on multiple occasions, to
parties on private property at which alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by underage person(s). Responses to such parties result in a
disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources and cause a drain on staff, leaving other areas of the city with inadequate protection.
(F) Person(s) held responsible for abetting or tolerating parties will be more likely to properly supervise and stop such conduct at parties held on
private property under their possession and control. The prohibitions found in this chapter are reasonable and expected to deter the consumption
of alcoholic beverages by underage person(s) by holding person(s) who knowingly allow service to or consumption by underage person(s)
responsible. (Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-2008)
6-25-3: PURPOSE:
The council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is:
(A) To protect public health, safety and general welfare;
(B) To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of alcohol by underage person(s); and
(C) To reduce the costs of providing law enforcement, fire and other emergency response services to parties by imposing a civil fee against social
hosts and landowners (including landlords) and for the recovery of costs associated with providing law enforcement, fire and other emergency
response services to parties where alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by underage person(s). (Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-2008)
6-25-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section as follows:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 152/436
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined
with other substances.
JUVENILE: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
PARTY OR PARTIES: An assembly of two (2) or more individuals for any purpose, unless all of the individuals attending the assembly are members of
the same household or immediate family.
PERSON(S): Includes, but is not limited to, any business, corporation, or other organization.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: A hotel or motel room or bed and breakfast unit, home, yard, apartment, condominium, mobile home, cottage, cabin, trailer,
tent or other dwelling unit, abandoned or vacant warehouse or other building or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or
permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without
compensation.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person or persons with a right of possession in the residence or other private property on which a party is conducted,
including, but is not limited to:
(A) An owner of the private property;
(B) A tenant or lessee of the private property;
(C) The person(s) in charge of the private property; and
(D) The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the party or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such
party.
UNDERAGE PERSON(S): Any person under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-2008)
6-25-5: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY UNDERAGE PERSON(S):
Except as permitted by article I, section 4 of the California constitution, it is unlawful for any person to:
(A) Knowingly permit, allow, or host a party on his or her private property or premises under his or her control where underage person(s) are present
and alcoholic beverages are being served to or consumed by any underage person(s).
(B) This section shall not apply to conduct involving the service to or consumption of alcoholic beverages, which occurs exclusively between an
underage person(s) and his or her parent or legal guardian or during the course of a religious ceremony conducted by an ordained minister.
(C) This section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the California department of alcohol and beverage control. (Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-
2008)
6-25-6: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
Whenever a responsible person is present at a private property at the time an underage person(s) is being served or consumes any alcoholic
beverage thereon, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person(s) had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge specified in section 6-25-
5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-2008)
6-25-7: SEPARATE VIOLATION FOR EACH INCIDENT:
Each incident in violation of section 6-25-5 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. An "incident" refers to each time law enforcement, fire, or
other emergency personnel respond to a party, i.e., if a response is required multiple times to the same party on the same date, each response shall
be a separate offense. (Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-2008)
6-25-8: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
(A) A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period
not to exceed six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-2008)
6-25-9: RESERVATION OF LEGAL OPTIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 153/436
(A) The city of Selma does not waive its right to seek other legal remedies or procedures. This section in no way limits the authority of peace officers
or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct currently regulated, nor do they limit in any way the prosecution's
ability to initiate and prosecute a criminal prosecution for any violation of a criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances.
(B) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Selma city council hereby declares that it would
have passed and adopted this chapter and each and all provisions thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more of said provisions be
declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 2008-8, 9-15-2008)
Chapter 26
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING CONTRACTS
6-26-1: DEFINITIONS:
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: An agreement between the city of Selma and a franchisee awarding a nonexclusive franchise to franchisee for
nonconsensual towing subject to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement.
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING: The towing of vehicles in circumstances not requiring the owner's consent. (Ord. 2009-7, 8-17-2009)
6-26-2: AUTHORITY TO AWARD:
The city council of the city of Selma may award nonexclusive, nonconsensual franchises in the city pursuant to the following:
(A) The granting of a nonconsensual towing franchise shall be done by a franchise agreement approved by resolution of the city council of the city of
Selma and executed by the city manager or his or her designee.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of nonconsensual towing within the city unless such person is an employee or agent
of the city, or is a party, or agent or employee of a party, to a "franchise agreement" as defined in this chapter.
(C) That all nonexclusive, nonconsensual towing franchises shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified in the franchise agreement(s), this
code, applicable resolutions, and any other federal, state or local law.
(D) The city of Selma may award any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. The city of Selma may limit the number of
franchises awarded based upon, but not limited to, the number of franchises necessary or required, as determined by the city manager or his or
her designee, to effectively nonconsensually tow vehicles as necessary or required by this chapter or any other law.
(E) The city of Selma may, by resolution of the city council set and/or amend, from time to time, a referral fee to be paid by franchisees for each tow in
an amount not to exceed the actual costs borne by the city related to nonconsensual towing of vehicles as described in this chapter.
(F) In granting a nonexclusive, nonconsensual towing franchise, the city council of the city of Selma may provide for such other and additional terms
and conditions as the council deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 2009-7, 8-17-2009)
6-26-3: NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES:
Nothing in this chapter precludes the city of Selma from using any other available method to lawfully tow vehicles without the consent of the owner,
including, but not limited to, chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. 2009-7, 8-17-2009)
Chapter 27
REGULATION OF CONSUMPTION OF MARIJUANA
6-27-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public within the jurisdiction of the city of Selma. The city council
of the city of Selma finds that the use of marijuana may be injurious to members of the public, including minors, who are not permitted to consume
marijuana. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
6-27-2: REGULATION OF CONSUMPTION OF RECREATIONAL OR MEDICAL MARIJUANA:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 154/436
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume marijuana or marijuana products, whether recreational or medical, in the city of Selma, unless
such smoking, ingesting or consumption occurs entirely within a private residence. "Within a private residence" shall mean inside habitable areas and
shall not include garages, whether attached or detached, and other accessory buildings, unless those buildings are at all times fully enclosed during
the consumption. Medical marijuana may also be consumed within a clinic, healthcare facility, residential care facility, or residential hospice licensed
pursuant to applicable provisions of the California Health And Safety Code. All consumption shall be done in a manner so as not to cause a nuisance
to nearby residents with noxious odors or other adverse health and safety impacts. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
6-27-3: COST RECOVERY FOR RESPONSE REQUIRED FOR MARIJUANA RELATED ACTIVITY:
In the event it is determined by the appropriate department head of the city that a call for service or response to any event or disturbance, including,
but not limited to, any fire, provision of medical assistance, or response by law enforcement is the result of use or consumption of medical or
nonmedical marijuana, or is caused by any activity related to nonmedical or medical marijuana including sale, transport, distribution, cultivation or
processing of marijuana or marijuana products, the department head may issue an invoice or bill in the form of a citation to the person responsible for
creating or causing the event or disturbance in the amount of the actual cost incurred by the department as a result. The invoice or bill so issued shall
conform to the extent practicable to the provisions of title I, chapter 20 of this code and shall be subject to an appeal as provided by section 1-20-9 of
this code. Following the conclusion of any such appeal, in the event the validity of the invoice or bill is affirmed on appeal, or if the bill or invoice is not
timely appealed, the bill or invoice may be collected in the manner provided by section 1-20-11 of this code, or by action in the courts on the debt
thereby created. Title I, chapter 20 of this code shall govern the time and manner by which an appeal of any invoice or bill is taken. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-
2016)
6-27-4: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and constitute a public nuisance and shall be enforced in accordance with the procedures set forth
in title I, chapter 4 of this code or other applicable section of this code. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 28
AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATIONS; PROHIBITED LOCATIONS
6-28-1: DEFINITIONS:
AGGRESSIVE OR ABUSIVE MANNER: A solicitation via any of the following acts or conduct:
(A) Intentionally coming within three feet (3') of a solicited person unless and until that person has indicated, by word or conduct, that he or she
wishes to make a donation;
(B) Intentionally blocking the path of or impeding the passage or free use of a sidewalk or public right of way by a solicited person;
(C) Intentionally falling behind, beside or in front of a solicited person after that person has indicated, by word or conduct, that he or she does not
wish to make a donation;
(D) Continuing to request a donation from a solicited person after that person has indicated, by word or conduct, that he or she does not wish to
make a donation;
(E) Approaching a solicited person when that person is entering or exiting a motor vehicle or assisting another in doing so;
(F) Rending any service to a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, any cleaning, washing, protecting, guarding or repairing of said vehicle or
any portion thereof, without the consent of the owner, operator or occupant of such vehicle, and thereafter requesting payment for the
performance of such service, regardless of whether such vehicle is stopped, standing, or parked;
(G) Threatening a solicited person, by word or conduct, with physical harm or violence;
(H) Using profane or abusive language toward a solicited person;
(I) Intentionally touching or attempting to touch a solicited person without that person's consent;
(J) Any other words or conduct that would cause a reasonable person, in the position of the solicited person, to fear for his or her safety, the safety
of his or her property or the safety of another person accompanying the solicited person;
(K) Intentionally blocking the path of a motor vehicle.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 155/436
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE OR ATM: An electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit,
deposit, savings, or convenience account.
BANK: A member bank of the federal reserve system, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution
organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank deposits of which are insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation.
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS: Any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorater or who operates a business that conducts deferred
deposit transactions pursuant to California Financial Code sections 12000 et seq., and 23000 et seq., and California Civil Code section 1789.30, or
any other similar business.
CREDIT UNION: A federal credit union and any state chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the administrator of the national
credit union administration.
PUBLIC PLACE: A place, whether publicly or privately owned, to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is
not limited to: any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, doorway,
entrance, lobby, or other portion of any business establishment including an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed
for actual residents.
SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION: A federal and savings and loan association and any "insured institution" is defined by section 401 of the
national housing act, as it may be amended, and any federal credit union as defined in section 2 of the federal credit union act, or as it may be
amended.
SOLICITATION: Any request, by words or physical gesture, made in person seeking an immediate donation or contribution of money or other item of
value. For the purposes of this chapter, a donation also includes the purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value under circumstances
where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is a donation or contribution. For the purposes of this chapter, solicitation includes to
solicit or beg. Solicitation, for the purposes of this chapter, does not include a person who is soliciting by use of passive displays or a sign or other
indication that he or she is seeking donations or contributions, or when he or she does not address the solicitation to any specific person other than in
response to an inquiry by that person. (Ord. 2014-2, 2-18-2014)
6-28-2: AGGRESSIVE OR ABUSIVE SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
(A) No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in an aggressive or abusive manner in any public place. (Ord. 2014-2, 2-18-2014)
6-28-3: ALL SOLICITATION PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED LOCATIONS:
(A) Prohibited Locations: All solicitation is prohibited in the following specified locations:
1. Banks and ATMs. No person shall solicit within fifty feet (50') of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union,
check cashing business during its business hours or within fifty feet (50') of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for
customer's use;
2. Bus stop, public transportation vehicle, or facility;
3. Parking lot or structure or any street or highway median;
4. A queue or line of two (2) or more persons waiting to be admitted to a retail or commercial establishment, a place of amusement, or waiting to
purchase an item or ticket;
5. An outside dining area or motor vehicle drive-through lane of a restaurant or other dining establishment serving food for immediate consumption.
(B) Motor Vehicles:
1. Solicitation Prohibited: No person shall approach an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle (as detailed by the California Vehicle Code) for the
purpose of soliciting while such vehicle is located in any public place.
2. Exemptions: Subsection (B)1 of this section shall not apply to any of the following:
(a) To solicitations related to business which is being conducted on the subject premises by the owner, lawful tenants, or other authorized
person;
(b) Solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle or the lawful towing of a motor
vehicle;
(c) Solicitations related to onetime or annual fundraising by community groups including: 1) sales of the Annual Kids Day newspaper benefiting
Children's Hospital Of Central California; 2) annual or occasional fundraisers by the Selma Peace Officers or Selma Firefighters Associations;
or 3) any other fundraising event approved by the city manager.
(C) Penalty: A violation of this chapter is subject to the penalties set forth in title I, chapter 4 of this code.
(D) Nonexclusive: Nothing set forth in this chapter is intended to be an exclusive penalty or remedy and does not prohibit the application of any other
penalty or remedy available under federal, state, or local law. (Ord. 2014-2, 2-18-2014)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 156/436
Chapter 29
SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCT USE
6-29-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE: Means an electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including
any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Means any place, publicly or privately owned, which is open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement.
REASONABLE DISTANCE: Means a distance of twenty five feet (25') in any direction from an area in which smoking is prohibited.
RECREATIONAL AREA: Means any area that is owned, controlled or used by the City of Selma and open to the general public for recreational
purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes but is not limited to parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports
fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, skateboard parks,
amusement parks, and beaches. The term "recreational area" shall also include Pioneer Village.
SMOKE: Means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization, when the apparent or
usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing
material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term "smoke"
includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic smoking device vapors, cannabis smoke, and crack cocaine smoke.
SMOKING: Means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted, heated, or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic smoking
device, cannabis or any plant product intended for human inhalation.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Means:
(A) Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, little cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; and
(B) Any electronic smoking device.
(C) Notwithstanding any provision of subsections (A) and (B) of this definition to the contrary, "tobacco product" includes any component, part, or
accessory intended or reasonably expected to be used with a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. "Tobacco product" does not
include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for
other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
UNENCLOSED AREA: Means any area that is not an enclosed area. (Ord. 2018-6, 5-7-2018)
6-29-2: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCT USE IN UNENCLOSED AREAS:
(A) Smoking and the use of tobacco products is prohibited in the unenclosed areas of the following places within the City of Selma:
1. Recreational areas;
2. Other public places, when being used for a public event, including but not limited to a farmers' market, parade, craft fair, festival, or any other
event open to the general public, provided that smoking is permitted on streets and sidewalks used only as pedestrian or vehicular
thoroughfares, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
(B) Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person, employer, or nonprofit entity with legal control over any property from prohibiting smoking and tobacco
product use on any part of such property, even if smoking or the use of tobacco products is not otherwise prohibited in that area. (Ord. 2018-6, 5-7-
2018)
6-29-3: REASONABLE SMOKING DISTANCE REQUIRED:
(A) Smoking in all unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent into an
enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except while the person smoking is actively passing on the way to another destination.
(B) Smoking in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any unenclosed areas in which smoking is prohibited under
this chapter, except while the person smoking is actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any
unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. (Ord. 2018-6, 5-7-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 157/436
6-29-4: OTHER REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS:
(A) No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit smoking or the use of tobacco products in an area which is under the legal or de
facto control of that person, employer, or nonprofit entity and in which smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited by law.
(B) No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly or intentionally permit the presence or placement of ash receptacles, such as, for example,
ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the legal or de facto control of that person, employer, or nonprofit entity and in which smoking or the
use of tobacco products is prohibited by law, including, without limitation, within a reasonable distance required by this chapter from any area in
which smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the presence of ash receptacles in violation of this
subsection shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking or the use of tobacco products in violation of any provision of this chapter.
(C) No person shall dispose of used smoking or tobacco product waste within the boundaries of an area in which smoking or tobacco product use is
prohibited, including within any reasonable distance required by this chapter.
(D) Except as otherwise provided by subsection (E) of this section, a person, employer, or nonprofit entity that has legal or de facto control of an area
in which smoking and the use of tobacco products is prohibited by this chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous "No Smoking" and
"No Use of Tobacco Products" or "Smokefree" and "Tobacco-Free" sign at each point of ingress to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous
point within the area, unless the prohibition is established by law other than this chapter and that law does not require the placement of signs. The
signs shall have letters of no less than one inch (1") in height and shall include the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). Signs posted on the exterior of buildings to comply with this
section shall include the reasonable distance requirement. At least one sign with the City of Selma phone number to which complaints can be
directed must be placed conspicuously in each place in which smoking is prohibited. For purposes of this section, the City Manager or his/her
designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs in regulated facilities owned or leased in whole or in part by the City. Notwithstanding this
provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking or the use of tobacco products in violation of any other
provision of this chapter.
(E) The City, or other sponsor of any public event occurring in open public places shall establish temporary signage at such locations as required by
the City Manager or his/her designee notifying persons of the prohibition against smoking at such public event.
(F) No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another
person who seeks to attain compliance with this chapter.
(G) Each instance of smoking or tobacco product use in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. For violations other than for
smoking, each day of a continuing violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2018-6, 5-7-2018)
6-29-5: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
(A) The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
(B) Each incident of smoking or use of tobacco products in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine.
Other violations of this chapter may, at the discretion of the City Attorney, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of
justice so require. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the City Manager or his/her designee. In addition, any peace officer or
Code enforcement official also may enforce this chapter.
(C) Each incident of smoking or use of tobacco products in violation of this chapter, and the fine imposed by this chapter may be enforced by issuance
of an administrative citation under title I, chapter 20 of this Code.
(D) Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the City of Selma, punishable by a civil fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) and not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation.
(E) Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.
(F) Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(G) In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the
City Attorney, including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, Civil or Criminal Code enforcement
proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 2018-6, 5-7-2018)
Title 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 158/436
Chapter 1
FIRE CODE
7-1-1: ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 50022.2 of the Government Code and sections 17922, 17958.5, 17958.7 and/or 18941.5 of the Health And
Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city of Selma does hereby adopt by specific reference thereto and incorporation herein by
said reference, the provisions, rules and regulations specified and set forth in the 2016 edition of the California fire code with appendices, copies of
which are on file with the city of Selma, for public record and inspection. These are hereby adopted by said council by reference as the fire code of the
city of Selma and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions, deletions and fee exceptions
as set forth in this chapter. This code shall be designated as title VII, chapter 1, the fire code of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
7-1-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND FEE EXCEPTIONS:
The California fire code as adopted by this chapter is amended to include the following provisions:
(A) Add To Appendix Chapter 1, Section 105: Permits: The provisions for fire permit fees and all matters relating to permits shall be as set forth in the
latest resolution approved by the city council establishing a schedule of fees and charges, or as otherwise provided for by title VII of the municipal
code.
(B) Add: Violation; Penalty: Any person operating or maintaining an occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to the California fire code, who allows a
hazard to exist or fails to take immediate action to abate the hazard on such occupancy, premises or vehicle when ordered or notified to do so. The
remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. Violations of any provision of
this chapter are subject to administrative, criminal, civil or other penalties and enforcement pursuant to title I, chapter 4 of the municipal code.
(Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 2
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
7-2-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings, hereafter erected, constructed, or moved in, of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more in floor area, and all additions to existing
buildings hereafter erected, constructed, or moved in, when the addition to the existing building results in a total combined floor area of five thousand
(5,000) square feet or more, shall be equipped with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system in all occupancies as defined in the 2016 edition of the
California building code and amendments thereto, except occupancies defined in chapter 3 of the California building code, 2016 edition, as R-3 and U,
all of which shall conform to the regulations of the California building code, 2016 edition. The square footage shall be determined by measurement of
the exterior wall dimensions. When an addition results in a building with total combined square footage of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more in
floor area, the entire building, existing and addition, shall be equipped with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system. Other construction
specifications shall be required as deemed necessary for fire protection by the building official and/or fire chief in all buildings, regardless of size and
group occupancies. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be as defined and outlined in chapter 9 of the 2016 edition of the California
building code and all amendments thereto. (Ord. 2016-7, 12-5-2016)
7-2-2: EXCEPTIONS:
Where an approved automatic fire sprinkler system is provided in buildings, the following substitutions may be approved by the building official;
provided that these exceptions shall not apply to buildings covered by title 19 of the California administrative code:
(A) Occupancy separations may be reduced by one hour.
(B) Exterior wall protection due to the proximity of property lines may be reduced by fifty percent (50%).
(C) Party walls for adjacent property may be approved by the building official subject to the following conditions:
1. Both buildings are equipped with approved automatic fire extinguishing systems.
2. The party wall is a minimum of a two (2) hour fire rated wall.
3. The area of the combined buildings is within the allowable area for a single building.
4. An approved party wall agreement signed by both property owners is recorded in the county recorder's office.
(D) Vertical shaft enclosures may be reduced by one hour but in no case less than one hour in buildings three (3) or more stories in height.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 159/436
(E) Corridor protection may be reduced to thirty (30) minute wood frame construction with twenty (20) minute labeled assemblies on all openings.
(F) Fire protection for exit enclosures and exterior smokeproof enclosures may be reduced by fifty percent (50%) but in no case to less than one hour.
(G) Exit courts and passageways may be constructed with thirty (30) minute fire protection with twenty (20) minute labeled assemblies in all openings.
(H) Fire protection for exterior walls, floors, ceilings may be reduced by fifty percent (50%).
(I) Plumbing schedule 40 ABS and PVC-DWV piping installations may be used in those structures where combustible construction is allowed. (Ord.
2016-7, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 3
FIREWORKS
7-3-1: SALE OF FIREWORKS, GENERAL:
"Safe and sane fireworks", as defined by section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, and any subsequent amendments
thereto, may be sold and discharged within the City during the period beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on June 28, ending ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. on July 4 each year pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and not otherwise. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-1.5: SALE OF FIREWORKS, NEW YEAR'S 2000:
Notwithstanding Section 7-3-1 of this Chapter, a separate one-time permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall authorize the retail sale of safe and
sane fireworks within the City during the period beginning at nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on December 26, 1999, until twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of
January 1, 2000. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-2: SALE OF FIREWORKS, PERMIT:
Except as provided herein, no person shall offer for sale or sell at retail any fireworks of any kind without having first applied for and received a permit.
(Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-3: APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT:
All applications for a permit to sell fireworks shall:
(A) Be made in writing accompanied by a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(B) Be made between the first day and last day of March of each year except when the last day falls on a Saturday or Sunday; then, the following
business day shall be determined to be the last day.
(C) Set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand.
(D) Be accompanied by an assurance that if the permit is issued to applicant, applicant shall, at the time of receipt of permit, deliver to the City Clerk a
five hundred thousand dollar ($500,000.00) combined single limits insurance certificate designating the City as an additional insured, and a copy of
the required license from the State Fire Marshal.
(E) Include a statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the terms of any retail permit granted it and furnish any additional information
upon request of the City.
(F) All applicants shall obtain and submit to the City Clerk the property owner's signed permission to erect a fireworks stand on his property. (Ord. 99-
4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-3.5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT FOR NEW YEAR'S 2000:
All applications for a permit to sell fireworks from December 26, 1999, to January 1, 2000, shall comply with all of the provisions of Section 7-3-3 of
this Chapter, except the application to the City shall be made between the August 1 and August 31, 1999. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-4: NOTICE OF GRANTING OR REJECTING OF PERMIT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 160/436
Applicants for a permit shall be notified by the Finance Director of the City by April 15 of the granting or rejection of such application for a permit. (Ord.
99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-4.5: NOTICE OF GRANTING OR REJECTING OF PERMIT TO NEW YEAR'S 2000:
Applicants for a permit for the sale of safe and sane fireworks from December 26, 1999, to January 1, 2000, shall be notified by the Finance Director of
the City on or before September 15, 1999, of the granting or rejection of such application for a permit. On or before October 15, 1999, all permittees
shall comply with all of the conditions and terms of this Chapter or the permit shall be revoked. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-5: QUALIFICATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The following qualifications must be met by each applicant for a permit:
(A) No permit shall be issued to any person, except nonprofit associations or corporations organized primarily for civic betterment or youth activities.
(B) Each such organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place in the City's sphere of influence limits; must maintain a bona fide
membership of at least ten (10) members; and, must have been organized and established in the City's sphere of influence limits for a minimum of
one year continuously preceding the filing of the application for the permit.
(C) No organization may receive more than one permit for fireworks sales during any one calendar year. One permit may be issued to two (2) or more
qualifying applicants as a joint venture. The maximum number of permits that may be issued during any one calendar year shall be ten (10)
permits, until the City's population has increased to thirty five thousand (35,000). Once the City's population has increased to thirty five thousand
(35,000), the maximum number of permits which may be issued during any one calendar year shall be increased by one for each additional
population increase of three thousand five hundred (3,500) persons.
(D) If the number of applicants exceed the number of permits to be issued, the permittees during the preceding year shall have first priority for the
available permits, provided each permittee retains the same participating organizations which operated under the permit during the preceding year.
Each participating organization in a joint venture shall be deemed to be a co-permittee with the same duties and liabilities under the permit. If there
are any additional permits available, such additional permits shall be granted by a drawing supervised by the City Clerk. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-5.5: QUALIFICATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF NEW YEAR'S 2000 PERMIT:
All applicants for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks from December 26, 1999, to January 1, 2000, shall comply with subsections 7-3-5(A) and (B)
of this Chapter. The maximum number of permits that will be issued shall be ten (10) permits. Applicants who received permits from the City for the
sale of fireworks in preceding years, shall not receive any preference or priority. Notwithstanding the restriction of subsection 7-3-5(C) of this Chapter,
an organization that received a permit for fireworks sales from June 28, 1999, to July 4, 1999, may receive a permit for fireworks sales from December
26, 1999, to January 1, 2000. If there are more than ten (10) applications that qualify for a permit, the granting of the ten (10) permits shall be based
on a drawing supervised by the City Clerk amongst all of the qualified applications. The City Clerk shall determine the ten (10) permittees, with two (2)
alternatives, who shall receive a permit in the event that one or two (2) of the ten (10) permittees fail to comply with all of the conditions and terms of
this Chapter. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-6: OPERATION OF STAND:
(A) No entity other than the permittee organization shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued.
(B) No person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee organization, or the wives or husbands or adult children of such members,
and in any event no person under the age of eighteen (18), shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand.
(C) No person shall be paid any consideration for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand.
(D) Any organization which is granted a permit, and which for any reason fails to exercise the permit by the operation of a stand in accordance with the
conditions of the permit, shall automatically forfeit the right to a permit for the succeeding year. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-7: TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STANDS:
All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and sales from any other building or
structure is prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions:
(A) No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of any building, nor within one hundred feet (100') of any gasoline pump.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 161/436
(B) Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the building code; provided, however, that all stands shall be erected under the
supervision of the Building Official, who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner that will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants
and customers.
(C) No stand shall have a floor area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet. The maximum length of any stand shall not exceed forty feet (40').
(D) Each stand must have at least two (2) exits.
(E) Each stand shall be provided with a two and one-half (21/2) gallon water pressure type fire extinguisher by each required exit in good working order
and easily accessible for use in case of fire.
(F) Temporary fireworks stands shall not be permitted in any zoning district with a residential designation. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEES:
(A) All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty feet (20') surrounding the
stand.
(B) "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed on the fireworks stand.
(C) Each stand must have an adult in attendance and in charge while fireworks are stored therein. Sleeping or remaining in the stand after close of
business each day is not permitted. No fireworks shall remain in the stand after the close of each business day.
(D) The sale of fireworks shall not begin before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on June 28 and shall not continue after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on July 4.
Except for June 28, the sale of fireworks shall not begin before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and shall not continue after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each
day.
(E) All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on July 5.
(F) The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on July 7, and all accompanying litter shall be
cleared from said location by said time and date.
(G) Prior to the issuance of a permit, each applicant shall file with the City Clerk a cash deposit, certificate of deposit or a surety bond made payable to
the City in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to assure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Such deposit, certificate or bond shall be
refundable upon compliance with the provisions and requirements of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the removal of the stand and the
cleaning of the site. In the event the permittee does not so comply or remove the stand or clean the site, in the manner required by the Fire Official,
the City may do so, or cause the same to be done by other persons, and the reasonable cost thereof shall be charged against the permittee and
his deposit or surety bond. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-8.5: REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEES OF NEW YEAR'S DAY 2000 PERMITS:
All permittees of a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks from December 26, 1999, to January 1, 2000, shall comply with all provisions of this Chapter,
except:
(A) The sale of fireworks shall not begin before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on December 26, 1999, and shall not continue after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on
January 1, 2000. Except for December 26, 1999, the sale of fireworks shall not begin before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and shall not continue after
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day.
(B) All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on January 2, 2000.
(C) The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on January 7, 2000, and all accompanying litter
shall be cleared from said location by said time and date. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-9: PERMIT FEE:
The permit fee for selling fireworks within the City shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year per stand, which fee must be paid at the time the application
for stand is filed. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-10: TEMPORARY SALES TAX PERMIT REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 162/436
Organizations selling fireworks are required to obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-11: DISPLAY OF STATE LICENSE, CITY PERMIT AND SALES TAX PERMIT:
Each State license, City permit to sell fireworks, and temporary sales tax permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand. (Ord.
99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-12: PROHIBITIONS ON DISCHARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, or permit the ignition, explosion or projection of any fireworks
upon, over, or onto the property of another, or to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or make use of any fireworks within ten feet (10') of any
residence, dwelling or other structure. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-13: STORAGE:
Safe and sane fireworks may be stored within the City pursuant to the following provisions:
(A) Buildings or parts of buildings used for storage shall meet the zoning requirements of the County and a permit to store shall be issued by the
County.
(B) Signs with the wording "Fireworks - No Smoking", in letters a minimum of four inches (4") high, shall be conspicuously located throughout the
building.
(C) Fire extinguishers, of the water pressure type, shall be located so there is not more than fifty feet (50') of travel to any fireworks storage.
(D) Stacks of merchandise shall be limited in size to twelve thousand (12,000) cubic feet, and each stack shall be separated from other stacks by eight
feet (8') wide aisles. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-14: STATE FIREWORKS LAW:
The provisions of this Chapter shall be construed so as not to conflict with the State Fireworks Law1. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
7-3-15: REPEAL OF NEW YEAR'S DAY 2000 PERMITS:
Sections 7-3-1.5, 7-3-3.5, 7-3-4.5, 7-3-5.5 and 7-3-8.5 of this Chapter shall become inoperative on January 31, 2000, and, as of January 31, 2000, are
repealed, unless a later enacted ordinance, that becomes operative on or before January 31, 2000, deletes or extends the dates on which the sections
become inoperative and are repealed. (Ord. 99-4, 4-19-1999)
Chapter 4
SMOKING IN THEATERS
(Rep. by Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
Chapter 5
GASOLINE SERVICE PUMPS
7-5-1: CONSTRUCTION OF PUMPS; APPROVAL REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or replace any gasoline or distillate service pump, or any gasoline or distillate storage tank, upon
any public street or alley within the City, or upon any property of the City without the consent and approval of the Council. (Ord. 255; 11-21-27)
Chapter 6
TRANSPORTATION AND HANDLING OF EXPLOSIVES
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 163/436
For the purpose of this Chapter the term "Vehicle" shall mean any conveyance of any type whatsoever operated upon the streets or highways within
the Corporate Limits, which is marked or which is required to be marked, with any of the following markings:
EXPLOSIVES
DANGEROUS
COMPRESSED GAS
DANGEROUS - RADIO-ACTIVE MATERIAL
POISON GAS
7-6-2: UNLAWFUL TRANSFER OF EXPLOSIVES:
No explosives, poisons, acids or gases, of which the vehicle transporting the same is required to bear the markings mentioned in Section 7-6-1 hereof,
may be transferred from one (1) vehicle to another except in case of breakdown or collision, and then only after notifying, and under the supervision of
the Police Department; provided, however, this Section shall not be so construed so as to prohibit the transfer, pickup or delivery of articles or
materials, the storage of which is permitted.
7-6-3: VEHICLE TO BE ATTENDED AT ALL TIMES:
No loaded vehicle, except vehicles operated in delivery service under the provisions of Section 7-6-2 hereof, shall be left unattended at any time within
the Corporate Limits.
7-6-4: PARKING OF VEHICLES:
No vehicle shall be parked or left standing upon the traveled portion of any street or highway. In the event conditions make it impracticable to move the
vehicle from the traveled portion of the street or highway, the vehicle shall be parked so as to leave all possible width of the street or highway opposite
the vehicle for free passage of other conveyances and so as to provide a clear view of the standing vehicle for as far as possible to the front and the
rear.
7-6-5: MARKERS TO BE PLACED:
Whenever any motor vehicle is disabled upon any street or highway, the driver, or other person in attendance of the vehicle, or both, shall immediately
place on the traffic side of the disabled vehicle, so as to give warning of danger, a lighted red electric lantern, or a red emergency reflector, or, during
the time of day when lights are not required, red flags. If the vehicle contains explosives, combustible liquid or gas, no signal producing a flame or arc
shall be used.
7-6-6: UNLAWFUL TO DRIVE NEAR FIRE:
No vehicle shall be driven past any open fire burning at or near any street or highway.
7-6-7: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall smoke in, on, or around any such vehicle. (1963 Code)
Chapter 7
PROHIBITED BURNING
7-7-1: BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall cause, allow, aid, suffer or maintain any open burning of any kind or the burning of any waste materials or rubbish in any incinerator,
barrel, can, pit, fireplace or similar container or enclosure. No person in charge or possession of any premises upon which such burning occurs, or any
premises immediately adjacent to any public place upon which such burning occurs, shall fail to extinguish the fire, providing he has knowledge of the
fire and it is within his power to extinguish it.
EXCEPTIONS: This Section shall not apply to the following:
(A) An indoor or outdoor barbecue or similar heating or cooking device while being used for the heating or cooking of food for human consumption and
not being used primarily for the burning of waste materials or rubbish.
(B) A pathological-type incinerator or furnace used by a hospital, veterinary hospital, crematorium or similar establishment for the incinerator of body
parts, bandages or related refuse.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 164/436
(C) Comfort heating by use of a fireplace inside of a residence that is not being used primarily for the burning of waste materials or rubbish.
(D) The personal use of cigarettes, cigars, or pipes.
(E) The using of matches for the lighting of authorized fire or fire fed devices.
(F) The use of authorized lighting and heating devices such as candles, water heaters and lanterns provided they are not likely to cause air pollution or
create fire hazards.
(G) Controlled fires for the purpose of training firefighters.
(H) When the material to be burned originates as the result of an agricultural operation and originates on and is being burned on premises constituting
a separate parcel of land under one ownership of a gross size of five (5) acres or more. Before any such burning shall take place a permit must be
obtained from the Selma Fire Chief specifying the time when said burning will be permitted.
(I) No exceptions from this Section shall authorize or permit any act or condition which is prohibited by the California Health and Safety Code Sections
24198 through 24323 (relating to Air Pollution Control Districts) or the rules or regulations of any Air Pollution Control District established pursuant
thereto. (Ord. 670; 3-16-70; Eff. 4-16-70)
Chapter 8
FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICE FEES AND COSTS
7-8-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the FEES FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICES AND COSTS ORDINANCE and shall be so cited. (Ord. 2009-6, 7-27-
2009)
7-8-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and the intent of this chapter to establish fees to cover the cost of services which the city of Selma fire department provides related to
motor vehicle accidents, collisions, motor vehicle fires, motor vehicle extrications, and hazardous materials spills or discharge. (Ord. 2009-6, 7-27-
2009)
7-8-3: FEE SCHEDULE ADOPTION:
The city council shall adopt and amend, from time to time, a schedule of fees as described in this chapter by resolution. (Ord. 2009-6, 7-27-2009)
7-8-4: FEE SCHEDULE:
Fees to cover the costs of services provided by this chapter are as follows:
(A) Motor Vehicle Accidents, Fires, And Extrications: The following fees shall be charged for recovery of costs associated with motor vehicle accidents,
motor vehicle fires, and extrications:
1. Fees Charged: The fee for services provided by the city of Selma fire department in connection with response to motor vehicle accidents,
collisions, motor vehicle fires, and extrications shall be determined on a case by case basis by the fire chief, his/her designee or third party billing
service, in an amount not to exceed the amount reasonably borne by the city to provide such services, including, but not limited to, reasonable
costs of collecting said fees, including reasonable attorney fees. Said fees shall be charged according to the usual, customary and reasonable
fees as set by a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the city council of the city of Selma which may, from time to time, be amended by
resolution of the city council of the city of Selma. The fee shall not be charged to any person who is a resident of the city of Selma.
(B) Hazardous Materials: The following fees shall be charged by the city of Selma fire department for the following services:
1. Hazardous materials mitigation and/or cleanup shall be determined on a case by case basis by the fire chief, his/her designee or third party
billing service in an amount not to exceed the amount reasonably borne by the city to provide such services outside the city limits of the city of
Selma, including, but not limited to, reasonable costs of collecting said fees, including reasonable attorney fees. The term "hazardous materials"
shall have the same meaning as the term "hazardous waste" as defined by the California department of health pursuant to Health and Safety
Code section 25141. Said fees shall be charged at the usual, customary and reasonable rate as set by a schedule of fees adopted by resolution
of the city council of the city of Selma which may be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. The fee shall not be charged to
any person who is a resident of the city of Selma.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 165/436
(C) Persons Subject To Charges: The foregoing fees shall be charged, as determined by the fire chief or his or her designee or third party billing
service to any person or persons whose negligent or wilful act is the cause of any motor vehicle fire, motor vehicle accident or collision or technical
rescue and to any person or persons who is the owner of, or has custody and control over any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle fire, motor
vehicle accident or collision and to any person, regardless of fault, responsible for the release or discharge of any hazardous materials.
(D) Nonexclusive Remedies: Nothing in this chapter precludes the city of Selma from using any other available method to recover fees or costs as
described in this chapter by any other means available at law. (Ord. 2009-6, 7-27-2009)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
GARBAGE REGULATIONS
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them, unless the content makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
COMPOSTING: The controlled or uncontrolled biological decomposition of organic constituents (including by anaerobic digestion equipment).
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS: Used or discarded construction materials removed from a premises or property during the
construction, renovation, or razing of a structure, including both recyclable and nonrecyclable materials.
CONTRACT AGENT: An agent or employee of the city, or any person thereof with whom the city shall have duly contracted, under the terms
hereinafter set out in the provisions of this chapter, and under the provision of the laws of the state, with amendments thereto, to collect, transport
through the streets, alleys or public ways of the city, and dispose of and/or recycle organics, solid waste, and/or dry recyclables produced within the
corporate limits, and shall also mean "refuse collector" or "contractor".
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: For the purposes of this chapter, "development project" shall mean the following:
(A) All new commercial, industrial or institutional building for which a building permit is required.
(B) All new single-family residential project, consisting of five (5) or more units, which share a common area for collecting and loading solid waste.
(C) All new multiple-family residential projects which share a common area for collecting and loading solid waste.
(D) All new public facilities where areas for collecting and loading solid waste are provided.
(E) All existing commercial, industrial or institutional buildings which add thirty percent (30%) or more to the existing floor area and require a
building permit.
DISABLED CUSTOMER: Anyone who has applied at city hall for a discount, has provided adequate documentation and has been determined by the
city manager or the city manager's designee as meeting one or more of the following criteria:
(A) Has been found to be handicapped by the California department of motor vehicles; or
(B) Has been found to be totally and permanently disabled by the social security administration under any of their programs including, but not
limited to, the social security disability insurance program under title II of the social security act and including, but not limited to, the supplemental
security income program under title XVI of the social security act; or
(C) Has been found to have at least a fifty percent (50%) disability under the workers' compensation insurance act; or
(D) Has been determined to be disabled by any branch of the military or the veterans' administration; or
(E) The city manager or his designee has determined that the individual is disabled based on the statement of a licensed physician.
DISPOSAL SITE: The solid waste facility or facilities selected by the contractor for the ultimate disposal (by contractor) of solid waste collected by the
contractor. The Avenal Landfill shall be the initial disposal site.
FOOD WASTE: Organic consumer food materials that are separated, set aside, handled, packaged or offered for collection by the waste generator in
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 166/436
a manner different from solid waste, and includes, without limitation, fruits, vegetables, meat, seafood, small bones, dairy, eggs, breads, pastas,
sauces, cooking oil, grease, tea bags, coffee grounds and filters, and other related materials.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal, fish, food, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter (excluding green waste), or any portion thereof, resulting from the
preparation, storage, handling or consumption of such substances.
GREEN WASTE: Untreated and unpainted wood, prunings, brush, leaves, or grass clippings, Christmas trees and such other types of waste that may
be specified by the city in its reasonable discretion for collection and processing.
INCINERATOR: Fireproof receptacles to be used for disposing of combustible solid waste on private premises.
MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY (MRF): Any plant or site used for the purpose of sorting, cleansing, treating or reconstituting recyclable materials
and returning them to the economy.
ORGANICS: Green waste and food waste.
PUBLIC FACILITY: Any facility which is owned by a public agency.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Domestic, commercial or industrial byproducts of economic value separated, set aside, handled, packaged or offered for
collection by the waste generator in a manner different from solid waste and specifically includes, but is not limited to, glass, paper, plastic, metal,
construction and demolition debris that is recyclable, food waste and green waste.
RECYCLING AREA: The space provided in a trash enclosure for the collecting and loading of recyclable materials.
RECYCLING STATION: Any property and/or facility that the city shall designate at any time to be used for the recycling of any or all dry recyclables
that may accumulate within the city.
RUBBISH: Paper (other than newspaper), pasteboard, carpets, rags, clothing, books, straw, packing, barrels, boxes, oily rags, oily waste, furniture,
sawdust, shavings, old tires, boots, shoes, leathers, yard scrapings, broken crockery, broken brick, tin vessels, ashes, natural soil, street sweepings,
earth, stone, and all other similar articles of any kind or character considered as waste or rejected by the owners thereof, but shall not include brick,
mortar or other debris incident to the construction or demolition of buildings.
SENIOR: Anyone who has applied at City Hall for a discount and has been determined by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee as having
reached sixty (60) years of age or older. The applicant shall have the responsibility of adequately documenting that he or she meets the terms of this
definition.
SOLID WASTE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid waste accumulated or delivered for collection and disposal within the City
and includes, but is not limited to, garbage, construction debris, demolition debris, rubbish, and bulky waste. Solid waste does not include hazardous
waste or household hazardous waste, designated waste, infectious waste, recyclable materials when recycled, sewage, or abandoned automobiles.
WASTE GENERATOR: The owner or occupant of premises, including businesses, which initially produce solid waste.
WET GARBAGE: All animal and vegetable refuse and household waste or material or matter prepared or intended in part or in whole to be used for
food. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-2: REGULATIONS FOR ACCUMULATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, keep, accumulate or permit, cause or suffer any solid waste to be deposited, kept or accumulated upon
any lot or parcel of land, or on any public or private place, street, lane, alley or drive, unless the same shall be kept, deposited or allowed to
accumulate as hereinafter provided.
(A) Solid Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, accumulate or permit to be kept or accumulated any solid waste upon any lot, or parcel of
land, or on any public or private place, street, lane, alley or drive, unless the same shall be kept in a suitable container. A "suitable container" shall
meet one of the following criteria:
1. Either it shall be a container having a capacity of not less than five (5) gallons, and not to exceed thirty (30) gallons, said receptacles to be
provided with a close fitting lid or cover, which shall be kept closed at all times, except when necessarily opened to permit solid waste to be taken
therefrom or deposited therein; or
2. If the City Council by resolution shall adopt a policy of pursuing the automated collections of solid waste, it shall be a container which is either
provided for the purpose by the contract agent or a container which has been approved in advance by the contract agent.
(B) Placement Of Receptacles On Streets/In Alleys: Waste containers shall be stored at a location on the premises no closer to public rights-of-way,
including but not limited to any street or alley, than the applicable structural setback line(s) set forth in the zoning ordinance of the City; and shall be
visually screened from the adjacent streets, alleys and premises. Containers shall be placed for collection on the street side of the curb, or in the
alley no sooner than five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on the scheduled day of collection and shall be returned from the collection location to the storage
location no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on the scheduled day of collection.
(C) Misplacement Of Solid Waste Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump, place or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dumped,
placed or deposited any solid waste upon the premises or property of another, with the intent to thereby dispose of such solid waste.
(D) Consented Misplacement Of Solid Waste Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to consent to any other person dumping, placing, or
depositing upon the premises of the person giving such consent, of any such solid waste with the intention that the same will thereby be discarded
and disposed of.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 167/436
(E) Recycling Program And Organics Pick Up Program: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall be appropriate, and mandatory, for
any person to participate in either the Recycling Program or the separate Organics Pick Up facilitated by and through the City and the contract
agent. The provisions of the programs shall be as follows:
1. The collection of dry recyclables shall be by a service schedule separate from those for the pickup of solid waste and organics;
2. The Recycling Program shall commence on July 1, 1992;
3. Individual and unusual problems presented by any customer shall be considered by the contract agent, including parking conflicts, with the
provision of the service;
4. The Organics Pick Up Program shall commence on July 1, 2017.
(F) Administrative Citation: The City retains the right to issue citations and levy a fine, the amount of which is determined by resolution, or by this
Code, against any person who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to the following provisions:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person utilizing the Organics Pick Up Program, to fail to sort the organics from solid waste and dry recyclables, and
unlawful to fail to put the organics in the separate container provided for such purpose by the contract agent;
2. It shall be unlawful for any person utilizing the Recycling Pick Up Program to fail to separate the dry recyclables from solid waste and organics,
and it shall be unlawful to fail to use the container provided for such purpose by the contract agent;
3. Any waste generator that chooses not to participate in the Recycling Program shall provide, individually, for the recycling of his own dry
recyclables by transporting them personally (or by his or her employee) to an authorized recycling station, selling them to a third party for a net
payment to such waste generator, or by donating them to a youth, civic or charitable organization, but he shall not, in any event, discard into the
City's waste stream what would have been dry recyclables, as if they were non-recyclable solid waste;
4. Except for the contract agent and its officers, agents and employees, it shall be unlawful for any person to pick up, collect, take, appropriate, or
remove any solid waste, organics or dry recyclables from any container after it has been placed at the collection point by the customer or
resident or placed into any receptacle maintained by any multi-family residence, apartment building, mobile home park, motel, hotel, assisted
living facility, restaurant or other place of business, or industry within the City.
The above mentioned premises and property refers to that contained within the corporate limits of the City.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, put, deposit or burn any solid waste, or cause the same to be placed, put, deposited or burned in or upon
any public street, park, lane, place or alley in the City. (Ord. 2017-1, 6-19-2017)
8-1-3: TRANSPORTATION:
(A) Solid Waste Transportation: No solid waste shall be removed and carried on and along the streets and alleys of the City, except by the City or its
contractor. Solid waste shall be carried, conveyed or hauled in conveyances so constructed as to be dustproof and so arranged that it is impossible
for the contents of such conveyances to sift through or fall upon the streets and alleys. The contents of such conveyances must be further
protected so as to prevent the same from being blown upon the streets, alleys or adjacent lands. All solid waste accumulated at any private lot or
parcel of land, private residence or dwelling, or at any store, shop, restaurant, hotel, cafe, apartment house, tenement, boarding house, school, and
at any other place in the City where solid waste accumulates, shall be removed by the City at regular intervals of not less than once a week unless
otherwise directed by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee.
(B) City Manager Directs Removal: It shall be the duty of the contractor, when directed by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, to
immediately call at any premises in the City to which the contractor may be directed by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, and
where solid waste, organics, or dry recyclables are accumulated and there collect and remove such solid waste, organics, or dry recyclables in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(C) Organics Transportation: Under the Organics Pick Up Program, once the organics is placed at curbside or other collection point by a residential
customer for collection under the provisions of this chapter or is placed into a bin or other container provided by the contract agent to any
apartment building, mobile home park, motel, hotel, assisted living facility, restaurant, or other place of business or industry within the City, it shall
be unlawful for any person other than the contract agent and its officers, agents and employees, to pick up, collect, take, appropriate, or remove
any organics materials from any such container. If any person shall opt not to participate in the Organics Pick Up Program provided by and
between the City and the contract agent, nothing shall prevent that individual from removing and carrying organics to a legally designated recycling
station.
(D) Dry Recyclables Transportation: Under the Dry Recyclables Pick Up Program, once the dry recyclables are placed into a container at the curbside
or other collection point by a residential customer, or have been placed into a bin or other container provided for that purpose by the contract agent
to any apartment building, mobile home park, motel, hotel, assisted living facility, restaurant or other place of business or industry within the city, it
shall be unlawful for any person other than the contract agent, its officers, agents and employees, to pick up, collect, take, appropriate or remove
any dry recyclables from any such container. If any person shall choose to provide for recycling individually rather than participate in the recycling
program provided by and between the city and the contract agent, nothing herein shall prevent any such person from removing and carrying such
dry recyclables to a legally designated recycling station. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-4: RATES FOR COLLECTION:
For the service of collection and disposal of all solid waste, organics and dry recyclables as herein referred to, but not including dead animals, or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 168/436
refuse from the construction or demolition or alteration of buildings, the rates to be charged by the city, or any contractor to whom a contract is
awarded for such purpose shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-5: VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
Every truck used in the collection and removal of solid waste, organics, and/or dry recyclables, shall be kept well painted, and clean inside and out.
The city reserves the right to require contractors to weigh, at public scales, all of its loaded trucks carrying refuse, solid waste, organics and/or dry
recyclables, originating within the corporate limits for a period not exceeding ten (10) days in one year, at the city's expense. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-6: BURYING REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to deposit or bury any solid waste within the city limits; provided, however, that rubbish and waste matter may be made use of
when leveled and properly covered, on written permission of the city manager or the city manager's designee for the filling of low lots within the city
limits. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-7: EMERGENCY REMOVAL:
Nothing contained in the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the removal and hauling by an unlicensed person of materials
considered by the city manager or the city manager's designee or fire chief to constitute a health menace or a fire menace of such nature as
necessary to be ordered by either of said officers to be promptly removed. (Ord. 320, 9-12-1938; amd. Ord. 92-4, 6-1-1992)
8-1-8: MANDATORY SERVICE; UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE PROHIBITED:
(A) The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, organics, and dry recyclables shall be controlled by the city for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare and to contribute toward the diminution of air pollution in the city. The city council finds that to give practical
effect, a comprehensive system for the periodic collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, the recycling of dry recyclables, and the collection,
removal, disposal and/or composting of organics, from all premises in the city is essential and benefits all occupants of premises in the city, and,
therefore, all such occupants are made liable for the solid waste collection charges, the organics collection charges, and the dry recyclables
collection charges established by the council for the collection and processing of organics and dry recyclables, and each occupant shall pay at
least the minimum rate established for such services.
(B) Every person owning or occupying a residence or commercial establishment shall subscribe to solid waste collection service from the city or
contract agent having a valid solid waste collection route permit and a service location permit for any such residence or commercial establishment.
(C) For residential properties, nonpayment of collection and/or disposal fees will result in an assessment in the amount of the unpaid fees, added to
the property tax bill of the owner of the property.
(D) For commercial properties, the contract agent shall retain the right to pursue any and all remedies available against either the property owner or
any lessee, whoever may be in possession of the premises.
(E) No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any solid waste matter in or upon any vacant lot, street, alley, gutter,
highway, park or other public place or keep any residential solid waste except in the manner prescribed by this chapter.
(F) No person shall deposit solid waste in the container of another person, or set out solid waste for collection at another person's service location,
except as may be established by the city manager or the city manager's designee where the city manager has knowledge of construction,
demolition or other temporary obstacles which prevent the use of or access to permanent service locations.
(G) No customer shall permit or consent to another person depositing solid waste in his container or setting out solid waste for collection at his place
or premises; except that this provision shall not apply where the city manager or the city manager's designee has established a temporary service
location because the city manager has knowledge of construction, demolition or other temporary obstacles which prevent the use of or access to
permanent service locations.
(H) No person shall burn solid waste in a home heating furnace, fireplace, or wood stove, excepting that nonplasticized wastepaper may be used for
kindling of fires in wood burning appliances. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-9: CITY MANAGER; POWERS:
The city manager or the city manager's designee shall have the power to establish rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter, governing the collection and disposal of solid waste, organics, and dry recyclables, provided that such rules and regulations shall have as
their purpose the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the health and sanitary laws and regulations in effect in the city. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-
2014)
8-1-10: ENFORCEMENT; INTERFERENCE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 169/436
The health department is hereby specifically required to enforce the provisions of this chapter, except sections 8-1-11 and 8-1-12 of this chapter, and
shall have the right to enter any and all premises for the purpose of determining the sanitary condition thereof, and any person denying or obstructing
such entry shall be subject to the general penalty provided for in this code1.
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with the collection or disposal of solid waste, organics or recyclables by any person
authorized by license or contract to collect and dispose of the same. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-11: CONTRACT:
For the collection and disposal of solid waste or for the collection and disposal and/or composting of organics, and/or for the collection and recycling of
dry recyclables, a contract for a period determined by the city council may be entered into by the city in accordance with and subject to the terms and
conditions of the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state. If the city elects to enter into separate contracts for different portions of the city,
each of the aforementioned contracts may be separate, and whether by separate contract or by a single contract, may be held by one contract agent.
Any such contract shall provide that the contractor shall collect and dispose of the solid waste in the city, or collect and compost the organics in the
city, or collect and recycle the dry recyclables in the city, in the manner in which this chapter provides, and shall not charge any amount in excess of
the rates specified by the council under the authority granted to it in this chapter, subject to a discount, in an amount to be determined by the council,
on solid waste and organics collection fees for seniors and disabled customers. The contractor shall be required to furnish a surety bond to the city in
the sum of the value of the contract for one year or one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), whichever is less, conditional upon the faithful
performance of the contractor and the provisions of this chapter. The contractor shall have the sole and exclusive right, except as in this chapter
otherwise provided, to collect all solid waste, organics and dry recyclables in the city (or in the portion of the city covered by its contract), and transport
the same through the streets and public ways of the city.
Each contract shall further provide that the contractor shall be required to dispose of all such solid waste at the transfer station or disposal site
selected by the contractor and approved by the city, or the recyclable materials and organics at the MRF or processing facility selected by the
contractor.
Each such contract shall also require that the contractor carry comprehensive general liability insurance in an amount not less than five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage; automobile liability insurance in an
amount not less than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage; and workers'
compensation and employers' liability insurance in amounts not less than: a) workers' compensation limits as required by the Labor Code of the state
of California, and b) employers' liability limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident. Such insurance is to cover both the city and the
contract agent.
The council by resolution shall have power to provide for the inclusion in such contract of such terms as it deems necessary to protect the interests of
the city.
Each contract may be let to such responsible persons as the council may see fit, or be let on bids, and if let on bids, sealed bids shall be called for by
the council and the contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. Each proposal or bid shall be accompanied by a certified check, payable to the
city, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) which sum shall be forfeited to the city if the bidder to whom is awarded the contract shall fail or
refuse to enter into the contract within ten (10) days after the date of mailing to the successful bidder the "notice of award of contract". The council
reserves the right to reject any and all bids. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-12: TRASH ENCLOSURES:
The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to all development projects, as defined by this chapter, receiving building permits in the city after
adoption of this section. All trash enclosures shall meet the following minimum standards:
(A) The enclosure shall be architecturally compatible with the structure it will be serving. All enclosures shall have a minimum of six foot (6') high solid
masonry walls and solid metal gates. Gates for trash enclosures shall be secured with "cane bolts" and be attached to a six inch (6") diameter steel
post placed outside of the trash enclosure. Gates shall not be secured to the walls of the enclosure. Enclosures shall meet or exceed all applicable
criteria as may be set forth by state and federal laws.
(B) The minimum trash enclosure size shall be six (6) square feet per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area for commercial and
industrial development projects. Residential development projects requiring a trash enclosure shall provide ten (10) square feet of trash enclosure
space per unit in the development. The minimum size of all trash enclosures shall be one hundred (100) square feet not including any pedestrian
accessways.
(C) A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the space in a trash enclosure shall be provided as a recycling area. The designated recycling area
shall be protected from the weather and shall be posted with a sign which clearly identifies the area.
(D) All trash enclosures shall be placed so as to provide convenient access to the user. No trash enclosure shall be placed so as to create a potential
safety hazard to traffic or pedestrians. No trash enclosure shall be placed in a required setback area when adjacent to residential uses or zoning.
(Ord. 93-6, 10-4-1993)
8-1-13: RECYCLING CONTAINERS FOR MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCES, APARTMENT BUILDINGS AND MOBILE HOME
PARKS:
The owner of every "multi-family residential unit" (defined as 2 or more single-family units on the same site receiving solid waste collection service),
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 170/436
apartment building, or mobile home park shall procure from the contract agent and provide bins or other suitable containers on site for the collection of
dry recyclables of the tenants, occupants or inhabitants of such multi-family residential unit, apartment building or mobile home park. Said bins or
containers shall be reasonably available to tenants, occupants or inhabitants therein and to the contract agent for collection in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-3, 3-19-2007)
8-1-14: SEPARATE CONTAINERS FOR STREET/PARKING LOT SWEEPERS:
"Commercial or shopping centers", defined as two (2) or more offices or wholesale or retail establishments or other businesses occupying a site with
shared or contiguous private streets or parking lots which employ or perform services involving the cleaning of streets and parking lots within the
center shall provide on site bins, containers or other receptacles provided by the contract agent as reasonably necessary and reasonably located for
exclusive use of the street sweeping/parking area sweeping service to place the material collected by such street sweeping/parking area sweeping
service and shall maintain such bin, container or receptacle separate from any bin, container or receptacle provided for the collection and disposal of
solid waste, organics or recyclables generated by merchants or businesses within the center. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-15: USE OF CONTAINER PROVIDED BY CONTRACT AGENT, LICENSED CONTRACTOR OR PROPERTY OWNER:
All construction sites, licensed contractors and others engaged in construction or demolition work within the city where solid waste is produced and
accumulates, shall procure from the contract agent, a container, bin, or receptacle and shall use such container, bin or receptacle provided by the
contract agent for placement, holding and collection by the contract agent of all solid waste, recyclable materials and organics which is produced or
accumulates on the site or on the premises between the times of successive collections. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a licensed contractor engaged
in construction or demolition work within the city, or a property owner of property on which such demolition or construction is being performed may use
any container, bin or receptacle which is owned by and the property of either such contractor or property owner for the placement and holding of all
solid waste, recyclables and organics produced or accumulated on the site or premises, and may dispose of the same at any licensed transfer station
or MRF. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
8-1-16: PORTABLE RESTROOM TO BE PROVIDED BY CONTRACT AGENT, LICENSED CONTRACTOR OR PROPERTY
OWNER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, locate or to provide or make available for the use of any other person or persons any portable
restroom on any public or private property within the city unless the portable restroom or restrooms have either been procured from and provided for
by the contract agent, or are owned by and the property of the property owner of real property at which such restroom or restrooms is placed,
maintained or located, or by a licensed contractor performing demolition or construction work at such location. Every person, commercial, wholesale or
retail establishment or other business and all construction sites, licensed contractors and others engaged in construction or demolition work within the
city who is required to or does place, locate, maintain or who provides or makes available for the use of any other person or persons a portable
restroom or restrooms within the city shall either procure such restroom or restrooms from the contract agent and shall use such portable restroom or
restrooms provided by the contract agent for the holding of waste for collection, delivery to or service by the contract agent; or, such restroom or
restrooms shall be owned by and/or the property of the licensed contractor performing such construction or demolition work within the city or the
property owner of the property or premises upon which such work is being conducted. (Ord. 2011-4, 10-17-2011)
8-1-17: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable pursuant to provision of title I, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2014-3, 3-3-2014)
Chapter 2
INDUSTRIAL WASTE SYSTEM
(Rep. by Ord. 742-A, 3-15-1976)
Chapter 3
SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
(A) Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as defined in the American Society of Civil
Engineers' "Manual Of Engineering Practice No. 37", and the latest edition of the book "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Sewage", published by the American Public Health Association.
(B) The meaning of additional terms as used in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPLICANT: Any person or group of persons who applies for sewer service.
BUSINESS: All commercial uses, including, but not limited to, offices, merchandising and industrial uses, and residential uses on premises
where there are five (5) or more living units or where unrelated persons are housed in the same structure, such as boarding or fraternity houses.
CITY: The city of Selma, authorized representative acting within the scope of his assigned duties.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 171/436
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Selma.
CITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM OR SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: All facilities for collecting and transporting domestic or industrial wastes of any
nature, including all such facilities both inside and outside the city limits owned by the city and operated and maintained by the Selma-Kingsburg-
Fowler County sanitation district ("district").
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE GRINDER: A mechanical unit for pulverizing large quantities of waste by a commercial user.
COMPLETION: Acceptance, in writing, by the city manager of an addition to the city sewerage system.
CONNECTED: The physical joinder of any plumbing or drainage system or fixture contained in structure to a public sewer line.
CUSTOMER: Any person, firm, association, corporation or governmental agency served by the city.
DISTRICT: The Selma-Kingsburg-Fowler County sanitation district.
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT: A room or suite of rooms which is occupied by one family for living and sleeping purposes, including a singlefamily
residence, mobile home unit, apartment, townhouse, flat or condominium.
FEE SCHEDULE: The fee schedule as adopted from time to time by the city council by resolution whether separately or as part of a master fee
schedule in a master fee resolution.
INFILTRATION: The water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as, but not
limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW: The total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.
INFLOW: The water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections
from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include and
is distinguished from infiltration.
LOT: Any premises, piece or parcel of land or property, as bounded, defined or shown upon the latest map, plat or deed recorded in the office of
the recorder of the county; provided, however, that in the event any building or improvements appurtenant to said building covers more area than a
"lot", as herein defined, the term "lot" shall be deemed to be and include all such pieces or parcels of land upon which said buildings or
improvements are wholly or partly located.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, municipality, private corporation, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or
other entity.
SEWAGE: Sewage as defined under the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the district.
SEWER CONNECTION FEES: The "connection charge" which may be applicable to any lot, but does not include those applicable fees charged
by district.
UNIT, EQUIVALENT SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT OR EQUIVALENT SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: Synonymous terms that mean a residential
service unit as defined by the district for office, commercial, industrial, institutional, or similar uses. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-2: CONNECTION; CITY RIGHTS; INFILTRATION/INFLOW LIMIT:
(A) The city has by written agreement designated the district to control the right to physically connect with the sanitary sewer system of the city and for
laying laterals therefrom upon payment of applicable fees of city and district. The infiltration/inflow limit for all connections to the sanitary sewer
system of the city shall be as determined by the district.
(B) Applicant shall perform tests as required by the district to guarantee that inflow/infiltration does not exceed the limit as prescribed by the district.
Copies of any such tests shall be filed with the city. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No connection shall be made to the sewer system of the city until a permit therefor has been obtained from the city manager or the manager's
designee and the appropriate permits from the district. The city shall not issue a building permit until a sewer connection permit has been obtained
from the district. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-4: SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
No connection to the sewer system of the city shall be made unless the following charges, when applicable, have been paid:
(A) Fees; Connection Charge:
1. For each connection to the city sewer system there shall be a charge as set forth in the master fee resolution or by separate resolution. Payment
of any fees hereunder to city or credits granted by city shall in no way limit, abrogate or relieve the applicable requirements of district.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 172/436
2. Where connection is to an existing building sewer for which a connection charge has been previously paid to city, a credit equal to the previous
connection classification shall be made in determining the applicable connection charge for the city's charges only; provided, however, the
existing building sewer has not been disconnected for the previous twelve (12) calendar months. Industrial classifications will be reviewed by the
city engineer to determine what credit from the city, if any, is applicable. All such credits will be on a current rate basis.
(B) Deferral Of Charges: When land is subdivided, the owner, prior to the time the final map or parcel map is approved, shall pay or cause to be paid
all applicable sewer connection fees of the city; provided, however, that the connection charge of city applicable to subdivision may be deferred
(except for existing structures) and paid at any time prior to the issuance of a building permit for any structure to be constructed on such property.
(C) Authorization Of Work: Payment of charges and issuance of permits pursuant to this section does not authorize the permittee to perform or cause
to be performed work specified in this chapter to be performed by the city or the district. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-5: PAYMENT OF SANITARY SEWER CHARGES:
The amount of any sewer system connection charges of the city prescribed under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owing to the
city which, until paid, shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the property for the connection of which the charge was incurred. Any person who
makes a connection to the city sewer system without having paid such charges in full shall be liable in an action in the name of the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the amount of such charge. The conviction or punishment of any person for connection to the city sewer system without
obtaining all necessary permits shall not relieve such person from paying the charges due and unpaid at the time of such conviction. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-
15-2003)
8-3-6: REIMBURSEMENTS:
When a sewer main installed by a person is required to be constructed to a size larger than required solely for such person's application or when
sewer mains are installed that benefit property other than the property making contributions to the construction, the persons constructing such sewer
mains or oversized sewer mains may request an agreement for reimbursement over a period not to exceed ten (10) years from fees generated by
connection of the noncontributing property. The cost eligible for inclusion shall be determined by the city council in its sole discretion and such decision
shall be final. Cost may include, but is not limited to, interest during the life of the agreement. The city may cause the cost of preparation of such
agreement to be prepaid. The persons requesting such agreement shall provide to the city the cost information required to prepare such an agreement
and deposit the amount established by the city manager to cover the cost of preparing said agreement. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-7: CONNECTION; PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Connections made to the sewer system of the city and laterals therefrom shall be made in accordance with the standard specifications of the district.
Any person or entity discharging to, or proposing to discharge to the sewer system, shall comply with the ordinances, policies, standards and
regulations of the district (herein "ordinances"). In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the ordinances of the district, the ordinances shall
control. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-8: SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION:
Any person desiring to make an addition to the sewer system shall comply with district regulations and standards. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-9: USE OF CITY SYSTEM REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS ON PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES:
(A) It is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit the discharge of sewage, human excrement or other liquid wastes in any place or manner
except to the city sewer system. It is unlawful to construct within the city any privy, privy vaults, septic tank, cesspool or other facility designed or
intended to be utilized for the disposal of sewage.
(B) Existing systems, working properly, may be used and pumped, but repairs, additions or alterations are prohibited. At the time a repair, addition or
alteration is required, the system will be abandoned and connection made to the city sewer system.
If a property using an existing private sewage disposal facility is within two hundred feet (200') of an accessible public sewer and is not connected
to said public sewer, the property must connect to the public sewer upon the first occurrence of any of the following: failure of the septic tank
system or creation of a public nuisance; building additions or modifications requiring a building permit; changes in the use of the property requiring
a conditional use permit or a zoning variance; or a change in ownership of the property. Prior to connection to the public sewer, the owner must pay
the district sewer connection fee and the city sewer connection fee which are in effect at the time of issuance of the sewer connection permit. (Ord.
2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-10: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES DESIGNATED:
No person shall discharge, deposit or throw, or cause, allow or permit to be discharged into any public sewer or plumbing fixture connected to the
sewer, any substance/material prohibited by the district and shall abide by the applicable regulations of the district. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-11: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 173/436
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user in accordance with district regulations and standards. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-12: SWIMMING POOL WATER AND OTHER INFLOW PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
It is unlawful to discharge into the city sewer system any water defined as "inflow", and to do so will be grounds for discontinuance of service.
Swimming pool water shall not be drained or pumped into the sewer system except with prior approval by and acceptance of conditions imposed by
the district. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-13: ENFORCEMENT; CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY:
(A) The city manager is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any building,
structure or property connected to the city sewer system, whether the same is owned, operated or controlled by a private party or by a public or
quasi-public agency, corporation or association. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude or restrict the district, either concurrently with the city or
independently from the city, from enforcing the district's ordinances, policies, regulations and standards at the district's sole discretion. Upon
request by district, enforcement will be deferred to district on any of the matters of this chapter excepting only those matters of the sole province of
city, e.g., city sewer fees.
(B) In addition to such other penalties as may be prescribed for a violation of this chapter, whenever the city manager finds that a discharge of sewage
has been taking place in violation of any prohibitions or limitations prescribed herein or any effluent limitations or pretreatment standards
promulgated by the district or any violation creating a violation of the collection, treatment and disposal agreement of the city with the district, the
city manager may require the user to submit for his approval a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the user shall take in order to
prevent or correct such violation. Any failure to comply with such an approved time schedule shall likewise be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(C) Any person aggrieved by any decision or determination made by the city manager interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, charges required to be paid, may file with the city manager a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of
such decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the request for reconsideration. If the ruling made by the city
manager on such request for reconsideration is not satisfactory to the person requesting the same, he may, within ten (10) days after written
notification of the city manager's ruling, appeal same to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The appeal shall be
heard by the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of filing. After hearing the appeal of such person and giving due consideration thereto,
the city council shall make its determination and notify the aggrieved party of such determination within ten (10) days of the hearing. The appeal
shall be based on the appellant's written request to the city manager and the city manager's ruling thereon. The ruling of the city manager shall be
final and conclusive for all purposes, except for rulings by the city manager that are appealed by the city council whose determination shall remain
in full force and effect during such periods of reconsideration and/or appeal. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-14: RIGHTS OF INSPECTION:
The officers, employees and inspectors of the public works department and building and inspection and of the district shall have the right to enter upon
the premises of any person at reasonable hours to inspect and to determine whether this chapter is being violated. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-15: VIOLATION; CORRECTION NOTICE REQUIRED:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the city or authorized representative with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Said time limit shall not be less than two (2) nor
more than seven (7) working days. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. All persons
shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of agents or employees done under the provisions of this chapter. Upon being notified by the city
of any defect arising in any sewer or of any violation of this chapter, the person or persons having charge of said work shall immediately correct the
same. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-16: ENFORCEMENT; DISCONNECTION AUTHORIZED WHEN; RECONNECTION CONDITIONS:
As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the city shall have the power to disconnect the user from the sanitary sewer
system of the city. Upon disconnection, the city shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the system, and such user shall
deposit the cost, as estimated, of disconnection and reconnection before such user is reconnected to the system. The city shall refund any part of the
deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and reconnection. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-17: CONTINUING CERTAIN USES DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE WHEN; ABATEMENT:
Continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any industrial facility in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. The city may cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of the building or industrial facility during the period of
such violation. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-18: OCCUPATION OF DISCONNECTED PREMISES DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE; ABATEMENT; RECONNECTION
COSTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 174/436
During the period of such disconnection, habitation of such premises by human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon the city shall
cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement for the occupancy of said premises by human beings during the period of such disconnection. In
such event, and as a condition of reconnection, there is to be paid to the city a reasonable attorney fee and cost of suit arising in said action. (Ord.
2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-19: DISCONNECTION AS MEANS OF ENFORCEMENT ONLY:
The city declares that the foregoing procedures set forth in sections 8-3-15 through 8-3-18 of this chapter are established as a means of enforcement
of the terms and conditions of this chapter and not as a penalty. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-20: VIOLATION; DAMAGE LIABILITY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by
reason of such violation. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-21: TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING SEWERAGE WORKS PROHIBITED:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance
or equipment which is a part of the city sewer system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties provided by law. (Ord. 2003-
6, 9-15-2003)
8-3-22: VIOLATION OF DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS; CHARGES:
Any user violating discharge requirements shall pay the actual cost for labor, material and supplies necessary to correct the discharge violation and
shall pay an administrative cost as determined by the city manager upon recommendation of the city engineer. The minimum charge, including
administrative costs, shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2003-6, 9-15-2003)
Chapter 4
SHOPPING CARTS
8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard the life, health, property, and public welfare in keeping with the character of
the City by establishing and maintaining standards for the establishments that provide shopping carts for their customers.
(A) To protect and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods and property values by prohibiting abandoned and/or discarded shopping carts;
and
(B) To promote and maintain healthy commercial centers and property values by providing for the effective communication of the nature of goods and
services and the avoidance of unsightly competition in regards to abandoned carts; and
(C) To provide a reasonable and comprehensive system of controls for abandoned carts; and
(D) To encourage businesses to reinforce a pleasing appearance to the community; and
(E) To attract and direct persons to various activities and enterprises in order to provide for maximum public convenience. (Ord. 99-1, 2-16-1999)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms and phrases as used in this Chapter shall mean:
PARKING AREA: A parking lot or other property provided by a retailer for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. The parking
area shall also include any area designated by the retailer for the placement or storage of shopping carts.
SHOPPING CART: A basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of
transporting goods of any kind. (Ord. 99-1, 2-16-1999)
8-4-3: PERMANENT FIXED SIGN REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 175/436
All shopping carts for any retail establishment in the City shall have a sign permanently affixed to them. The sign shall identify the owner of the cart or
the retailer or both; notify the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the parking area; notify the public that the
unauthorized removal of the cart from the parking area of the retail establishment, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of State law
and City ordinance; and shall list a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart removed from the parking area to the owner or retailer. If
there is no procedure listed on the shopping cart for the authorized removal of the shopping cart from the parking area, then there is a rebuttable
presumption that the shopping cart shall not be removed from the parking area. (Ord. 99-1, 2-16-1999)
8-4-4: REMOVAL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to do any of the following acts, if a shopping cart has a permanent affixed sign as provided for above:
(A) To remove a shopping cart from the premises or parking area of a retail establishment with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the
owner or retailer of possession of the cart.
(B) To be in possession of any shopping cart that has been removed from the premises or the parking area of a retail establishment, with the intent to
temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.
(C) To be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers removed, obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive
the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.
(D) To leave or abandon a shopping cart at a location other than the premises or parking area of the retail establishment with the intent to temporarily
or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.
(E) To alter, convert or tamper with the shopping cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on a cart,
with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.
(F) To be in possession of any shopping cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of a retail establishment, with the intent to
temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. (Ord. 99-1, 2-16-1999)
8-4-5: NOTICE REQUIRED:
There shall be posted, by the business establishment furnishing a parking lot and shopping carts for its customers' use, prominently and
conspicuously, on the building and at any shopping cart storage area, a notice, in English and Spanish, in substantially the following form:
Removal of a shopping cart from the premises is a misdemeanor. (Selma Municipal Code Section 8-4-3). Maximum penalty: $1000 - 6 months, or
both.
(Ord. 99-1, 2-16-1999)
8-4-6: IMPOUNDMENT:
The City Council hereby adopts a policy of impounding shopping carts that are not on the parking lots of retail establishments, and shall by resolution
of the City Council adopt a fine the owner of the shopping cart shall pay for the retrieval of the shopping cart. This shall be done in accordance with
California Business and Professions Code section 22435.7 or any successors. (Ord. 99-1, 2-16-1999)
Chapter 5
NUISANCES; ABATEMENT
8-5-1: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
A "nuisance" is a thing, act, occupation or use of property which:
(A) Shall annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public.
(B) Shall unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage a public park, square, street, alley or highway.
(C) Shall offend public decency.
(D) Shall in any way render the public insecure in life or in use of property. (1963 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 176/436
8-5-2: NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(A) All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public.
(B) All diseased animals running at large.
(C) All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
(D) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within twenty four (24) hours after death.
(E) Accumulations of manure or rubbish.
(F) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight.
(G) The pollution of any public or private well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other
substances. (1963 Code)
(H) (Rep. by Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
(I) All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease.
(J) The use of a common public drinking cup or roller towel.
(K) The distribution of samples of medicine or drugs unless such samples are placed in the hands of an adult person.
(L) All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of property which are deemed by the board of health to be a nuisance to the health of the
inhabitants of this city or any considerable number thereof.
(M) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities. (1963 Code)
8-5-3: NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(A) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdyhouses.
(B) All domestic animals in the act of copulation exposed to public view.
(C) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured, sold, bartered or given away in violation of law.
(D) All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and newspapers.
(E) Betting, bookmaking, prizefighting and all apparatus used in such occupations in violation of law. (1963 Code)
8-5-4: NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(A) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection from cross
streets in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop before the intersection is reached.
(B) All limbs of trees which are less than eight feet (8') above the surface of any street or sidewalk.
(C) All wires which are strung less than fifteen feet (15') above the surface of the ground, except clotheslines.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 177/436
(D) All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount in violation of any law.
(E) All use or display of fireworks in violation of law.
(F) All unnecessary noise and annoying vibrations.
(G) All buildings and alterations to buildings made or erected within the fire limits as established in this code in violation of the regulations concerning
manner and materials of construction.
(H) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under such conditions
as are provided by law.
(I) Radio aerials strung in any manner in violation of any law.
(J) Any use of property abutting upon a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the streets and sidewalks.
(K) The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
(L) All dangerous unguarded machinery in any public place or so situated or operated on private property as to attract the public.
(M) All use of stationary loudspeakers in any part of the city in such manner as to annoy any of the inhabitants of the city.
(N) All irrigation water permitted to run in the streets or alleys of the city except such as is confined in irrigation ditches or flumes.
(O) All other conditions or things which are liable to cause injury to the person or property of anyone. (1963 Code)
8-5-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
8-5-6: ABATEMENT NOTICE:
(A) Upon determination by the council that a "nuisance", as defined in this chapter, exists, the council shall forthwith cause a notice to be posted on the
premises liable for the nuisance directing the removal or abatement of such nuisance.
(B) At the time of posting, the council shall cause a copy of such notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the owner
or agent in charge of the property at the last known address of such owner or agent.
(C) The notice to abate shall contain:
1. A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which or adjacent to which the nuisance exists.
2. A direction to remove the nuisance within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice.
3. A description of the nuisance.
4. A statement that unless such nuisance is removed or abated the city will do so and the cost thereof shall be a lien against the property.
5. A statement that the owner or agent in charge of the property may protest the action by giving notice to the recorder within fifteen (15) days from
the date of mailing of the notice.
(D) The person posting and mailing the notice as provided herein shall, upon completion of the posting and mailing, execute and file in the office of the
recorder a certificate stating the date and place of such mailing and posting.
(E) An error in the name or address of the owner or agent in charge of the property or the use of a name other than that of the owner or agent shall not
make the notice void and in such a case the posted notice shall be deemed sufficient. (1963 Code)
8-5-7: ABATEMENT BY THE OWNER:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 178/436
(A) Within the time allowed by the notice as provided in section 8-5-6 of this chapter, the owner or agent in charge of the property shall remove and
abate the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.
(B) The owner or agent in charge protesting that no nuisance in fact exists shall file with the council a written statement which shall specify the basis
for contending that no nuisance exists.
(C) The statement of protest shall be a part of the council's regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for the consideration of the
abatement, the owner or agent may appear and be heard by the council and the council shall thereupon determine whether a nuisance in fact
exists and such determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases
where a written protest has been filed as provided herein.
(D) Upon council determination that a nuisance does in fact exist, the owner or agent in charge shall within a reasonable time as determined by the
council and within a period of not more than fifteen (15) days, remove or abate such nuisance. (1963 Code)
8-5-8: ABATEMENT BY THE CITY:
(A) If within the time fixed, as provided in this chapter, the nuisance has not been abated by the owner or agent in charge of the property, the council
shall cause the nuisance to be abated.
(B) The council (or official in charge) shall maintain an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in abating the nuisance and shall include
therein an overhead charge of ten percent (10%) of the total cost for administration.
(C) The total cost, including the administrative overhead, shall thereupon be assessed to the property as hereinafter provided. (1963 Code)
8-5-9: ASSESSMENT OF COST:
(A) A notice of the assessment shall be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the owner or agent in charge of the property by
the recorder. The notice shall contain:
1. The total cost, including the administrative overhead, of the abatement.
2. A statement that the cost as indicated will become a lien against the property unless paid within sixty (60) days.
3. A statement that if the owner or agent in charge of the property objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of
objection with the recorder within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice.
(B) Objections to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the council in the regular course of its business.
(C) An assessment for the cost of the abatement as determined by the council shall be made by resolution of the council and shall thereupon be
entered in the docket of city liens, and upon such entry being made, it shall constitute a lien against the property from which the nuisance was
removed or abated.
(D) The lien shall be collected in the same manner as liens for street improvements are collected, and shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%)
per annum. Such interest shall commence to run thirty (30) days after entry in the lien docket.
(E) An error in the name of the owner or agent in charge of the property shall not void the assessment nor will a failure to receive the notice of the
assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. (1963 Code)
8-5-10: PROCEDURE OF ABATEMENT NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The procedure provided by this chapter is not exclusive, but in addition to procedure provided by other provisions of this code, and furthermore, the
health officer and the police officers of this city may proceed summarily to abate a sanitary or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and from
which there is imminent danger to human life or property. (1963 Code)
Chapter 6
WATER WELL CONTROL
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the construction, repair and reconstruction of wells to the end that the ground water of this City will not
be polluted or contaminated and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health,
safety or welfare of the people of this City, for the destruction of abandoned wells, and for the abatement of wells found to be public nuisances to the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 179/436
end that all such wells will not cause pollution or contamination of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of
this City.
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the meaning provided in this Section:
(A) "Well" or "water well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the
underground. "Well" or "water well" shall not include:
1. Oil and gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use
as water wells; or
2. Wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavation during construction, or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.
(B) "Community water supply well" means a water well used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to Chapter 7 of Part 1 of
Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with Section 4010).
(C) "Individual domestic well" means a water well used to supply water for domestic needs or an individual residence or commercial establishment.
(D) "Industrial wells" means water wells used to supply industry on an individual basis.
(E) "Agricultural wells" means water wells used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes, including so-called "stock wells".
(F) "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of water to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through
spread of disease.
(G) "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of water to a degree which unreasonably affects (1) such waters for beneficial uses, or (2) facilities
which serve such beneficial uses. "Pollution" may include contamination.
(H) "Person" means any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency.
(I) "Order of abatement" means both mandatory and prohibitory orders requiring or prohibiting one or more acts; said term shall also include those
orders effective for a limited as well as an indefinite period of time, and shall include modifications or restatements of any order.
(J) "Abatement" means the construction, reconstruction, repair or destruction of a well so as to eliminate a nuisance caused by a well polluting or
contaminating ground water.
(K) "Health Officer" means the City Health Officer or his authorized representative.
8-6-3: STATE REPORTING:
Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be deemed to release any person from compliance with the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 10, Division 7, of
the Water Code of the State of California or any successor hereto.
8-6-4: ACTS PROHIBITED, PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall, within the incorporated area of the City, construct, repair, reconstruct or abandon any well unless a written permit has first been
obtained from the Health Officer of the City, as provided in this Chapter, and the work conforms to the conditions of such permit and this Chapter.
Applications for such permits shall be made on the forms provided for that purpose and in accordance with procedure established by the City Health
Department.
Each such application shall be accompanied by a filing fee set by resolution of the City Council. No part of the fee shall be refundable.
Within ten (10) business days after receipt of the application, the City Health Officer shall either grant, conditionally grant, or deny the permit. If the
application is not acted upon within said ten (10) day period, the application shall be deemed granted. A permit shall not be issued if, in the judgment
of the Health Officer, the well may jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of Selma.
Construction, reconstruction, repair and destruction of wells shall be performed by a contractor with a C-57 Contracting License, or an equivalent
issued by the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards; provided, however, that a property owner may construct, reconstruct, repair or
destruct a well on his own property, which well serves or will serve said property that is neither being offered for sale nor intended to be so offered.
8-6-5: INSPECTIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 180/436
(A) Upon receipt of an application, an inspection of the well location shall be made by the Health Officer precedent to issuance of a well permit.
(B) After work has been completed, the Health Officer shall be notified by the person performing the work and the Health Department shall make a
final inspection of the completed work to determine compliance with the well standards.
8-6-6: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Each permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized thereby has not been completed within one
year following the issuance of the permit.
Upon expiration of any permit issued pursuant hereto, no further work may be done in connection with construction, repair, reconstruction or
abandonment of a well unless and until a new permit for such purpose is secured in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
8-6-7: STANDARDS:
Standards for the construction, repair, reconstruction or abandonment of wells shall be as set forth in Chapter II of the Department of Water Resources
Bulletin No. 74, "Water Well Standards" (February 1968) and Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1, "Cathodic Protection Well Standards"
(March 1973), or as subsequently revised or supplemented, which are hereby incorporated by reference.
8-6-8: VARIANCES:
The Health Officer shall have the power to allow variances from the standards referred to in Section 8-6-7, so as to prevent unnecessary hardship or
injustice and at the same time accomplish the general purpose and intent of the standards.
8-6-9: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
(A) A permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the Health Officer as hereinafter provided if he determines that a violation of this
Chapter exists, that written notice has been directed to permittee specifying the violation and that the permittee has failed or neglected to make the
necessary adjustments within thirty (30) days after receiving such notice.
(B) A permit may be so revoked or suspended by the Health Officer if he determines at a hearing for such purpose that the person to whom any permit
was issued pursuant to this Chapter has obtained the same by fraud or misrepresentation, provided that notice of the time and place of such
hearing is given to the permittee at least five (5) days prior thereto.
(C) The suspension or revocation of any permit shall not be effective until notice thereof in writing is mailed to the permittee, and the time for filing an
appeal to the City Council has expired. The notice shall advise the permittee of his right to appeal to the City Council and to stay the suspension or
revocation pending such appeal.
8-6-10: INVESTIGATION:
The Health Officer may, upon reasonable cause to believe that an abandoned well or other well is causing a nuisance by polluting or contaminating
ground water, investigate the situation to determine whether such a nuisance does in fact exist. He shall have the power, when in the performance of
his duty and upon first presenting his credentials and identifying himself as an employee of the Health Department to the person apparently in control
of the premises, if available, to enter upon any such premises between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., to discover or
inspect any thing or condition which appears to indicate such a nuisance. He may examine such premises, things or conditions, take such samples
and make such tests as needed and take any other steps reasonably necessary for the proper investigation and determination of whether such a
nuisance exists.
8-6-11: ORDER TO ABATE NUISANCE:
Whenever the Health Officer determines that an abandoned or other well is causing a nuisance by polluting or contaminating ground water, he may
issue a written order requiring that the conditions productive of the nuisance be abated within a period of ten (10) days thereafter and shall forthwith
serve the order upon the person occupying the premises, if any, and if no person occupies the premises, the order shall be posted upon said premises
in a conspicuous place. In addition, a copy shall be mailed to the owners of the premises as their names and addresses appear upon the last
equalized assessment roll. The Health Officer may for good cause extend the time specified in the order or otherwise modify or rescind the order.
The order of abatement shall advise the possessors and owners of the property of their right to appeal to the City Council and to stay the order of
abatement pending such appeal.
8-6-12: APPEAL FROM DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT, AND FROM ORDER OF ABATEMENT:
Any person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit one issued has been revoked or suspended, or who has been given an
order of abatement may, within ten (10) days following the receipt of the notice of such denial, suspension or revocation, or of the order of abatement,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 181/436
file an appeal in writing to the City Council. Said appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and shall specify the
grounds upon which the appeal is taken. The City Clerk shall then proceed to set the matter for hearing, not later than twenty (20) days thereafter, and
such appeal shall stay the effect of any order or action until the City Council hears the appeal and issues its order either to affirm, overrule or modify
the action of the Health Officer. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the appealing party at least five (5) days prior to the hearing.
8-6-13: ABATEMENT BY THE CITY:
In the event that a nuisance is not abated in accordance with an Order of Abatement, the Health Officer may, upon securing the approval of the City
Council, proceed to abate the nuisance by force account, contract or any other method deemed most expedient by the City Council.
8-6-14: PAYMENT OF COST BY OWNER:
The Health Officer shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of
the real property upon which the well is or was located, and the names and addresses of the record owner, the holder of any mortgage or deed or trust
of record, and any other person known to have a legal interest in the property.
A hearing shall be held on said report and any protests or objections thereto, and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the persons with a legal
interest in the property at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The City Council shall determine at the hearing the correct charge to
be made for the work. If such costs are not paid by the owner of said property within thirty (30) days of the determination by the City Council, they shall
be assessed upon the property involved as a special assessment. The special assessment will then be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided
for ordinary City taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.
8-6-15: ABATEMENT OF SAFETY HAZARD:
This Chapter shall not affect the right of the City to abate as a public nuisance, pursuant to Article 9, Chapter 1, Division 1, Title 5, of the Government
Code (commencing with Section 50230) any abandoned well which presents a safety hazard. (Ord. 701; 5-21-73; Eff. 6-20-73)
Chapter 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
8-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all properties, structures and dwellings, or portions thereof within the City. (Ord. 95-7, 8-7-95)
8-7-2: PENALTIES:
(A) Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or, at the discretion of the City
Attorney, an infraction. A person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of
which a violation of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization.
(B) Penalties for infractions shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall periodically review the penalties for infractions and set
new penalties by resolution as required to maintain the effectiveness of this Chapter.
(C) All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and exclusive. (Ord. 95-7, 8-7-95)
8-7-3: MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS IN OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
Notwithstanding anything set forth or provided for in this Chapter, if other provisions of the Municipal Code, or other applicable laws, rules, or
regulations, are more restrictive than the provisions set forth in this Chapter, then the other such laws, rules, or regulations shall be applicable. (Ord.
95-7, 8-7-95)
8-7-4: NOT EXCLUSIVE REGULATIONS:
This Chapter is not an exclusive regulation of nuisances, unsafe structures and housing within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition to all
other regulatory laws, codes or ordinances. (Ord. 95-7, 8-7-95)
8-7-5: MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY:
All property within the City shall be maintained in accordance with the following minimum standards:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 182/436
(A) No dangerous building or structure shall be kept upon any property.
(B) No abandoned buildings, partially destroyed, or partially constructed or uncompleted buildings after building permits have expired shall be kept
upon any property.
(C) Buildings shall be maintained in a condition such that deteriorated or peeling exterior treatments shall not permit the effects of the sun and water
penetration to cause or encourage decay, dry rot, warping, cracking or similar deterioration of the building.
(D) All windows, doors, attic vents, underfloor vents and similar building features shall be maintained in an unbroken state.
(E) All fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe condition.
(F) All landscape and yard areas shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards:
1. All landscaped areas, trees, shrubs and decorative plants shall be maintained in a manner which is consistent with other similar areas within the
neighborhood.
2. No lawns visible to the public right of way shall be maintained with grass in excess of ten inches (10") in height. No lawn shall be kept in a
condition which would cause it to become a potential fire hazard.
3. Vegetation shall be maintained in a manner such that it will not attract vermin.
4. Dead, dying or diseased trees and shrubbery should be removed.
(G) Lumber or salvage materials shall not be stored in any area which is visible to public streets or neighboring properties at ground level. These items
may be kept on commercial and industrial properties provided they are screened from view at ground level from adjacent properties and public
rights of way, and all approvals required by title XI of this code have been attained and any conditions of approval have been complied with.
(H) Junk, trash, rubbish, garbage, vegetation clippings or debris shall not be stored on any property for more than one hundred forty four (144) hours,
except during construction activity. Materials may be stored for recycling purposes providing that the materials shall be screened from public view
and shall not be collected in any quantity or fashion which may create an unsafe condition.
(I) No abandoned, discarded or unused furniture, household appliances, household fixtures or similar equipment shall be kept on any residential
property. These items may be kept on commercial and industrial properties provided they are screened from view at ground level from adjacent
properties and public rights of way, and all approvals required by title XI of this code have been attained and any conditions of approval have been
complied with.
(J) No abandoned, wrecked, or dismantled vehicles shall be kept on any residential property for more than seventy two (72) hours. These items may
be kept on commercial and industrial properties provided they are screened from view at ground level from adjacent properties and public rights of
way, and all approvals required by title XI of this code have been attained and any conditions of approval have been complied with.
(K) No used vehicle tires, discarded parts or portions of vehicles shall be kept on any residential property for more than seventy two (72) hours. These
items may be kept on commercial and industrial properties provided they are screened from view at ground level from adjacent properties and
public rights of way, and all approvals required by title XI of this code have been attained and any conditions of approval have been complied with.
(L) No storage of dirt, stone, bark or similar materials shall be permitted on any residential property, except temporary storage during construction or
installation of landscaping. (Ord. 95-7, 8-7-1995)
(M) All buildings and structures shall be kept free of any defacing due to graffiti. The owner shall remove graffiti within forty eight (48) hours of written
notification by city officials. If after written notification the owner fails to remove the graffiti, the city may remove the graffiti. In the event the city
removes the graffiti, the city may place a lien against the property for the full cost of such removal. In the event the city places a lien on the
property, it shall serve a notice of assessment on the owner in accordance with subsection 8-7-6(B)3(b) of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-9, 10-3-2005)
(N) No hanging and/or drying of laundry shall be permitted in any required front or side yard which is visible from a public right of way. No laundry shall
be hung on a fence at any time.
(O) Hazardous materials shall be stored in proper containers and shall not be stored in quantities in excess of three (3) gallons on residential property
at any time. No hazardous materials shall be dumped or stored in a condition such that it will cause ground contamination on any residential,
commercial or industrial property. (Ord. 95-7, 8-7-1995)
8-7-6: PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT:
(A) Dangerous and unsafe structures. See title IV of this code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 183/436
(B) Nuisance abatement other than dangerous and unsafe structures.
1. First And Second Offense For Similar Nuisance:
(a) Notice: Upon identification of a violation of this chapter, the community development director or his authorized representative shall issue a
notice to the occupant of the property, if any, and mail a copy of the notice to the owner of the property as shown on the latest tax assessment
rolls of the Fresno County assessor. A copy of the notice shall be kept by the community development department. The notice shall contain
the following information:
(1) The location of the subject property by street number and/or the approximate location of the property if no street address is available.
(2) A description of the nuisance.
(3) A direction to abate the nuisance within fifteen (15) days from the date on the notice.
(4) A statement that the owner of the property may appeal the notice to the Planning Commission within ten (10) days of the date shown on
the notice. In the event of an appeal, the owner shall be responsible for paying all applicable fees required for processing an appeal. If the
appeal is successful, any fees paid to the City for processing the appeal shall be refunded.
If significant progress is being made to abate the nuisance or an unusual hardship would be created by strict imposition of the fifteen (15) day
abatement period, the Community Development Director may at his discretion extend the time allowed to abate the nuisance up to fifteen (15)
additional days.
(b) Citation: If the nuisance has not been abated prior to the deadlines stated in subsection 8-7-6(B)(1)(a), then the Community Development
Director or his authorized representative shall issue a citation for an infraction, unless a determination has been made by the City Attorney that
a misdemeanor charge is more appropriate. The citation shall be issued to the property owner where the nuisance exists by certified mail or by
personal delivery to the owner. If the property has an occupant other than the owner, a copy of the citation shall also be posted at the property
or delivered to the occupant. The citation shall contain the following:
(1) The location of the subject property by street number and assessor parcel number.
(2) A description of the nuisance and the applicable Municipal Code section.
(3) A notice to appear before the Municipal Court at a specified date and time.
(4) A statement that the City may cause the abatement of the nuisance and the cost of the abatement shall be a lien against the property.
A copy of the notice shall be kept by the Community Development Department. The address of the owner shall be taken from the latest
County Assessor's office tax roll.
(c) Abatement Prior To Court Date: If the nuisance is abated prior to the date shown on the citation for a court appearance, the property owner or
his representative may contact the Community Development Director for an inspection of the property. If the Director finds that the nuisance
has been abated, then the Director or his authorized representative shall transmit such information to the Municipal Court to have the citation
dismissed.
(d) Municipal Court: The owner shall be required to appear before the Municipal Court for a hearing by that Court if the citation has not been
dismissed and received by the Court prior to the hearing date. In addition to any action required to abate the nuisance, the Court may impose
fines in accordance with the adopted fine schedule and levy any court costs as may be required by the Court.
2. Third And Subsequent Offenses For Similar Nuisances: Third and subsequent offenses shall follow the procedures stated above except, that
there shall be no courtesy notice issued and the abatement procedures shall begin with the issuance of a citation.
3. The City may abate the nuisance, provided that notice has been given as set forth above. In the event the City abates the nuisance, the City
may place a lien against the property for the full cost of the abatement. In accordance with California Government Code section 38773.7, the City
may require the owner to pay treble the costs of abatement, upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two (2) year
period. The process for recovering expenses for abatement by the City shall be as follows:
(a) Recovery Of Costs: Any costs incurred by the City shall be recovered through a lien against the property. Recoverable costs shall include, but
not be limited to, staff time, materials and cost of abatement by third parties under contract to the City. An accurate record of the expense
incurred by the City shall be maintained.
(b) Notice Of Assessment: The notice of assessment shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with
article 3 commencing with section 415.10 of chapter 4 of title 5 of part 2 of the California Code for Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after
diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and
publication thereof in the Selma Enterprise at least one time. The notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The amount of the lien, the date of the abatement order, the street address, the legal description, assessor's parcel number of the parcel
which the lien is imposed, the name and address of the recorded owner of the property and the mailing address of the City.
(2) A statement that the cost will become a lien against the property unless paid within sixty (60) days of the date of the assessment notice.
(3) A statement that if the owner objects to the assessment as indicated, an appeal may be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of
the assessment notice.
(4) The nuisance abatement lien will be recorded in the Fresno County Recorder's Office and from the date of recording shall have the full
force, effect and priority of a judgment lien.
(c) Hearing On Objections: If the owner files an objection within the thirty (30) day time period, then the City Clerk shall cause the objection to be
placed on the next regular City Council meeting agenda, providing that is at least ten (10) days notice may be given. The City Council shall
review the evidence and any testimony given at the meeting and make a determination on the assessment. The action of the City Council shall
be final.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 184/436
(d) Any assessment for nuisance abatement shall be as determined by the City Council by a resolution. (Ord. 95-7, 8-7-95)
8-7-7: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which has not been actively utilized for a lawful purpose, which has not been
maintained, and which has not been rendered inaccessible to members of the public by boarding or similar means, for a continuous period of not less
than ninety (90) days.
BUILDING: A permanently located structure having a roof. House trailers and other vehicles as regulated under the California Vehicle Code.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Building Official of the City of Selma or his designated representative.
DANGEROUS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which is in a condition such that the life, health, property or safety of the public
or its occupants may be endangered shall be a dangerous building or structure.
DIRECTOR: The Community Development Director of the City of Selma or his authorized representative.
JUNK, RUBBISH, OR TRASH: Any unusable or discarded items not being used for the original purpose for which they were constructed. The terms
shall also include used items which may be recycled.
NUISANCE: The following shall be defined as public nuisances for the purposes of this Chapter:
(A) Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence.
(B) Any dangerous building or structure.
(C) Any property or building not maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 8-7-5 of the Municipal Code.
(D) Any condition related to real property which may pose a threat to the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants. (Ord. 95-7, 8-
7-95)
Chapter 8
PROPERTY BEAUTIFICATION
(Rep. by Ord. 95-7, 8-7-1995)
Chapter 9
WATER CONSERVATION
8-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to minimize outdoor water use, control unnecessary water consumption and to conserve water in landscaping to
preserve the available potable water supply of the City. (Ord. 92-10, 1-19-93)
8-9-2: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the WATER CONSERVATION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SELMA. (Ord. 91-1, 3-4-91)
8-9-3: AUTHORIZATION:
The City Manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this Chapter upon their determination
that such implementation is necessary to protect the public welfare and safety. (Ord. 91-1, 3-4-91)
8-9-4: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all persons, customers and property within the limits of the City. (Ord. 91-1, 3-4-91)
8-9-5: WASTE OF WATER PROHIBITION:
The following uses of water are defined as a "waste of water" and are hereby prohibited except as otherwise authorized:
(A) The use of water which allows substantial amounts of water to run off to a gutter, ditch, or drain. Every water user is deemed to have his water
distribution lines and facilities under his control at all times and to know the manner and extent of his water use and excess runoff.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 185/436
(B) The excessive use, loss, or escape of water through breaks, leaks or malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution facilities for any
period of time after such escape of water should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall be presumed that a period of forty eight
(48) hours after discovery is a reasonable time within which to correct such a leak or break.
(C) The washing of vehicles, building exteriors, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas without the use of a
positive shut-off nozzle on the hose, which results in excessive runoff, except where necessary to dispose of liquids or substances that would
endanger the public's health and safety. (Ord. 930, 5-7-90)
(D) The watering of lawns, groundcover and shrubbery shall not be allowed between certain hours and certain dates to be determined by the City
Council. (Ord. 91-1, 3-4-91)
8-9-6: OUTDOOR WATER USE; WATER CONSERVATION STAGES:
No one within the City shall knowingly make, cause, use or permit the use of water for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or any other
purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this Chapter, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by the conservation stage in effect
pursuant to action taken by the City Manager, or his designee, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The Director of the Public Works
Department shall promulgate guidelines which shall set forth the criteria for determining when a particular conservation stage is to be implemented
and terminated. Such guidelines shall be updated when, in the opinion of the Director, the conditions of the utility system have changed so as to
necessitate such update. The Director shall include in such guidelines a scheduling system designating allowed days for irrigation by customers. Said
guidelines shall be available for inspection at the City Clerk's office, and the Public Works Department City Hall offices during normal business hours.
(A) Stage 1. Voluntary Conservation: Water users in the City are requested to voluntarily limit the amount of water used at all times to that amount
absolutely necessary for health, business and irrigation.
(B) Stage 2. Voluntary Compliance - Water Alert: Upon implementation by the City Manager, and publication of notice, the following restrictions shall
apply to all persons. All elements of Stage 1 shall remain in effect in Stage 2 except that: (Ord. 930, 5-7-90)
1. Irrigation utilizing individual sprinklers or sprinkler systems of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants is permitted only
on days and times as designated by resolution of the City Council. Irrigation of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants
is permitted anytime if:
(a) A hand-held hose with a positive shut-off nozzle is used;
(b) A hand-held, faucet-filled bucket of five (5) gallons or less is used; or
(c) A drip irrigation system is used.
EXCEPTION: Commercial nurseries, commercial sod farmers, and similar establishments are exempt from State 2 irrigation restrictions, but
will be requested to curtail all nonessential water use. (Ord. 92-10, 1-19-93)
2. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment is permitted only on designated irrigation days
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held
bucket, or a hand-held hose, equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle for quick rinses.
EXCEPTION: Washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further,
such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle
cleaning, such as garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and perishables.
3. The refilling or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools and/or spas is permitted only on designated irrigation days between the hours
of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
4. The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making similar use of water is prohibited unless the fountain uses a recycling
system, such as an electric pump.
5. The washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, courts, patios, or other paved areas is absolutely prohibited.
6. All restaurants are requested to serve water to customers only when specifically requested by the customers.
(C) Stage 3. Mandatory Compliance - Water Warning: Upon implementation by the City Manager and publication of notice, the following restrictions
shall apply to all persons. All elements of Stage 2 shall remain in effect in Stage 3 except that: (Ord. 930, 5-7-90)
1. All outdoor irrigation of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants shall occur only on days and between times as
designated by resolution of the City Council, and shall be done utilizing individual sprinklers, sprinkler systems, drip systems, or hand-held faucet
filled buckets of five (5) gallons or less, with no exceptions. (Ord. 92-10, 1-19-93)
2. The use of water for irrigation of golf greens and tees is permitted only on designated irrigation days between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. The irrigation of golf course fairways is absolutely prohibited.
(D) Stage 4. Mandatory Compliance - Water Emergency: Upon implementation by the City Manager and publication of notice, the following restrictions
shall apply to all persons; all elements of Stage 3 shall remain in effect in Stage 4 except that:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 186/436
1. All outdoor irrigation of vegetation shall be allowed only between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
designated days.
2. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment not occurring upon the immediate premises of
commercial car washes and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and welfare shall be
prohibited.
3. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment upon the immediate premises of commercial
car washes and commercial service stations, not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and welfare shall occur only between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
4. The watering of golf course tee areas is prohibited.
5. Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and/or other activities immediately necessary to maintaining the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of Selma.
6. Commercial nurseries, commercial sod farmers, and similar establishments shall water only on designated days between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and shall use only hand-held hoses, drip irrigation systems, or hand-held buckets.
7. The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools and/or spas is prohibited.
8. The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure is prohibited. (Ord. 930, 5-7-90)
8-9-7: MANDATORY CONSERVATION PHASE IMPLEMENTATION:
The City Public Works Department and California Water Service Company shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water within the City and
shall recommend to the City Manager the extent of the conservation required through the implementation and/or termination of particular conservation
stages in order to assure the water supply of the City. Thereafter, the City Manager, as directed by Administrative policies, may order that the
appropriate phase of water conservation be implemented or terminated in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter. Said order shall
be made by public announcement and shall be published a minimum of one time in a newspaper of general circulation and shall continue to be
published on a weekly basis as a poster ad until such time as all restrictions are removed and shall become effective immediately upon such
publication. The City Council will approve the conservation state at a regularly scheduled meeting within fourteen (14) days following implementation
by the City Manager. (Ord. 930, 5-7-90)
8-9-8: DESIGN CRITERIA FOR WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING:
(A) Irrigation System Design Criteria: All commercial and industrial projects requiring landscaping and developer provided landscape for single- and
multi-family residential projects completed after adoption of this Section, shall comply with the following design criteria for irrigation. All upgraded or
refurbished projects are encouraged to follow these criteria.
1. All irrigation systems shall be designed by a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor or other appropriate licensed
professional. The person preparing the plans shall certify that all requirements of this Section are complied with.
2. All irrigation systems shall be on an automatic timer. No battery operated timers shall be permitted.
3. All irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the amount of over spray between sprinklers and onto any adjacent nonlandscape areas.
4. No spray irrigation shall be allowed in any landscape area which is less than eight feet (8') in width.
5. Unless within a turf or similar area, all trees and shrubs shall be irrigated by drip or similar low flow devices which do not exceed a flow of sixteen
(16) gallons per hour.
6. All irrigation systems shall be designed to account for project specific terrain, soil types, prevalent wind conditions, temperatures, and other
environmental factors to provide the most water efficient irrigation design.
7. The irrigation system design criteria shall not apply to public or private golf courses, parks, cemeteries, and City maintained parking lots and
medians, although these uses are encouraged to comply with water conserving irrigation practices.
(B) Landscape Design Criteria: All commercial and industrial projects requiring landscaping and developer provided landscape for single- and multifamily
residential projects, completed after adoption of this Section, shall comply with the following design criteria for landscaping. All upgraded or
refurbished projects are encouraged to follow the criteria.
1. All landscaping plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor or other appropriate licensed
professional. The person preparing the plans shall certify that all requirements of this Section are complied with.
2. A maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the landscape area of a lot may be turf. The amount of turf area may be increased by five percent
(5%) for each of the following water conservation measures incorporated into the landscaping:
(a) Micro irrigation for trees and shrubs is used (watering heads which do not exceed sixteen (16) gallons per hour).
(b) Rain gauges are used for automatic shut-off during periods of rain.
(c) Soil moisture sensors are used to activate and deactivate irrigation systems.
(d) Use of a drought tolerant turf.
3. No turf shall be permitted in any landscape area less than eight feet (8') in width.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 187/436
4. All plant materials shall be well-suited to the local climate and require low to moderate water usage. Plants having similar water usage shall be
grouped together in distinct hydrozones. It is recommended that all plant materials be from the City's recommended plant list.
5. All nonturf areas shall be prepared with three inches (3") of mulch prior to any planting.
6. The landscape plans shall include a regular maintenance schedule, which shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Inspecting, adjusting and repairing damage to irrigation systems and landscaping.
(b) Resetting automatic controllers to compensate for seasonal changes.
(c) Fertilizing, weeding, pruning and other routine maintenance. Aerating and dethatching turf areas.
7. The landscape design criteria shall not apply to public or private golf courses, parks, cemeteries, and City maintained parking lots and medians,
although these uses are encouraged to comply with this subsection B.
8. The City staff shall develop and have available to the public, landscape guidelines which outline various water conservation techniques and
recommended plant materials within six (6) months of the adoption of this Section. (Ord. 92-10, 1-19-93)
8-9-9: ENFORCEMENT:
It is one of the objectives of the City Council of the City that the citizens of Selma be encouraged to voluntarily comply with the provisions of Sections
8-9-5 and 8-9-6 of this Chapter. Therefore, in furtherance of said objective, the enforcement of this Chapter will permit issuance of up to three (3)
warnings of violation of Sections 8-9-5 and 8-9-6, by way of written notices of violation to the violating water user, before the issuance of a citation for
said violations.
Not withstanding the foregoing, any person violating any provision of Sections 8-9-5 and 8-9-6 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as
a new and separate offense.
Section 8-9-8 of this Chapter shall be enforced by the Planning Department during the development review process. The Planning Department shall
review and approve landscape and irrigation plans as per other sections of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 92-10, 1-19-93)
8-9-10: PUBLIC NUISANCE; DEFINITIONS:
In addition to any other remedies which may otherwise be available to the City, the City Council of the City hereby makes the following findings and
declarations:
(A) The waste of water, as that term is defined herein, on public or private property within the City is hereby found to contribute to and compound
drought conditions which may, from time to time, exist in the City to the detriment of one of our most precious and finite resources, to wit; water.
Such conditions cause injury to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Selma. Therefore, the waste of water within the City on
private or public property, except as expressly permitted hereinabove, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in
an action brought on behalf of the people of the State of California, by the City Attorney, in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 930, 5-7-90)
8-9-11: ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS:
(A) Compliance: All peace officers and persons authorized by law to issue citations within the City shall, in conjunction with duties imposed by the law,
diligently enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
(B) Authority: Pursuant to the provisions of section 835.5 of the Penal Code, the following officers and employees of the City are hereby designated as
enforcement officers and authorized to issue citations for enforcement of this Chapter:
Director of Public Works
Public Works Supervisor
Building Official
Police officers
Fire captains
(C) Notice: Employees of the California Water Service Company are authorized by this Chapter to issue written notices of violations of Section 8-9-5
and 8-9-6, but are not authorized by law to issue citations for said violations.
(D) Exceptions: Consideration of written applications for exceptions to Sections 8-9-5 and 8-9-6 of this Chapter, regarding regulations and restrictions
on water use not otherwise set forth in previous sections of this Chapter shall be as follows:
1. Written application for exception to Section 8-9-5 and 8-9-6 of this Chapter shall be submitted to the City Manager. The City Manager may grant
an exception if the following conditions exist:
(a) Strict application of those sections would cause an unnecessary and undue hardship to the applicant, including, but not limited to, adverse
economic impact; or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 188/436
(b) Strict application of those sections would cause a condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection or safety of the applicant
or the public; or
(c) Granting the application is not detrimental to the "general welfare". (Ord. 92-10, 1-19-93)
Chapter 10
URBAN STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
8-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the URBAN STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and to protect and enhance the quality of the
city's watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands pursuant to and consistent with all applicable state and federal laws related to storm water
management, including, but not limited to, the clean water act (33 United States Code section 1251 et seq.), the national pollution discharge
elimination system regulations (40 code of federal regulations part 122) and the city's storm water discharge permit for small municipal storm sewer
systems (MS4). (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to storm water. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, drainage from outdoor areas, and activities required to control the discharge
from construction sites disturbing one acre of land or more (in 1 or more phases of construction).
CALIFORNIA STATE WATER RESOURCES CONTROL BOARD (SWRCB): The state agency charged with administration of the national pollution
discharge elimination system (NPDES).
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act, as amended, 22 United States Code section 1251 et seq.
DIRECTOR: The public works director.
DISCHARGE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, ejecting, placing, releasing, leaching, dumping or disposing into or on any
land in a manner that may cause pollution.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The federal agency charged with enforcement of environmental laws and regulations.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): Storm water discharge permit for small municipal storm sewer systems
(MS4) permit issued by the California state water resources control board which authorizes the discharge of storm water pursuant to the clean water
act section 402 (33 USC section 1342).
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): A form submitted to the regional water quality control board notifying the agency of a person's intent to be covered under
a separate regional water quality control board construction permit for the control of construction site runoff on projects that disturb one acre of land or
more, in one or more phases of construction.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, government entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
POLLUTANT: Shall have the same meaning as defined in 40 CFR section 122.2, and shall include, but not be limited to, any solid, liquid, gas, or other
substance that can alter the physical or chemical properties of water including, but not limited to, fertilizers, solvents, sludge, petroleum or petroleum
products, solid waste, garbage, biological materials, radioactive materials, sand, dirt, animal waste, acids, and bases.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.
PUBLIC STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: All or any part of the publicly owned and maintained roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, storm drains and dry wells located within public easement, right of way, parks, common areas, retention areas, or other publicly owned or
maintained real property designed or used for collecting, holding, or conveying storm water.
REGIONAL WATER QUALITY CONTROL BOARD (RWQCB): The state division of the SWRCB charged with enforcement of the water quality laws
and regulations in the state of California.
STORM WATER: Storm water runoff, surface runoff and drainage. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-4: AUTHORITY FOR ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 189/436
The director of public works shall have the authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties set forth in this chapter and to administer and
enforce provisions of this chapter. The director of public works may designate other employees to exercise such powers and perform such duties, as
he/she deems appropriate. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-5: CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with requirements of the federal clean water act and its implemented regulations for storm water
management, and to comply with the California state water resources control board's storm water discharge permit for small MS4s, and shall be
applicable to all storm water generated on any developed or undeveloped urban lands lying within the city of Selma or conveyed by the public storm
drain system. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-6: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY OF DISCHARGER:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the United
States caused by said person. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Selma, or any agent or employee thereof, for any
damages, claims, or liabilities that result from any dischargers, reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord.
2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-7: PROHIBITION OF NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE TO THE PUBLIC STORM DRAIN SYSTEM; EXEMPTIONS:
(A) Discharging Of Substances Prohibited: Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this chapter, no person shall cause or allow the discharge to a
public right of way or public storm drain system of any substance that is not composed entirely of storm water.
(B) Addition Of Pollutants Prohibited: Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this chapter, no person shall use, store, spill, dump, or dispose of
materials in a manner that those materials could cause or contribute to the addition of pollutants to storm water.
(C) Exemptions: The following discharges are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section:
1. Discharges authorized by a separate NPDES or RWQCB permit.
2. The following categories of nonstorm water discharges are permissible unless otherwise prohibited under subsection (C)3, (C)4 or (C)5 of this
section:
Air conditioning condensation.
Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
Discharges from emergency firefighting activity.
Discharges from potable water sources.
Diverted stream flows.
Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
Footing drains.
Foundation drains.
Individual residential car washing.
Irrigation water.
Landscaping irrigation.
Lawn watering.
Rising ground waters.
Springs.
Uncontaminated ground water infiltration as defined in 40 CFR section 35.2005(20).
Uncontaminated pumped ground water.
Water from crawl space pumps.
Water line flushing.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 190/436
Or any other activity that the director identifies is not a significant contributor of pollutants during the city of Selma's NPDES storm water
discharge permit for small MS4's permit term.
3. No person shall discharge to public storm drain system any exempted discharge under this subsection if the director or assigned designee
identifies and provides written notice to the person that the discharge has the potential to be a source of pollutants to receiving waters,
waterways, or ground water.
4. No person shall discharge to the public storm drain system that would result in or contribute to a violation of the city's NPDES storm water
discharge permit for small MS4s. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the
discharge.
5. No person shall establish, use, maintain, or continue any connection to the public storm drain system which has caused or is likely to cause a
violation of this section. This prohibition is retroactive and shall apply to any connection that was made in the past, regardless of whether it was
made under permit or other authorization, or whether it was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the
connection. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-8: OPERATING FACILITIES OR ACTIVITIES:
(A) All persons owning or operating premises or engaged in activities who are required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or RWQCB a
notice of intent (NOI) to comply with an NPDES or RWQCB storm water discharge permit shall provide a copy of such notice to the director upon
request. Facilities required to apply for a storm water discharge permit are identified in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
(B) All persons engaged in activities which will or may reasonably be expected to result in pollutants entering the public storm drain system shall
undertake best management practices (BMPs) to minimize such pollutants, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of pollutants to the
public storm drain system and comply with cleanup and notification requirements of this chapter. Such measures shall include the requirements
imposed by federal, state, county, or local authorities. BMPs are site specific and are described in the documents "Storm Water Best Management
Practice Handbook: Construction"; "Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbook: New Development And Redevelopment"; "Storm Water
Best Management Practice Handbook: Industrial And Commercial"; "Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbook: Municipal"; or other
guidance documents available from EPA and/or RWQCB.
(C) If best management practice is required by the public works director or city engineer to prevent a pollutant from entering the public storm drain
system, the person receiving the notice of such a requirement may petition the city council of the city of Selma to reconsider the application of the
BMPs to the premises or activity. The written petition must be received by the city clerk within ten (10) working days of the notice issued by the
public works director or city engineer. The petition shall set forth any reasons as to why application of BMPs to the premises or activity should not
be required and any proposed alternatives to such requirement. The city council will act within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of the petition.
(Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-9: CONSTRUCTION SITES:
(A) All persons engaged in construction activities who are required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or RWQCB a notice of intent to comply
with an NPDES storm water permit, shall provide the city with copies of the NOI and the NPDES storm water permit issued by the RWQCB.
Construction activities that will disturb one acre or more of land area or smaller land areas, if they are part of a larger common plan of development
or sale, are required to apply for a storm water discharge permit (40 CFR 122.26(b)(15)).
(B) Any person performing construction shall not cause or contribute to a violation of the RWQCB storm water discharge permit issued by the RWQCB
to the city of Selma. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge. Any person
performing construction shall undertake best management practices to minimize pollutants (including sediments) from leaving the construction site,
provide protection from accidental discharge of pollutants to the public storm drain system, and comply with the cleanup and notification
requirements of this chapter. Site operator shall ensure erosion and sediment control and control of waste and properly dispose of waste, such as
discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts
to water quality. Such measures shall include the requirements imposed by federal, state, county, or local authorities. BMPs are site specific and
are described in the documents "Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbook: Construction"; "Storm Water Best Management Practice
Handbook: New Development And Redevelopment"; "Storm Water Best Management Practice Handbook: Industrial And Commercial"; "Storm
Water Best Management Practice Handbook: Municipal"; or other guidance documents available from EPA and/or RWQCB.
(C) If best management practice is required by the public works director or city engineer to prevent a pollutant from entering the public storm drain
system, the person receiving the notice of such a requirement may petition the city council of the city of Selma to reconsider the application of the
BMPs to the premises or activity. The written petition must be received within ten (10) working days at the issuance of the notice by the public
works director or city engineer and shall set forth any reasons as to why application of BMPs to the premises or activity should not be required and
any proposed alternatives to such a requirement. The city council will act within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of the petition. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-
17-2007)
8-10-10: POSTCONSTRUCTION:
Property owners or operators shall ensure long term operation and maintenance of postconstruction storm water runoff control mechanisms, such as
retention basins, dry wells and other measures described in 40 CFR 122.34(b)(5)(iii). (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-11: CLEANUP AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 191/436
(A) As soon as any owner or operator has actual or constructive knowledge of any discharge which may result in pollutants entering the public storm
drain system, such person shall promptly take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery of the source and the extent and proceed with
containment and cleanup of such discharge.
(B) The owner or operator shall notify the public works director or the city engineer of the discharge in both of the following manners:
1. By telephone as soon as practical or by calling 9-1-1, if hazardous materials are involved; and
2. By written report identifying the discharge source, extent, pollutant, measures taken to mitigate the discharge, and preventative measures put
into place to prevent a subsequent discharge. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-12: INSPECTIONS:
(A) Authority To Inspect: Upon presentation of credentials and at all reasonable or necessary hours, all authorized employees of the city shall have
access to all premises and to all records pertaining to those premises for purposes of ensuring compliance with this chapter. Inspection,
interviewing, copying, sampling, photographing, and other activities conducted on the premises shall be limited to those which are reasonably
needed by the city in determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter. All persons shall allow such activities under safe and
nonhazardous conditions with a minimum of delay.
(B) Monitoring Activities: The public works director or the city engineer may order any person engaged in any activity or owning or operating on any
premises which may cause or contribute to discharges of pollutants to the public storm drain system in violation of this chapter or any applicable
NPDES or RWQCB storm water permit condition to undertake such monitoring activities and analyses and furnish such reports as the public works
director or city engineer reasonably may specify. The costs of such activities, analyses, and reports shall be borne by the recipient of the order.
(C) Access Refusal: If an authorized employee of the city of Selma has been refused access to any premises, and is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect, interview, copy, photograph or sample as part of an
inspection and sampling procedure of the city designed to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter or any related laws or
regulations designed to protect the environment and the public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the public works director or city
engineer may seek issuance of a search warrant from a magistrate judge or judicial officer of the Fresno County superior court. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-
2007)
8-10-13: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
(A) Enforcement: Charges levied pursuant to this chapter shall be collected by the department of public works. The public works director or city
engineer shall make and enforce economic and efficient management and protection of the city's storm drain system.
(B) Owner Of Record: The owner of record of the property upon which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be presumed to be a person having
lawful control over the activity or premises unless it is demonstrated that another person has knowingly and in good faith accepted responsibility for
the activity at issue. If more than one person is identified as the owner, such persons shall be presumed to be jointly and severally in lawful
possession and control of the activity or premises.
(C) Notice Of Violation: The public works director or city engineer may issue a written notice of violation to any person who has violated or is in
violation of this chapter. Failure to comply with any act required in the notice of violation be a separate violation for each day beyond the thirtieth
day following the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the public works director or city engineer to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. In appropriate situations, the public works
director or city engineer may notify the person orally either in person or by telephone prior to, and, in some cases, in lieu of, written notification.
(D) Consent Orders: The public works director or city engineer may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, negotiated
settlement agreements or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the person(s) to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document, including an
identification and description of the best management practices and measures to utilize in implementing the order. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as any other orders issued under this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
(E) Cease And Desist Orders: When the public works director or city engineer finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter or any related laws or regulations, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, the public works director or city engineer may
issue an order to the person directing them to cease and desist all such violations and direct the person to immediately comply with all
requirements; and take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the person. A person's failure
to comply with an order of the public works director or city engineer issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(F) Civil Penalties: In addition to any other enforcement authority contained in this chapter, the public works director or city engineer shall issue a civil
citation to any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any related laws or regulations. A person who
violates any requirement of this chapter or any applicable NPDES or RWQCB storm water discharge permit condition shall be civilly liable to the
city of Selma for a sum not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day per violation.
(G) Criminal Penalties: A person who wilfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, or any related laws or regulations shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00)
per day per violation and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 192/436
(H) Criminal Prosecution: Some intentional violations may constitute criminal violations of federal, state and local laws, and that under such
circumstances, the public works director or city engineer may seek the assistance of the EPA, the state or county prosecutor to commence civil
and/or criminal action against any person who violates any requirement of this chapter or any applicable NPDES or RWQCB storm water discharge
permit condition.
(I) Revoking Or Withholding Of Permit: In addition to or in lieu of all other available penalties, the city of Selma may revoke or withhold any permit,
approval or license to construct improvements to real property or operate a business in the city of Selma if the holder of such permit, approval, or
license is in violation of any requirement of this chapter or any applicable NPDES or RWQCB storm water discharge permit condition.
(J) Liability For Costs: The public works director or city engineer may assess liability for costs to any person found in violation of this chapter for all
actual costs incurred by the city of Selma in surveillance, sampling and testing, abatement, and remediation associated with a discharge that is in
violation of this chapter. Additionally, the public works director or city engineer may assess liability for costs to any person whose discharge
resulted in a violation of the city's storm water discharge permit. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-14: CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS:
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law, regulation, permit, or other ordinance of the city of Selma, the
requirements which establishes the stricter standard shall govern. To the extent permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of
any other applicable law. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-15: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter or any part of the code adopted herein by reference is for any reason
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions thereof. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
8-10-16: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine or by imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment as specified herein. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as herein described. (Ord. 2007-9, 9-17-2007)
Chapter 11
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION
8-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION ORDINANCE and may be so cited. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-
2008)
8-11-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish an abandoned residential property registration program as a mechanism to protect residential
neighborhoods within the city limits of the city of Selma from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned
properties. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
8-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
The terms as used in this chapter or in any resolution or standard adopted by the city council pursuant to this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
ABANDONED: A property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default, notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale or that has
been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, or that is transferred
under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY: A property that is accessible through a compromised or breached gate, fence, wall or other similar feature.
ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE: A structure or building that is unsecured or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by
unauthorized persons.
BENEFICIARY: A lender under a note secured by a deed of trust.
BUYER: Any person, copartnership, association, corporation, entity, or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property
described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 193/436
DANGEROUS BUILDING: Any building or structure that would constitute a "dangerous building" as defined in section 302 of the uniform code for the
abatement of dangerous buildings or as prepared by the International Conference of Building Officials and adopted in force within the city.
DAYS: Consecutive calendar days.
DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE OR SALE: A recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of
trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.
DEED OF TRUST: An instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition
applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, including second trust deed, third trust deed, etc.
DEFAULT: The failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or conditional.
DISTRESSED: A property that is under a current notice of default, or notice of trustee's sale, or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been
foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary or trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that
the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or
mail, past due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds
or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, and statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery
agents, or government employees that the property is vacant.
FORECLOSURE: The process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor
(borrower) defaults.
LOCAL: Within forty (40) road driving miles distance of the subject property.
NEIGHBORHOOD STANDARD: Those conditions that are present on a simple majority of properties within a three hundred foot (300') radius of an
individual property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, or any other abandoned property within the three hundred
foot (300') radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority.
NOTICE OF DEFAULT: A recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's
sale.
OUT OF AREA: In excess of forty (40) road driving miles distance of the subject property.
OWNER: Any person, copartnership, association, corporation, entity, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person having recorded title to the property at any given point in time the record is provided by the Fresno County
recorder's office.
PROPERTY: Any unimproved or improved residential real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures
located on the property regardless of condition.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: Any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes,
and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade,
transfer, or exchange as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted or zoned for such use.
SECURING: Such measures as may be directed by the chief of police or his or her designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to
unauthorized persons including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of doors,
windows or other openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current housing and urban development (HUD) securing standards at
the time the boarding is completed or required.
TRUSTEE: The person, firm, corporation, or entity holding a deed of trust on a property.
TRUSTOR: A borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.
VACANT: A building or structure that is not legally occupied. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
8-11-4: RECORDATION OF TRANSFER OF LOAN, DEED OF TRUST, ASSIGNMENT OF RENTS:
Within ten (10) days of the purchase or transfer of a loan or deed of trust secured by residential property, the new beneficiary/trustee shall record with
the Fresno County recorder's office an assignment of rents or similar document that lists the name of the corporation, entity, or individual and the
mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary or trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan or deed of
trust. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
8-11-5: REGISTRATION:
(A) Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the city of Selma shall perform an inspection of the property that is
the security for the deed of trust upon default by the trustor and prior to recording a notice of default with the Fresno County recorder's office. If the
property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten
(10) days of the inspection, register the property with the chief of police or his or her designee on forms provided by the city.
(B) If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee or his designee monthly until:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 194/436
1. The trustor or other party remedies the default, or
2. It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at which time it is deemed abandoned and the trustee shall, within ten (10) days of that
inspection, register the property with the chief of police, or his/her designee, on forms provided by the city.
(C) The registration required by either subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation, entity, or
individual), the direct street mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact name and phone number for the
beneficiary/trustee, and, in the case of a corporation, entity, or out of area beneficiary/trustee, the local property management company responsible
for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property.
(D) An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion
of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be
received no later than January 31 of the year due.
(E) This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
(F) Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this
chapter as long as they remain vacant.
(G) Any person, firm, corporation, or entity that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten (10) days of the change. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
(H) Any individual or entity who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to section 8-11-12
of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-6, 11-4-2013)
8-11-6: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of chapter 5 of this title, properties subject to registration under section 8-11-5 of this chapter shall comply with the
following:
(A) In comparison to the neighborhood standard, the property shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building
materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, fliers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items,
including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the
property is abandoned.
(B) The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior of the structure.
(C) All yards visible from the public right of way shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard at the time registration was
required.
1. Landscape includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark, or artificial
turf or sod designed specifically for residential installation.
2. Landscape does not include weeds, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet, or any
similar material.
3. Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape, and removal of all
trimmings.
(D) Pools and spas shall either be kept in working order and treated so the water remains clear and free of pollutants, debris, and any kind of larvae
that would cause a health danger to the surrounding vicinity, or drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools or spas must comply with
the minimum security fencing requirements of the state of California.
(E) Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions, and
restrictions and/or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
8-11-7: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of chapter 5 of this title, properties subject to registration under section 8-11-5 of this chapter shall comply with the
following:
(A) The property shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not
limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding, and garage), gates, and any other opening of such size that may allow
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 195/436
a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure(s). In the case of broken windows, securing means the reglazing or boarding of the
window.
(B) If the property is owned by a corporation, entity, or out of area beneficiary/trustee/owner:
1. A local property management company shall be contracted to perform, at a minimum, monthly inspections to verify that the requirements of this
section, and any other applicable laws, are being met.
2. The property shall be posted with the name and twenty four (24) hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The
posting shall be no less than eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty five
feet (45') and shall contain, along with the name and twenty four (24) hour contact number, the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and
"TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL". The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the
property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is
visible from the street; if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the
front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. The exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with weather resistant
materials.
3. The local property management company shall inspect the property no less than on a monthly basis to determine if the property is in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
8-11-8: ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY:
In addition to the enforcement remedies established by other provisions of this code, the chief of police, or his/her designee, and the fire chief, or
his/her designee, shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record of any property affected by this chapter to
implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings,
installing additional security lighting, increasing on site inspection frequency, employment of an on site security guard, or other measures as may be
reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
8-11-9: MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY BY CITY:
(A) If any individual or entity covered by this chapter fails to maintain and secure their property as required by this chapter within a reasonable time of
issuance of a notice of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, then the city manager shall cause the property to be maintained or secured
by city personnel or private contract, and entry upon the property is expressly authorized for such purposes. Upon completion of the maintenance
or securing by direction of the city manager, the city manager shall cause a statement of the costs thereof to be prepared for submission to the city
council. The city manager shall set a time and place for the city council to receive and consider the statement of costs, and shall serve on the
owner or owners of the property a copy of the statement of costs and a notice of the time and place at which the city council will receive and
consider the statement of costs. The statement of costs and the notice of hearing shall be served in the same manner as provided in section 8-5-9
of this title.
(B) In addition to maintenance and securing of properties, any individual or entity covered by this chapter who fails to maintain and secure their
property as required by this chapter within a reasonable time of issuance of a notice of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to have authorized the city to remove trespassers from the property. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
8-11-10: FEES:
The fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2008-6, 8-4-2008)
8-11-11: ENFORCEMENT:
Every violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and may be enforced in any combination as allowed in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 2008-6,
8-4-2008)
8-11-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
(A) Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent.
(B) Any individual or entity that violates any portion of this chapter shall be subject to penalties as set forth in title I, chapter 4 of this code.
(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter and as an alternative to or in addition to any other remedy, the city may impose a civil penalty
in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for failure to maintain and secure a vacant residential property, as required
by this chapter pursuant to California Civil Code sections 2929.3 and 2929.4. The procedures for imposing a civil fine are as follows:
1. Notice Of Violation: Upon determining a violation, the city manager or his or her designee shall issue a notice of violation. The notice of violation
shall, at a minimum, give notice of each alleged violation, a description of each of the conditions that give rise to the allegation, and notice of the
city's intent to assess a civil fine if action to correct the violation is not commenced within a period of not less than fourteen (14) days and
completed within a period of not less than thirty (30) days.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 196/436
2. Mailing Of Notice: The notice of violation shall be mailed to the address provided in the deed or other instrument as specified in Government
Code section 27321.5(a) or, if none, to the return address provided on the deed or other instrument.
3. Determining Amount Of Fine: In determining the amount of the civil fine, the city shall take into consideration any timely and good faith efforts by
the legal owner to remedy the violation(s). The maximum civil fine authorized is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that the owner
fails to maintain the property, commencing on the day following the expiration of the period to remedy the violation as stated by the city in the
notice of violation.
4. Notice Of Fine: Once the city manager or his or her designee has determined that a civil fine should be imposed, notice of the fine shall be
mailed to the address provided in the deed or other instrument as specified in Government Code section 27321.5(a) or, if none, to the return
address provided on the deed or other instrument. The notice of fine shall contain, at a minimum, the violation(s), the dates or range of dates of
violation(s), the total number of days the fine is being assessed, the total amount of the fine, and whether or not, after considering any timely and
good faith efforts by the legal owner to remedy the violation(s), if any, the amount the civil fine will be reduced.
5. Contesting The Fine: The notice of violation shall also contain the following statement:
You may contest the imposition of this civil fine by filing, with the City Clerk, a written request for an appeal to be heard by the City Council.
The request for appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the Notice of Violation. In addition to filing the
application for an appeal, the applicant shall also pay a fee as fixed and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
Upon receipt of the request for appeal, the city manager shall fix a time and place for a hearing by the city council of the appeal within forty five
(45) days but not less than fifteen (15) days after receipt of the request for appeal and shall give notice of the hearing to the applicant by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the address provided by the applicant. The city council shall hear the appeal and make a decision within thirty
(30) days after close of the hearing. The city council shall notify the applicant of its decision in writing.
6. Notice Of Violation To Vacant Property That Is Subject To A Notice Of Default: Prior to imposing a fine or penalty for failure to maintain a vacant
property that is subject to a notice of default, that is purchased at a foreclosure sale, or that is acquired through foreclosure under a mortgage or
deed of trust, the city shall provide the owner of that property with a notice of violation and an opportunity to correct that violation. This section
shall not apply if the city determines that a specific condition of the property threatens public health or safety.
7. Failure To Pay Civil Penalty: The failure to pay a civil penalty imposed by this section shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city and shall be
collected in any manner authorized by law, including, but not limited to, the imposing of a lien on the property and/or imposing a special
assessment on the property. (Ord. 2013-6, 11-4-2013)
Title 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CURBS
9-1-1: STREET GRADES:
All streets in the city are to be graded and shall at the time and in the manner hereinafter specified be graded to the official grade with gutters on each
side of the street, except at street crossings, which street crossings shall be six inches (6") lower than the center of the street and the street shall have
a uniform curve from gutter to gutter. (Ord. 483, 4-16-1956)
9-1-2: SIDEWALK AND CURB; CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED:
Every owner of real property bordering on any street in the city shall, in the manner hereinafter specified, and at the times hereinafter specified,
construct and maintain in good repair and in clean condition, a sidewalk and curb and gutter along the street adjacent to the real property.
(A) When land is subdivided and work is done therein, the subdivider shall, at his own cost, install curbs and gutters.
(B) When a parcel of unimproved land is to be used for a building site, the owner shall install curbs, gutters and sidewalks at his own expense.
(C) When a parcel of land has buildings or other improvements located thereon, has no street improvements including curbs, gutters and sidewalks
and the owner wishes to remodel, add a structure or other improvement and the improvements have a value of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00),
then curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be required. (Ord. 2014-1, 2-18-2014)
9-1-3: SIDEWALKS TO CONFORM TO STREET GRADE:
Sidewalks shall be constructed in conformity with the official grade of the streets as now established or as may hereafter be established by the
engineer or director of public works. (Ord. 626, 5-1-1967)
9-1-4: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 197/436
It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to be permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle
shall first plank such streets. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
9-1-5: MATERIALS TO BE USED:
(Rep. by Ord. 626, 5-1-1967)
9-1-6: PLAYING BALL ON STREETS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball or throw any ball to and from upon any public thoroughfare in the city. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
9-1-7: EXPANSION JOINTS REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 626, 5-1-1967)
9-1-8: LINE STAKES; INSPECTIONS:
All sidewalks and curbs shall conform strictly to grade and line stakes, and after the line stakes are once set, constructors and others must use due
care in preserving the stakes. Inspection of the premises by the superintendent of streets shall be required prior to the installation of curbs and
sidewalks. All work done and materials furnished shall be first class in all respects and shall be done to the satisfaction and acceptance of the
superintendent of streets upon completion of sidewalks or curbs. (Ord. 483, 4-16-1956)
9-1-9: DRIVING ACROSS CURBS; PROTECTION REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 746, 5-3-1976)
9-1-10: BARRICADES:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to place proper signals or warnings at each end of any sidewalk or street on which any new asphalt
or pavement is being constructed at or before the time the work is commenced and to maintain such warnings at the place until the work is completed
and opened for public use. (Ord. 143, 3-31-1911)
9-1-11: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk by causing to be placed thereon any obstruction or any material that would interfere with
the free passage of persons using the sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning property fronting upon a sidewalk to permit any material or thing to be placed upon the sidewalk or to remain
thereon.
This section shall not apply to persons doing business in the city while such persons are transferring into or out of their place of business any
merchandise, produce or other article of trade. Any person doing business in the city shall have the right at any time in the necessary course of
business to transport articles of trade in which they are dealing across any sidewalk, but in such instances shall not obstruct the sidewalk for a longer
time than is necessary for the transfer of such articles. (Ord. 145, 5-1-1911)
9-1-12: SIDEWALK AREA MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
It is the purpose of this section to provide sidewalk area maintenance and repair procedures which are alternative and supplementary to the
procedures set forth in the Streets And Highways Code, division 7, part 3, chapter 22, commencing at section 5600, as those sections now exist or
may hereafter be amended or renumbered. The city, in each instance, may follow the procedures set forth in the Streets And Highways Code or those
set forth in this chapter, or some combination thereof. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Streets And Highways Code and this
section, the provisions of this section shall control.
(A) Definitions: For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
DEFECTIVE SIDEWALK: A sidewalk area where, in the judgment of the director, the vertical or horizontal line or grade is altered or displaced to
the extent that a safety hazard exists, or the sidewalk area is in such a condition as to endanger property or persons using the sidewalk area in a
reasonable manner, or is in such a condition as to interfere with the public convenience in the use thereof.
DIRECTOR: The public works director, or his/her designee; "director" shall have the same meaning as the term "superintendent of streets" as
utilized in the Streets And Highways Code section 5600 et seq.
LOT, LOTS OR PORTIONS OF A LOT: A parcel of real property located within the city adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 198/436
and when used in connection with the phrase "adjacent to or fronting on the defective sidewalk", or variation thereof, shall refer to the property in
front of or along the side of the defective sidewalk.
MAINTAIN AND REPAIR: Shall mean maintenance so that the sidewalk area remains in a condition that is not dangerous to property or persons
using the sidewalk area in a reasonable manner and in a condition that will not interfere with the public convenience in use of the sidewalk area,
and shall include, but not be limited to: maintenance and repair of sidewalks including grinding, removal and replacement of sidewalks;
maintenance and repair of curbs and gutters; removal and filling or replacement of parking strips; removal of weeds and/or debris; supervision and
maintenance of permissible signs and removal of impermissible signs; tree root pruning and installing root barriers; trimming of trees, shrubs and/or
ground cover including areas within park strips and between the property line of the adjacent property and the street pavement line. Any root
pruning, trimming or removal of trees or shrubs as a part of sidewalk maintenance and repair is subject to the provisions of chapter 4 of this title.
OWNER: Any person owning a lot, lots, or portions of a lot within the city, adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area.
PERSON: Shall include a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
SIDEWALK AREA: That portion of a street between the street pavement line and the adjacent property line, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
a park or parking strip, bulkheads, retaining walls, or other works for the protection of any sidewalk area, including any sidewalk, curb and gutter
located on side yard frontage.
(B) Owner's Duty To Maintain And Repair Sidewalk Areas: The owner of a lot, lots or portions of a lot adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a
sidewalk area shall maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and nondangerous condition, and shall repair such sidewalk area and pay the costs and
expenses therefor, including, but not limited to, charges for the city's costs of inspection and administration whenever the city undertakes sidewalk
maintenance and repair pursuant to subsections (D) and (E) of this section, and including the costs of collection and placing any assessment lien
on the property due to failure of the owner to promptly pay such costs. The procedures set forth in the Streets And Highways Code section 5600 et
seq., shall apply to the imposition and collection of costs and assessments.
(C) Liability For Injuries To Public: The owner required by subsection (B) of this section to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a duty to
members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and nondangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property
owner to maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and nondangerous condition as required by subsection (B) of this section, any person suffers injury
to or damage to person or property, the owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting damage or injury.
(D) Notice To Repair: Where the director has actual notice of the existence of a defective sidewalk, the director may give written notice to repair the
defective sidewalk to the owner of the lot, lots or portions thereof adjacent to or fronting on the defective sidewalk. Service of the notice to repair
shall be by either regular U.S. mail or by personal service. The notice to repair shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and how
the same is to be done and what materials shall be used in the repair; that if the owner proceeds to undertake the repair by private contract, his/her
activities will be governed by the provisions of this chapter; the time period within which the repair must be commenced by the owner; and that if
the repair is not commenced within such time period and prosecuted diligently without interruption to completion, the director may proceed with the
repair, and the cost shall be a lien on the property upon the owner's failure to timely reimburse the city for such cost pursuant to subsection (E) of
this section. The materials and construction work shall be in strict conformance with the applicable portions of the city's standard specifications as
they now exist, or as they may hereafter be amended.
Prior to commencing repairs, the owner will apply for and obtain an encroachment permit from the public works department. For the purposes of
this section, the owner is deemed to timely commence the repair of the defective sidewalk by the filing of an application for an encroachment
permit within the time period specified in the notice to repair.
The owner may request that the city perform the repair work. If so requested, the city may, at its sole discretion, perform the repair work with city
forces, or may contract with a vendor of the city's choosing to perform the work. In either case the property owner will remain responsible for all
costs of repair. As provided in section 9-1-13 of this chapter, the owner may request financing of the repair costs, not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00), from the city's curb, gutter, and sidewalk revolving fund or a grant in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
to defray a portion of such cost. The owner is deemed to have timely commenced repair of the defective sidewalk upon approval by the city
manager of the owner's request for financing. Bills for required repairs that were not commenced within the time frame as specified by the notice
may not be financed through the city's curb, gutter, and sidewalk revolving fund.
The director may direct city forces to correct minor sidewalk repairs limited to grinding and/or ramping if such repairs can be made in compliance
with all applicable laws and regulations. Said repairs are at the sole discretion of the city, and they in no way relieve the owner of the liabilities
identified in subsection (C) of this section or any other liability, nor do they set a precedent for future repairs.
(E) Failure To Make Required Repairs: If the person(s) provided with a notice to repair fails to commence the repairs within the time period specified in
said notice, or timely commences the repair but fails to diligently prosecute the same without interruption to completion, the director may thereafter
cause the city to make the required repairs and bill the person(s) for the cost thereof. If such person(s) fails to pay the cost within the time period
specified in the payment invoice, the unpaid sum shall be a lien on the lot, lots or portions thereof adjacent to or fronting on the defective sidewalk.
(F) Nonexclusive: In addition to the remedies and procedures set forth in this chapter, the director may use any other remedy in this code or available
at law. (Ord. 2014-1, 2-18-2014)
9-1-13: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK REVOLVING FUND:
A curb, gutter, and sidewalk revolving fund in the sum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for financing and paying for the installation of curbs,
gutters, and sidewalks in the city is hereby established, and the finance department is directed to transfer from the streets fund into the curb, gutter,
and sidewalk revolving fund the sum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The curb, gutter and sidewalk revolving fund shall thereafter be
maintained, if at all, as determined necessary by resolution of the city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 199/436
(A) Purpose: The curb, gutter, and sidewalk revolving fund shall be used and expended only to provide monies to construct or repair curbs, gutters,
and sidewalks in public street rights of way in the city adjacent to the real property of such of the owners thereof as may elect to cause curbs,
gutters, and sidewalks to be repaired, built, erected, constructed, and completed and payment thereof to be made from the curb, gutter, and
sidewalk revolving fund in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(B) Construction Standards: All curbs, gutters, and sidewalks installed as provided in this chapter shall be constructed in conformity with the standard
plans and specifications of the city and to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
(C) Advances; Applications And Agreements: Any owner of real property desiring to finance the construction of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks from the
curb, gutter, and sidewalk revolving fund shall make a written application and pay an application processing fee in an amount as set and/or
amended by resolution of the city council to the public works department. The maximum amount that may be requested is two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If such application is accepted and approved, the city and the owner shall enter into a written agreement, including a
promissory note, recorded on the property for the payment for such construction from said fund. Said owner shall by such agreement obligate
himself to repay to the city all sums paid from said fund for such construction. The entire amount thereof to be fully repaid to the city within a period
of not exceeding five (5) years from the date of such agreement, and on such terms and under such conditions as may be set forth in such written
agreement. The entire balance due under such agreement shall constitute a special assessment against the parcel of real property thus benefited,
and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof including a prorated share of the administration cost not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00) per year, and shall continue to be a lien thereon until the full amount thereof is paid and discharged in full.
Alternatively, as owner of real property desiring to construct curbs, gutters and sidewalks may apply for and receive a grant in the maximum
amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which shall be used as payment of all or part of the cost of such construction. No property owner may
apply for or receive both the maximum two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) advance and the maximum two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00)
grant referred to herein.
(D) Advances; Assessments As Taxes: The finance department, on or before the first Monday in March of each year, shall cause to be filed with the
county assessor a description of the property, together with the name of the owner or reputed owner thereof, against which such special
assessment shall be made, and the installments then due and unpaid, with administrative fees, together with all other sums of money due and
unpaid under such agreement, may be assessed as taxes against the real property, and the amount of money so assessed shall bear the same
penalties and interest as taxes regularly assessed on default of payment thereof.
(E) Deposits: All money received by the city under such written agreements or assessed or collected by the city shall be deposited in the curb, gutter,
and sidewalk revolving fund. (Ord. 2014-1, 2-18-2014)
Chapter 2
NUMBERING HOUSES
9-2-1: NUMBERING OF BLOCKS:
The numbering of the blocks in the city shall be based upon the following general plan:
Beginning in the southerly and southwesterly portions of the city, as hereinafter stated, the higher numbers shall be used successively as the
numbering proceeds northerly and northeasterly; and beginning in the easterly and southeasterly portion of the city, as hereinafter stated, the higher
numbers shall be used successively as the numbering proceeds westerly and northwesterly; the Southern Pacific Railroad being taken as the dividing
line between the blocks numbered 1900 and the blocks numbered 2000, in the direction first above mentioned, and First Street being taken as the
dividing line between the blocks numbered 1900 and the blocks numbered 2000, in the direction second above mentioned; the aforesaid plan of
numbering being otherwise expressed as taking the railroad as a base line and using the higher numbers as the numbering proceeds northerly and
northeasterly therefrom, and the lower numbers as the numbering proceeds southerly and southwesterly therefrom; and taking First Street (and
McCall Avenue North from its intersection with First Street) as a base line and using the higher numbers as the numbering proceeds northwesterly
from First Street and westerly from McCall Avenue North, and using the lower numbers as the numbering proceeds southeasterly and easterly
therefrom.
The blocks between Park Street and Nebraska Avenue shall be numbered 1900; those between Park Street and Valley View Street shall be numbered
1800; the blocks between McCall Avenue South and Sheridan Street shall be numbered 2000; the blocks between Sheridan Street and Skelton Street
shall be numbered 2100; the blocks between Skelton Street and Van Horn Street shall be numbered 2200; the blocks between Van Horn Street and
Gaynor Street shall be numbered 2300; the blocks between Gaynor Street and Thompson Avenue shall be numbered 2400; all blocks west of
Thompson Avenue shall be consecutively numbered with the numbers progressing higher as the numbering proceeds westerly; the block north of
Nebraska Avenue shall be numbered 2000, and the numbering shall proceed in regular order, allowing 100 numbers for each block, except as herein
otherwise stated, so that the blocks on the southwesterly side of the Southern Pacific Railroad and West Front Street shall be numbered 1900 as
aforesaid, and the blocks on the northeasterly side of the railroad and East Front Street shall be numbered 2000, as aforesaid. Owing to the
irregularity of the blocks and streets in the easterly portion of the city, all blocks between Tucker Street and Grove Street shall be numbered 2000; all
blocks between Grove Street and Mill Street and along the alley between Grove Street and Locust Street to the intersection of Peach Street shall be
numbered 2100; all blocks between Peach Street and East Street, and Block "A" and the southwesterly one-half (1/2) of Block "C" in Frey's Addition
shall be numbered 2200; all blocks between East Street and Rose Avenue, and all of Block "B", the northeasterly one-half (1/2) of Block "C", all of
Block "D", the Selma Lincoln Park, the fractional blocks numbered 1, 2 and 3, in Frey's Addition, and the corresponding portion of the property
between Grange Avenue and the canal shall be numbered 2300; all blocks between Rose Avenue and Arrants Street shall be numbered 2400; and
the block on the north side of Arrants Street shall be numbered 2500; thence north consecutively; the blocks between McCall Avenue South and West
Front Street, excepting along Park Street, shall be numbered 1900; the blocks between McCall Avenue South and West Front Street along Park Street
shall be numbered as follows: between McCall Avenue South and Otis Street shall be numbered 1900; between Otis Street and Sylvia Street shall be
numbered 1800; between Sylvia Street and Whitson Street shall be numbered 1700; and between Whitson Street and West Front Street shall be
numbered 1600.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 200/436
The numbering from the easterly and southeasterly portions of the city toward the westerly and northwesterly portion thereof shall proceed so that the
block on the northwesterly side of South Avenue, in South Park Addition, shall be numbered 1100, and all blocks on the west side of Olive Street shall
be numbered 1400, and the numbering shall proceed thence consecutively where possible. Owing to the irregularities of blocks and streets, the
fractional blocks between Locust Street and Orange Avenue shall be numbered 1500; also the block between Orange Avenue and Keith Street, and
between Orange Avenue and Third Street, and between Orange Avenue and "C" Street, shall be numbered 1600; Fourth Street and Third Street in
Whitson's Addition, and between Third Street in Cooper's Addition and Selma Street, and between "C" Street and "B" Street, and all of Block I in
Cooper's Addition shall be numbered 1700; all blocks between Third Street and Second Street in Whitson's Addition, and between Selma Street and
McCall Avenue, and between "B" Street and "A" Street, also Block "I" of the city and Cooper's Addition, shall be numbered 1800; all blocks between
Second Street and First Street, and between "A" Street and McCall Avenue North shall be numbered 1900; thence the numbering shall proceed in
regular succession, the portion of Walker Addition between Arrants Street and Stillman Street being numbered 2200, and between Stillman Street and
Gaither Street shall be numbered 2300. (Ord. 431, 6-4-1951)
9-2-2: NUMBERING OF HOUSES:
Stores, dwellings and other occupancies along the streets of the city when numbered shall be numbered according to the following method:
One hundred (100) numbers, or as many thereof as shall be necessary, shall be assigned to each block or fractional block, except as in this chapter
otherwise provided, and the odd numbers shall be used consecutively on the left hand sides of the streets, following the directions in which the block
numbers increase. Two (2) numbers shall be assigned to each twenty five foot (25') or thirty foot (30') lot as officially platted, and where lots are platted
with a greater frontage than thirty feet (30'), and where the long sides of the lots lie along the streets, and where blocks have not been subdivided into
regular lots, two (2) numbers shall be assigned to each twenty five feet (25') or major fraction thereof. The numbers shall be of conspicuous size, and
when placed on the stores, dwellings or other occupancies, they shall be placed in conspicuous positions and so as to be visible at all times whether
the doors are open or closed, and must not be obscured by screens. (Ord. 431, 6-4-1951)
9-2-3: CLERK TO KEEP RECORD:
The numbering provided for in this chapter shall be under the supervision of the clerk, and when any owner of property in the city shall apply to the
clerk for information regarding the numbering of his buildings or occupancies, it shall be the duty of the clerk to furnish the information applied for, free
of charge. (Ord. 431, 6-4-1951)
9-2-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All business houses, dwellings and other occupancies in the city shall be numbered in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and every
owner of a business house, dwelling or other occupancy who shall permit the same to remain unnumbered, or not numbered in accordance with this
chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 431, 6-4-1951)
Chapter 3
WEEDS
9-3-1: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The following are declared to be public nuisances in the city:
(A) All weeds growing upon the street, sidewalks, or private property in the city.
(B) All rubbish, refuse and dirt upon the parkways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, or private property in the city.
(C) All garbage upon parkways, sidewalks, streets, alleys, or private property in the city.
(D) All abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts of same on public or private property as defined in this code.
(E) All grass deposits or other obstructions situated or placed on sidewalks, parkings and parkways or streets as provided and described in
Government Code section 39502.
(F) Any sidewalk which is out of repair or pending reconstruction and is in such a condition to endanger persons or property or in a condition to
interfere with the public convenience in the use of such sidewalk as described and provided in Streets And Highway Code section 5611. (Ord. 849,
12-20-1982)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 201/436
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL OFFICER: Director of public works, his assistants and deputies, or other public officer designated by the city council to
perform the duties imposed by this chapter upon the environmental control officer.
GARBAGE: As defined in section 8-1-1 of this code.
IN FRONT OF WHICH THE NUISANCE EXISTS: Includes to the rear of or abutting the property upon which the nuisance exists.
RUBBISH: As defined in section 8-1-1 of this code.
STREET: Includes public street, alley, lane, court or other place.
WEEDS: Includes any of the following:
(A) Weeds which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature.
(B) Sagebrush, chaparral, or any other brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace or nuisance to
adjacent property.
(C) Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous.
(D) Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to the public health.
(E) Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other flammable material which endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard.
(F) Weeds which are seasonal and recurrent nuisances. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-3: ENFORCEMENT BY ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL OFFICER:
(A) It shall be the duty of the environmental control officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(B) When possible, and at his request, the public works, police and/or fire departments shall aid him. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-4: NOTICE TO OWNER AND/OR OCCUPANT OF EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
When in the opinion of the environmental control officer a public nuisance, as provided in section 9-3-1 of this chapter exists, he shall give or cause to
be given notice as hereinafter provided directing the removal of said public nuisance within fourteen (14) days following the date of notice or in default
of this being done, the city shall proceed to abate such nuisance and assess the costs of clearing the parcel to the owners and/or occupant or to the
owner whose land fronts on said sidewalks, he shall give two (2) weeks' notice. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-5: NOTICE TO REMOVE; MANNER OF POSTING AND MAILING:
(A) Posting: Such notice shall be given by posting a notice in a conspicuous place upon the property, lots, or buildings upon or in which such weeds,
grass, rubbish, or other easily combustible material is found, which notice shall be headed, "Notice To Clean Premises", in letters not less than one
inch (1") in height, and which, in legible characters, shall direct the removal of such weeds, grass, rubbish, or other combustible material within
fourteen (14) days from the posting or service thereof, which date of posting or service shall be stated in such notice. Said notice shall include the
following:
Within fourteen (14) days of the date of posting of this notice, you have the right to appeal the decision of the Environmental Control Officer to
the City Council by filing a written request with the City Administrator. Your appeal will be scheduled and heard at the next regular City Council
meeting. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(B) Mailing: A copy of such notice shall also be sent by mail to the property owner as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. (Ord. 849, 12-20-
1982)
9-3-6: ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY TO INSPECT FOR AND ABATE NUISANCES:
The environmental control officer may enter upon private property to inspect for and abate the nuisance. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-7: REMOVAL OF WEEDS, RUBBISH, REFUSE AND DIRT BY PROPERTY OWNER:
Before the environmental control officer arrives, any property owner may remove the weeds, rubbish, garbage, refuse, vehicles, grass or other
obstructions and dirt, or repair the sidewalks at his own expense. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 202/436
9-3-8: FAILURE TO REMOVE; PERFORMANCE OF WORK BY CITY; COSTS; LIEN:
Should such owner or occupant fail, refuse, or neglect to remove such weeds, grass, rubbish, or other easily combustible material within such time as
may be prescribed, the environmental control officer may employ labor and equipment to have the same done under his direction at the expense of
the city and upon payment of the cost by the city. Such owner of the property shall be indebted to the city for the cost thereof, and there shall be
created a lien against such property in an amount equal to all costs involved in such work. In an action to recover the costs thereof, the city shall be
entitled to recover in such action a reasonable attorney fee to be fixed by the court and to be paid, in addition to the costs of such work, by the owner
of such property. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-9: ACCOUNT OF COST OF ABATEMENT; SUBMISSION OF ITEMIZED REPORT TO CITY COUNCIL:
The environmental control officer shall keep an account of the cost of abatement in front of or on each separate parcel of land where the work is done
by him. He shall submit to the city council for confirmation an itemized written report showing such cost, and shall post a copy of the costs on each
separate parcel of land. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-10: RECEIPT OF AMOUNTS AND ISSUANCE OF RECEIPTS BY CITY CLERK:
The city clerk may receive the amount due on the abatement cost and issue receipts at any time after the confirmation of the report and until August 1
following the confirmation of the report. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-11: COST OF ABATEMENT CONSTITUTES SPECIAL ASSESSMENT; LIEN:
The cost of abatement in front of or upon each parcel of land constitutes a special assessment against the parcel. After the assessment is made and
confirmed, it is a lien on the parcel. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-12: FILING COPY OF REPORT WITH COUNTY ASSESSOR, COUNTY TAX COLLECTOR AND COUNTY AUDITOR:
After confirmation of the report, the city council shall by resolution, assess the cost of same to each parcel of land involved and the city clerk shall
certify such assessment to the county assessor and tax collector who shall place the same upon the tax roll for collection as a special tax in addition to
the taxes for general revenue purposes and who shall collect the same in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other city taxes. A
certified copy of the report shall be filed with the county auditor on or before August 10 of each year. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
9-3-13: DATE OF REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND GRASS:
All weeds and grass shall be removed from parkways, lots and all private property on or before April 1 of each year by the owner of the parcel upon
which the nuisance exists, or as often as may be deemed necessary during the year by the environmental control officer. (Ord. 849, 12-20-1982)
Chapter 4
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
9-4-1: TITLE; ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter shall be known as the TREE REGULATIONS and may be cited as such.
The director of public works, or his duly authorized representative, shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 472, 11-1-1954)
9-4-2: PERMISSION TO PLANT TREES:
No trees or shrubs shall hereafter be planted in or removed from any public parking strip or other public place in the city without the permission from
the director of public works. (Ord. 472, 11-1-1954; amd. Ord. 852, 2-22-1983)
9-4-3: STREET TREE PLAN:
All trees and shrubs hereafter planted in any public parking strip or other public place in the city shall conform as to species and location with the
recommendation of the Saratoga horticultural foundation or to the street tree plan of the city which are hereby made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 472,
11-1-1954)
9-4-4: PROHIBITED TREES:
It shall be unlawful to plant in any public parking strip the following trees:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 203/436
Acacia
Elm
Tree of Heaven
Black Walnut
Palm
Conifers
Eucalyptus
Poplar
Sycamore
It shall be unlawful to plant willow, cottonwood or poplar trees anywhere in the City unless the Director of Public Works approves the site as one where
the tree roots will not interfere with a public sewer. (Ord. 472, 11-1-54; amd. Ord. 852, 2-22-83)
9-4-5: REMOVAL OF TREES:
It shall be the policy of the City to conserve mature and healthy trees whenever feasible; provided, however, the Director of Public Works may cause
trees to be removed when the Director of Public Works in his discretion determines that removal outweighs the interest in conservation of said tree.
Where roots from trees, shrubs or plants growing in a parking strip, any public place or in private property cause or may cause damage to sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, driveways or public or private utilities, the Director of Public Works shall investigate and shall order corrective action. The Director of
Public Works shall give written notice to the occupant or owner of such property or to the occupant or owner of property abutting a parking strip
requiring that necessary trimming, root pruning or removal be performed by the occupant or owner at occupant or owner's expense. Owner or
occupant may, within ten (10) days of date of mailing of the notice of required corrective action, request an appeal of the Director's decision to the City
Council. The decision of the Council shall be final.
If the occupant or owner does not request an appeal and if the corrective action is not taken within the required ten (10) days by the occupant or
owner, then in that event the Director of Public Works shall proceed to perform the required work and shall then charge the occupant or owner for all
costs involved and such cost shall be a lien against the real property of the owner.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the City or to relieve the occupant or owner of any private property from the
duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon his property or under his control in such condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard to persons or
property.
Nothing in this Section shall preclude the immediate removal by City forces of any obstruction, nuisance or overhang which the Director of Public
Works determines to be a public safety hazard. (Ord. 852, 2-22-83)
9-4-6: DANGEROUS TREES A NUISANCE; POWER TO REMOVE:
(Rep. by Ord. 852, 2-22-83)
9-4-7: APPEALS:
(Rep. by Ord. 852, 2-22-83)
9-4-8: TRIMMING TREES; PERMIT:
No person shall cut, trim, prune, plant, remove, injure or interfere with any tree, shrub or plant upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley
or public place of the City without the prior permission and approval therefor from the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works is hereby
authorized to grant such permission in his discretion and, where necessary, subject to the condition that the removed tree be replaced by an official
tree in conformity with the street tree plan at the sole cost and expense of the occupant or owner of the property. No such permission shall be valid for
a longer period than thirty (30) days after its date of issuance. (Ord. 852, 2-22-83)
9-4-9: ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES:
It shall be a violation of this Chapter to abuse, destroy or mutilate any tree, shrub or plant in a public parking strip or any other public place, or to attach
or place any rope, wire, other than one used to support a young or broken tree, sign, poster, handbill or other things to or on any tree growing in a
public place, or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to be attached to any tree, or to allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substances
which are harmful to trees to come in contact with their roots or leaves. (Ord. 472, 11-1-54)
9-4-10: PROTECTION OF TREES DURING CONSTRUCTION:
During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or structure in the City no person shall leave any tree in any public street in the
vicinity of such building or structure without such good and sufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury to said tree.
9-4-11: PERMIT FOR PUBLIC UTILITY:
Any person doing business as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, and any duly
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 204/436
constituted public agency authorized to provide and providing utility service, may be given a permit from the Director, valid for one year from the date
of issuance, permitting such person to trim, brace, remove or perform such similar acts with respect to trees growing within the public streets, as may
be necessary to the City, or which overhang such public streets, as may be necessary to comply with the safety regulations of said Commission or
public agency and as may be necessary to maintain the safe operation of its business. (Ord. 852, 2-22-83)
Chapter 5
RAILROADS
9-5-1: SPEED OF TRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to run or operate, or cause to be run or operated through or in the Corporate Limits, any freight train, passenger
train, railroad locomotive, engine, or railroad car at a faster rate of speed than forty five miles per hour (45 m.p.h.) between the hours of 5:00 A.M. and
11:00 P.M. of any day and for the time each day not covered by this Chapter, there is no limit upon the speed of the railroad rolling equipment. (Ord.
359, 8-21-44)
9-5-2: TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK STREETS:
No person shall operate any train or train of cars, or permit the same to remain standing, so as to block the movement of traffic upon any street for a
period of time longer than five (5) minutes. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
9-5-3: MINORS LOITERING NEAR TRAINS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any minor, under the age of twenty-one (21) years, to get on or off, or attempt to get on or off, any car or train of cars, while the
same is in motion. (Ord. 51, 4-15-93)
Chapter 6
SUBDIVISIONS
9-6-1.00: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
9-6-1.01: TITLE, PURPOSE:
Sections 9-6-1 through 9-6-15 shall be known as and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City and is deemed necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, including the orderly growth and the development of the City; the beneficial use of land in the
public interest; the conservation, stabilization and protection of property values, and to assure provision for necessary utilities, public roads, and other
public conveniences in subdivided areas.
9-6-1.02: AUTHORITY TO REGULATE:
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Title 7, Division 2 of the California Government Code cited as the Subdivision Map Act and in addition to any
other regulations provided by law, the regulations contained in Sections 9-6-1 through 9-6-15 are established herewith and shall apply to all
subdivisions or parts of subdivisions wholly or partly within the City, and to the preparation, filing, and approval of maps.
9-6-1.03: GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
The design, improvement and survey data for subdivisions, the form and content of tentative, final and parcel maps, and the procedure to be followed
in securing official approval shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and by the additional provisions of Sections 9-6-1 through
9-6-15.
9-6-1.04: APPLICABILITY:
(A) The provisions of Sections 9-6-1 through 9-6-15 shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the
effective date of the Ordinance codified in Sections 9-6-1 through 9-6-15, unless those lots are hereafter proposed for further subdivision. It is not
intended by Sections 9-6-1 through 9-6-15 to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, (except those specifically repealed by the Ordinance codified in Sections 9-6-1 through 9-6-15) or with private restrictions placed upon
the property by deed, covenant, or other private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Only those improvement
standards, applicable at the time a tentative subdivision or parcel map is approved, shall be imposed.
(B) The provisions of Section 9-6-1 through 9-6-15 shall not be applicable to:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 205/436
1. The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings,
mobile home parks or trailer parks;
2. Mineral, oil or gas leases;
3. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the State.
4. A lot line adjustment between two (2) or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel,
and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the Planning
Commission following the filing by the subdivider of an application therefor, furnished by the City, and the payment of an application processing
fee in a sum as may be established by Council resolution;
5. Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged
lands is a party;
6. A tentative map may be required where a parcel map is required by this Ordinance. A parcel map shall be required for subdivisions as to which a
final or parcel map is not otherwise required by this Ordinance, unless the preparation of such parcel map is subject to Section 9-6-8.02(G), as
prescribed herein, and provided further that a parcel map shall not be required for subdivisions created by short term leases (terminable by either
party on not more than thirty (30) days' notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right of way of a railroad corporation defined as such by
Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, or for land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility or to a subsidiary of
a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights of way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that
public policy necessitates such a parcel map.
7. A developer may obtain from the City, a procedural form for obtaining a waiver of the requirements for a parcel map as prescribed under Section
9-6-8.02(G). The Subdivision Committee shall make a finding, based upon accurate data being submitted by a developer or individual, that the
proposed division of land complies with all requirements of the City Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable laws and
regulations enacted pursuant thereto as to area, improvements and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads,
sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements. In any case, where the requirement for a
parcel map is waived pursuant to provisions of this Ordinance, a tentative map may be required, prepared pursuant to Section 9-6-8.02. (Ord.
803, 6-18-79)
9-6-1.05: SEPARATE MAPS, WHEN REQUIRED:
A separate map shall be prepared for each subdivision where land is separated from other land in a parcel or holding by a division other than a street,
highway, approved private road, alley, railroad right-of-way, flood control right-of-way, canal or public utility right-of-way.
9-6-1.06: CONTROL OF DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT:
Control of design and improvement of subdivisions is vested in the City Council.
9-6-1.07: MAP APPROVAL, GENERALLY:
Jurisdiction to approve tentative and final subdivision maps within the City is vested in the City Council. Jurisdiction to approve tentative parcel maps is
vested in the Planning Commission. Authority to approve parcel maps conforming to approved tentative parcel maps is delegated to the secretary of
the Planning Commission.
9-6-1.08: ADVISORY AGENCY:
The Planning Commission is designated as the advisory agency to the City Council on all matters related to the subdivision of land.
9-6-1.09: COMMISSION, POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties, with respect to the filing of tentative subdivision maps, making investigations and
reports to the City Council on design and improvements, recommending action on tentative maps and the establishment of procedures related to the
processing thereof, and approval of tentative parcel maps and parcel maps which are specified by law and in Sections 1.00 through 15.00.
9-6-1.10: DELEGATION OF POWERS AND DUTIES:
Whenever, by the provisions of Sections 1.00 through 15.00, a power or authority is given to, or where a duty is imposed upon any public officer, it
may be exercised or performed by any deputy or departmental employee authorized by him pursuant to law unless it is expressly provided that it shall
be exercised in person.
9-6-2.00: DEFINITIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 206/436
9-6-2.01: GENERALLY:
The definitions and meanings of the words and phrases, which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act, are used in Sections 1.00 through 15.00, as
defined in this Article, unless from the context hereof it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended. The word "may" indicates an action which
is permissive. The word "shall" indicates an action which is mandatory. All words in the singular shall include the plural, and plural the singular. Each
gender shall include the other. Each tense shall include the other tenses.
9-6-2.02: ABUT:
"Abut" means to be contiguous to and in actual contact along a common line.
9-6-2.03: ACCESS ROAD:
"Access road" means a road which connects a subdivision to a public road.
9-6-2.04: ALLEY:
"Alley" means any dedicated way intended for vehicular service to the rear or the side of property served by a public road.
9-6-2.05: APPROVED:
"Approved" means approved by the City Council or by the department having jurisdiction on such matters, unless otherwise specified.
9-6-2.06: APPROVED PRIVATE ROAD:
"Approved private road" means a strip of land approved by the City Council for road purposes, which has not been dedicated or accepted as a public
road and which connects a parcel of land with a public road.
9-6-2.07: ARTERIAL, COLLECTOR AND LOCAL COLLECTOR:
"Arterial", "collector" and "local collector" means a road designated as such in the circulation element of the General Plan of the City, adopted by the
City Council.
9-6-2.08: CITY ENGINEER:
"City Engineer" means the City Engineer for the City, duly appointed by the City Council.
9-6-2.09: CITY PLANNER:
"City Planner" means the City Planner for the City, duly appointed by the City Council.
9-6-2.10: CLERK:
"Clerk" means the City Clerk for the City, duly appointed by the City Council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 207/436
9-6-2.11: COMMISSION:
"Commission" means the City Planning Commission.
9-6-2.12: COMMUNITY APARTMENT:
"Community apartment" means an undivided interest in common in the land coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment unit which
is part of a community apartment project.
9-6-2.13: CONDOMINIUM:
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a
separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store.
9-6-2.14: COUNCIL:
"Council" means the City Council.
9-6-2.15: COUNTY CLERK:
"County Clerk" or "County Clerk-Recorder" shall mean the County Clerk-Recorder of the County of Fresno.
9-6-2.16: CUL-DE-SAC:
"Cul-de-sac" means a road which terminates in a permanent turn-around and which by design is not intended to continue beyond its terminal point.
9-6-2.17: DEAD END ROAD:
"Dead end road" (stub road) means a road which is terminated at the boundary line of the subdivision but which will be required to be extended at a
later date to provide access to abutting land.
9-6-2.18: DEDICATED ROAD:
"Dedicated road" means a right-of-way dedicated to the City for road purposes and legally accepted as such by the City.
9-6-2.19: DESIGN:
"Design" means:
(A) Street alignments, grades and widths;
(B) Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities including alignments and grades thereof;
(C) Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 208/436
(D) Fire roads and firebreaks;
(E) Lot size and configuration;
(F) Traffic access;
(G) Grading;
(H) Land to be dedicated for park or recreation purposes;
(I) Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity
to or implementation of the General Plan or adopted specific plans.
9-6-2.20: DIVIDING STRIP:
"Dividing strip" means a separation between opposite directional flows of traffic. It may also serve to separate a road or highway from the parallel
frontage road which provides access to property.
9-6-2.21: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT:
"Double frontage lot" (or through lot) means a lot having frontage on two (2) roads and having the right of access to both of those roads, but excluding
corner lots.
9-6-2.22: EASEMENT FOR PUBLIC ROAD:
"Easement for public road" means a right-of-way offered to the City for road purposes by a division of land. Upon acceptance by the City, it is deemed
a City road, as defined above.
9-6-2.23: EXISTING LOT OR BUILDING SITE:
"Existing lot or building site" means a designated lot or contiguous lots on a lawfully established subdivision map or record of survey so existing upon
the effective date of the Ordinance codified in Sections 1.00 through 15.00, or a whole parcel of land under separate ownership so existing upon the
effective date of the Ordinance codified in Sections 1.00 through 15.00, or such a lot or separate parcel of land thereafter lawfully created.
9-6-2.24: EXPRESSWAY:
"Expressway" means a highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access and generally with intersections at grade.
9-6-2.25: FINAL MAP:
"Final map" is the official map which is recorded by the County Clerk indicating the divisions of land within the subdivision. It shall conform with the
requirements of Section 9-6-9.00.
9-6-2.26: FREEWAY:
"Freeway" means a highway for through traffic with full control of access and generally with grade separation at intersections.
9-6-2.27: FRONTAGE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 209/436
"Frontage" means that portion of a parcel of property which abuts on a public or approved private road.
9-6-2.28: FRONTAGE ROAD:
"Frontage road" (service road or outer highway) means those roads which parallel freeways, expressways or highways, providing for access to
abutting property or for circulation, and which are separated from the highway by a dividing strip.
9-6-2.29: GENERAL PLAN:
"General Plan" means the long range, comprehensive General Plan for the orderly development of the City, adopted by the Planning Commission and
the City Council, which may include any of the elements listed in the Government Code of the State.
9-6-2.30: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
"Improvement plans" means the plans, profiles, cross sections and specifications of all proposed improvements, including the information required by
Section 9-6-10.41.
9-6-2.31: IMPROVEMENT:
(A) "Improvement" refers to such street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or
private streets, highways, ways and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood
traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map or parcel map.
(B) "Improvement" also refers to such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by
public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the City Council, or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to
insure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan, or any approved specific plan.
9-6-2.32: IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
"Improvement standards" means the design and improvement requirements established by the City Council by Ordinance applicable at the time of
approval of the tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map.
9-6-2.33: LOCAL ROAD:
"Local road" means any public road that is used or is intended to be used for the principal purpose of serving as access to abutting property.
9-6-2.34: LOT:
"Lot" means:
(A) A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a subdivision map recorded in the office of the
County Recorder; or
(B) A parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey map or parcel map as filed in the office of the County Clerk-Recorder and,
if required by the zoning ordinance, abutting at least one public road or approved private road.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 210/436
9-6-2.35: MAP ACT:
"Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Title 7, Division 2, Government Code of the State of California.
9-6-2.36: MASTER PLAN:
"Master Plan" means the same as General Plan.
9-6-2.37: NONACCESS LINE:
"Nonaccess line" means a line delineated on a subdivision map, or described in a deed, which is for the purpose of prohibiting access.
9-6-2.38: OUTLOT:
"Outlot" means a lot designated alphabetically on the subdivision map for specific use or nonuse.
9-6-2.39: PARCEL MAP:
"Parcel map" means the map prepared for acceptance by the City and the County Clerk-Recorder in accordance with the approved tentative map as
provided for in Section 9-8-1.00 and State laws.
9-6-2.40: PERSON:
"Person" means and includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, receiver, syndicate, or any group or
combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number.
9-6-2.41: PLAN LINE:
"Plan line" means precise plan line.
9-6-2.42: PRECISE PLAN LINE:
"Precise plan lines" or "specific plan line" means the future right-of-way lines or plan lines of any highway as shown on the precise plan of streets and
highways for highway use or on a specific plan as adopted by the City Council.
9-6-2.43: PRIVATE ROAD:
"Private road" means the same as approved private road.
9-6-2.44: PUBLIC ROAD:
"Public road" means any State highway, County or City street, avenue, highway or road which is within the maintained road system of the public
agency having jurisdiction thereof or to be included within the maintained road system by agreement between said agencies and the subdivider.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 211/436
9-6-2.45: RESTRICTED ACCESS STRIP:
"Restricted access strip" means a strip of land not less than one foot (1') in width for the purpose of regulating access to part-width and dead-end
roads until such time as such roads may be completed or extended.
9-6-2.46: SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD:
"Front yard setback line" means the line which defines the depth of the required front yard measured from the right-of-way line or plan line when one
has been established.
9-6-2.47: SETBACK LINE, REAR YARD OR SIDE YARD:
"Rear yard or side yard setback line" means the line which defines the width or depth of the required rear yard or side yard measured from the
property line.
9-6-2.48: STUB ROAD:
"Stub road" (dead-end road) means a road which is terminated at the boundary line of the subdivision but which will be required to be extended at a
later date to provide access to abutting land.
9-6-2.49: SUBDIVIDER:
"Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided the real property
into a subdivision for himself or for others.
9-6-2.50: SUBDIVISION:
"Subdivision", for the purposes of this Chapter, means a division of any improved or unimproved land shown on the latest equalized County
assessment role as a unit or as contiguous units for the purpose of sale, lease or financing whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered
as contiguous units even if parcels are separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad right-of-way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium
project as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code of the State of California or community apartment project as defined in Section 11004 of the State
Business and Professions Code. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility shall not be considered a division of
land for purposes of computing the number of parcels.
9-6-2.51: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
"Superintendent of Public Works" means the Superintendent of Public Works for the City appointed by the City Council.
9-6-2.52: TEMPORARY TURN AROUND:
"Temporary turn around" means paved area for turning vehicles at the end of a dead-end road, which is constructed either within the dedicated right of
way or upon a temporary easement, to be obliterated when said road is extended. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-2.53: TENTATIVE MAP:
"Tentative map" is the map which is required to be presented to the secretary of the Planning Commission in order to officially commence the process
of dividing land according to the requirements of this Code. It shall conform with the requirements of Section 9-6-6.00. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 212/436
9-6-2.54: TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP:
"Tentative parcel map" means the tentative map for a division of land defined in subsection 9-6-8.01 (B) which is required to be presented to the
secretary of the Planning Commission in order to officially commence the process of dividing land according to the requirements of this Code. It shall
conform with the requirements of Section 9-6-8.00. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-2.545: VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
"Vesting tentative map" shall mean a map which meets the requirements described in Section 9-6-6.00 of the Selma Municipal Code and has
conspicuously printed on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Tract Map". (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-94)
9-6-2.55: WATERCOURSE:
"Watercourse" means a strip of land over which water flows, having a definite bed, bank and channel where in the water need not flow continually but
usually flows in a particular direction. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-2.56: ZONE DISTRICT:
"Zone district" means the district established by the Zoning Ordinance1. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-3.00: CONFORMANCE TO ZONING ORDINANCE AND PLANS:
9-6-3.01: GENERAL PLAN:
The preparation and evaluation of a subdivision map shall be in conformity with the principles and standards of the General Plan and elements thereof
with respect to population densities and distribution, and the type and extent of roads, highways and other utilities and public facilities. (Ord. 779, 10-
17-77)
9-6-3.02: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT:
No tentative map or tentative parcel map filed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be approved until an environmental impact analysis is
prepared, processed and considered in accordance with provisions of CEQA Guidelines. The subdivider shall provide such additional data and
information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents. (Ord. 779, 10-
17-77)
9-6-3.03: PRECISE PLANS AND PRECISE PLAN LINES:
Subdivision maps shall conform to the precise plans for streets, public areas and other projects adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-3.04: ZONING ORDINANCE:
Subdivision maps shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance2 of the City with respect to uses of land, lot sizes and dimensions, and other applicable
regulations provided, however, that where Sections 9-6-1.00 through 9-6-15.00 impose higher standards, the requirements of Sections 9-6-1.00
through 9-6-15.00 shall prevail. When a proposed use or development of land requires a zoning reclassification, conditional use permit or variance, the
application therefor shall be considered prior to or concurrently with the tentative map or the tentative parcel map. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-4.00: MAPS, GENERALLY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 213/436
9-6-4.01: EXAMINATION AND FIELD CHECK:
Pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map, the City Engineer shall make such detailed examination of tentative and final maps and tentative
parcel maps and parcel maps and such field check, if any, as may be necessary to enable him to make the required certifications. (Ord. 779, 10-17-
77)
9-6-4.02: REJECTION:
The City Council may reject a tentative or final map and the Planning Commission may reject a tentative parcel map if the proposed use is prohibited
by any ordinance, statute, law or other regulation and shall deny a map if it makes any of the following findings:
(A) That the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
(B) That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
(C) That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development.
(D) That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development.
(E) That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and
avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
(F) That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems.
(G) That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public-at-large, for access through or
use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the City Council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for
access or for use will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-4.03: FILING, REQUIREMENTS FULFILLED:
(A) No map shall be considered as filed with the City until all of the fees and charges required by the City as pertains to the subdivision of land have
been paid and an environmental impact statement has been prepared and accepted if required by the City, and all applicable requirements of
Sections 9-6-1.00 through 9-6-15.00 of this Chapter have been fulfilled or an application for an exception or for appropriate zoning has been filed
for concurrent consideration.
(B) A final map or parcel map shall not be considered as filed until all fees, bonds and deposits have been made, all corrections have been made as
requested by the City Engineer to the maps and improvement plans, if any, and the property has been annexed to the City and to any service
areas or districts other than the City which are to provide necessary services. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-5.00: PRELIMINARY MAPS:
9-6-5.01: FILING, OPTIONAL:
(A) Prior to the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a subdivider may submit preliminary maps, plans and other information concerning a
proposed or contemplated development to the secretary of the Planning Commission. Within thirty (30) days the secretary of the Planning
Commission shall hold a conference with the subdivider and make recommendations as shall seem proper. The secretary of the Planning
Commission shall recommend consultation by the subdivider with the appropriate public or private agencies.
(B) All such recommendations are preliminary only and shall not be binding upon the City in any manner.
This is an optional procedure which may be elected by the subdivider and is not required by the Ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-6.00: TENTATIVE MAPS:
9-6-6.01: FILING:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 214/436
Tentative tract maps and vesting tentative tract maps shall be processed in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act, the Subdivision
Map Act3, State planning law and applicable local regulations.
(A) Any person desiring to subdivide land or combine land, in other than a reversion to acreage, shall apply with the Planning Commission for a
tentative tract map, vesting tentative tract map or tentative parcel map in accordance with this Title and the California Subdivision Map Act.
(B) In accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act and this Title, the secretary to the Planning Commission shall determine in writing
whether such application is complete and accepted for processing. The Secretary, upon making the determination, shall specify those items
necessary to complete the application and immediately transmit the determination to the applicant. The secretary may in the course of processing
the application, require the applicant to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the information required for the application. (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-
94)
9-6-6.02: FEES:
The City Council shall set the fees for processing a tentative tract map and vesting tentative tract map at a level sufficient to recover the costs
reasonably incurred by the processing of such map. All fees shall be due and payable at the time of submittal of the required applications. (Ord. 94-7,
6-6-94)
9-6-6.03: CONTENT AND FORM OF TENTATIVE AND VESTING TENTATIVE TRACT MAPS:
The content and form of tentative and vesting tentative tract maps shall contain clear, concise, legible and accurate information, and be governed by
the provisions of this Section and prepared in accordance with the following criteria:
(A) Format and Graphic Representation:
1. Tentative and vesting tentative tract maps shall be a minimum of eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") and a maximum of twenty
four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). More than one sheet may be used if necessary. The secretary to the Planning Commission may
accept a larger size if the subdivision size or configuration requires a larger map for clarity.
2. All maps submitted shall be folded to a size of approximately eight inches by eleven inches (8" x 11") in a way such that the tract number is
clearly visible.
3. Each map shall be drawn to an engineer's scale at a scale sufficient to show the details of the map clearly.
4. A north arrow, the scale and date of map preparation shall be shown on the map. All subsequent revisions and the date they were made shall be
clearly noted on the map.
5. Lines and features shall be represented on the map as follows:
(a) Tract boundary; heavy double width solid line.
(b) Proposed lot and right-of-way lines; heavy solid line.
(c) Contours with elevations denoted, existing lot lines, existing features such as structures, curbs; light solid lines.
(d) Proposed lots not a part of the subdivision and easements; light dashed lines. Easements shall be labeled as to intended use, whether
existing or proposed, and whether the easement will remain or be removed.
(e) Water lines, sewers, and storm drains; heavy dashed lines. Utilities shall be labeled as to intended use, whether existing or proposed, and
whether the easement will remain or be removed.
(f) Direction of storm water flow; light arrows.
(B) Map Identification:
1. The tract number as obtained from the Fresno County Recorder shall be prominently shown on the map.
2. The map shall be conspicuously titled as either a tentative tract map or vesting tentative tract map. If the tentative tract map is for a
condominium, planned unit development or stock cooperative, or a conversion thereto, this shall be shown as part of the title of the tentative tract
map.
3. A vicinity map shall be provided on the map which clearly shows the proposed subdivision boundary with respect to the nearest major east-west
and north-south streets.
4. The tentative map shall state the name, address and phone numbers of the following persons:
(a) All record owners of the property proposed for subdivision.
(b) Subdivider.
(c) Subdivider's authorized agent, if other than the subdivider.
(d) Engineer, land surveyor or other person responsible for map preparation.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 215/436
(C) Subdivision Boundary:
1. Subdivision boundary lines shall be consistent with one or more contiguous units of land as shown on the latest Fresno County assessment roll,
as provided by section 66424 of the California Government Code.
2. Subdivision boundary lines shall be consistent with one or more lots of record and/or with one or more lots created lawfully in accordance with
State law and this Code, except as provided in subsection (C)3 below.
3. Where existing lots of record or otherwise lawfully created lots are only partly included within the subdivision boundary, the entire boundary of
such parcel shall be shown on the subdivision map.
4. Section lines and section corners shall be referenced on the map.
(D) Subdivision Information:
1. Sufficient elevations or contours shall be shown on the map to determine the general slope of the land and the high and low points thereof.
2. Proposed lots shall be drawn to scale, numbered, dimensioned and have their area shown.
3. Lots which comply with the zone district standards, but which are not proposed for development, may be designated as outlots or remainders,
with an explanation of their future use or nonuse.
4. Lots which are proposed to be dedicated for public purposes shall be identified as outlots and be given an alphabetical identification.
5. The location, center line, width and names of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, highways and other access easements shall be shown on
the map. The radius of all curves shall be indicated on the map. If there is any proposed change in the disposition of the existing rights of way,
these shall be shown on the map.
6. The location and widths of existing and proposed easements for drainage, sanitary sewer, water lines, public utilities, irrigation facilities and
other purposes shall be shown on the map.
7. All existing aboveground uses or structures, such as but not limited to buildings, water wells, power lines and poles, and towers shall be shown
on the map. The final disposition of these features shall also be shown on the map.
8. All existing underground uses or structures, such as but not limited to wells, cesspools, sewers, culverts, storm drains and dump sites shall be
shown on the map. The final disposition of these features shall also be shown on the map.
9. The location, width, depth and final disposition of all existing and proposed canals or private ditches shall be shown on the map.
10. Trees shall be shown on the map in the following manner:
(a) The location and type of existing trees present in the existing or proposed right of way shall be shown on the map.
(b) The location, approximate diameter and final disposition of all trees with a diameter greater than or equal to twelve inches (12").
(c) A statement shall be included on the map which states the number of trees within the subdivision which are proposed to be removed.
11. Proposed main line extensions or relocations of public utilities, storm drains, irrigation canals or similar features shall be shown on the map.
Major required facilities, such as lift stations and pump stations, shall also be shown on the map.
12. Proposed areas for parks, ponding basins, public facilities, open space, school sites and similar features shall be shown on the map as
required.
13. Maps which contain property within two hundred feet (200') of an existing or planned railroad, highway, airport or similar noise generating
source shall indicate the method of noise reduction such that the project will be consistent with the General Plan Noise Element.
14. The following features shall be shown accurately to a distance of fifty feet (50') from the proposed subdivision:
(a) Zoning and General Plan land use designation.
(b) Parcel boundary lines.
(c) Easements which may affect the proposed subdivision.
(d) Location and widths of existing rights of way.
(e) Location and width of existing improvements, including but not limited to, sewer, water, storm lines, concrete curb and gutter, sidewalk,
driveways, pavement, and the location of street lights and signals.
(f) Existing land use.
(g) Grade differences of one foot (1') or more.
15. In subdivisions which are reasonably expected to be resubdivided at some future date, potential street and lot alignments shall be shown on
the map.
16. Any remainder parcels shall be shown on the map in their entirety.
17. All proposed phase lines shall be shown on the map.
18. The map shall contain the following information:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 216/436
(a) Present zone district and General Plan land use designation.
(b) Proposed zone district and General Plan land use designation.
(c) Ultimate number of dwelling units to be constructed for residential subdivisions.
(d) Existing use of the property.
(e) Proposed use of the property.
(f) Gross and net site acreage.
(g) Source of the water supply.
(h) Source of sewage disposal.
(i) All public utilities to be provided to the site.
(j) For residential projects, a statement indicating how the use of passive natural heating and cooling opportunities are accommodated.
(k) A statement that all public improvements shall be constructed in accordance with City standards.
19. A preliminary grading plan shall be provided for all tentative tracts in such number as is specified by the secretary to the Planning Commission.
20. A preliminary title report prepared within six (6) months of the date of application shall be submitted.
21. The following additional information shall be submitted with all vesting tentative tract applications:
(a) A detailed grading plan and all fees required for review of the plan shall accompany a vesting tentative tract map application.
(b) A geotechnical report for the subject property.
(c) The proposed foot print of buildings or the minimum and maximum building coverage in square feet for each lot shall be shown or stated on
the vesting tentative tract map.
(E) Content and Form of Related Applications:
1. Related Applications: Applications related to a tentative or vesting tentative tract map that are submitted prior to or concurrent with the map shall
contain clear, concise, legible and accurate information. Such applications may include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) Environmental assessment application.
(b) General Plan amendment application.
(c) Zone change application.
(d) Conditional use permit application.
(e) Site plan review application.
(f) Annexation request.
2. Internal Consistency of Applications:
(a) Information presented in each application shall be consistent with information presented in related applications and on the map.
(b) All site plans, details, drawings and other graphic materials shall be consistent with information presented in related applications and on the
map.
(c) An application to rezone a property, within the boundaries of a tentative or vesting tentative tract map, shall have boundaries consistent with
the tentative or vesting tentative tract map. (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-94)
9-6-6.04: CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT CONSISTENCY:
All tentative and vesting tentative tract maps shall be reviewed for potential impacts on the environment in accordance with the California
Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code section 21000 et seq.) and any amendments which may occur to that Act subsequent to
adoption of this Section. (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-94)
9-6-6.05: REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The secretary to the Planning Commission, Superintendent of Public Works, City Building Official, City Engineer and Fire Chief shall be deemed to be
and are empowered to act as the Subdivision Review Committee. The secretary to the Planning Commission shall serve as the Committee
chairperson and shall convene the Subdivision Review Committee to formulate recommendations and requirements on the design and improvements
of subdivisions. The Subdivision Review Committee shall, through the secretary of the Planning Commission, report its recommendations in the form
of a staff report to the Planning Commission and City Council. The applicant shall be notified of the Committee's recommendations seventy two (72)
hours in advance of any hearing or action on a tentative or vesting tentative tract map. (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-94)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 217/436
9-6-6.06: PLANNING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION:
(A) The Planning Commission shall consider all tentative maps at public meetings scheduled in accordance with applicable State and local laws. The
Planning Commission shall take action by resolution to recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map to the City
Council. If a legal quorum can not be attained, the Planning Commission shall forward the map to the City Council without a recommendation. A
majority of the voting members present constituting a quorum shall be required to pass a resolution. A tie vote shall be considered a technical
denial without prejudice.
(B) A public hearing for all tentative maps shall be required. The public hearing shall be noticed in accordance with State law and the following:
1. The notice of the meeting shall indicate the time and place of the hearing and include a general description of the tentative map, its approximate
location and initial environmental determination.
2. The notice shall be given in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act, but in no case shall the project be noticed less than ten
(10) days in advance of the public hearing. Notice shall be given in at least two (2) of the three (3) following methods:
(a) The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the City.
(b) The notice shall be given by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities as shown on
the latest equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred feet (300') of the property which is the subject of the
tentative map.
(c) The property shall be posted in a manner such that it is visible to passing vehicular and pedestrian traffic. A minimum of one notice per three
hundred feet (300') of street frontage shall be provided.
3. The Planning Commission may continue an item to a specific time, date and place without the need for further noticing, provided that the time,
date and place are publicly announced by the presiding officer. (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-94)
9-6-6.07: AUTOMATIC RECOMMENDATION OF APPROVAL:
If the Planning Commission takes no action on a proposed subdivision within fifty (50) days of closing the public hearing or extensions as agreed to by
the applicant in writing, then the map shall be recommended for approval in so far as it complies with State and local law. The specified time limit shall
begin when the project is accepted and deemed complete for processing if environmental documents have been certified or approved in accordance
with section 21000 et seq. of the Public Resources Code. If environmental documents have not been certified or approved, then the time limit shall
begin when the appropriate environmental documents have been certified or approved. It shall be the duty of the secretary to the Planning
Commission to certify and transmit the approval to the City Council. (Ord. 95-2, 3-6-95)
9-6-6.08: CITY COUNCIL CONSIDERATION:
(A) The City Council shall consider all tentative maps at public meetings scheduled in accordance with applicable State and local laws. The City
Council shall take action by resolution to approve, conditionally approve or deny the proposed tentative map. The action of the City Council shall be
final. A tie vote shall be considered a technical denial without prejudice.
(B) A public hearing for all tentative maps shall be required. The public hearing shall be noticed in accordance with State law and the following:
1. The notice of the meeting shall indicate the time and place of the hearing and include a general description of the tentative map, its approximate
location and initial environmental determination.
2. The notice shall be given in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act, but in no case shall the project be noticed less than ten
(10) days in advance of the public hearing. Notice shall be given in at least two (2) of the three (3) following methods:
(a) The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the City.
(b) The notice shall be given by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities as shown on
the latest equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred feet (300') of the property which is the subject of the
tentative map.
(c) The property shall be posted in a manner such that it is visible to passing vehicular and pedestrian traffic. A minimum of one notice per three
hundred feet (300') of street frontage shall be provided.
3. The City Council may continue an item to a specific time, date and place without the need for further noticing, provided that the time, date and
place are publicly announced by the presiding officer. (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-94)
9-6-6.09: AUTOMATIC APPROVAL:
If the City Council takes no action on a proposed subdivision within thirty (30) days of closing the public hearing or extensions as agreed to by the
applicant in writing, then the map shall be approved in so far as it complies with State and local law. Except that, the specified time period shall
commence only after certification of the environmental impact report, adoption of a negative declaration or a determination by the City Council that the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 218/436
project is exempt from the requirements of division 13 (commencing with section 21000) of the Public Resources Code. It shall be the duty of the City
Clerk to certify such approval. (Ord. 95-2, 3-6-95)
9-6-6.10: TERMINATION OR EXTENSION PROCEEDINGS:
(A) Failure to record a final map within twenty four (24) months from the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, or within any
extension of time thereof granted by the City Council, shall terminate all proceedings. Before a final map may thereafter be recorded, a new
tentative map shall be required.
(B) The applicant or successor in interest to an approved tentative map may request an extension of twelve (12) months, provided such extension
does not extend the life of the map in excess of a total of five (5) years, including the initial approval. The City Council shall consider all extension
requests. To be considered the request shall be submitted to the Director of the Community Development Department not less than forty five (45)
days before the expiration of the tentative map. Such request shall be accompanied by all required forms, materials and fees. (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-94)
9-6-6.11: RIGHTS CONFERRED BY A VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
(A) The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the ordinances, written policies and standards as described in the California Subdivision Map Act4.
(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) above, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are
determined to exist:
1. A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety,
or both.
2. The conditions or denial are required in order to comply with State or Federal law.
(C) The rights conferred by this Section shall expire if a final map is not recorded prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in
Section 9-6-7.00 of this Title. If the final map is recorded these rights shall last for the following periods of time:
1. An initial period of twenty four (24) months. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting
tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map is recorded.
2. The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)1 above, shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application
for a grading permit, if such review exceeds thirty (30) days from the time a complete application is submitted.
3. A subdivider may apply for a one year time extension within sixty (60) days of the expiration of the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)1
above. If the extension request is denied the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council if the appeal is filed within ten (10) days of the
denial.
4. If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit for a subdivided lot, the period of time specified in this subsection (C) and
the rights referred to herein, shall continue until the expiration of the permit and any extensions thereof. (Ord. 94-7, 6-6-94)
9-6-7.00: FINAL MAPS:
9-6-7.01: FILING, TIME LIMIT:
(A) Within the prescribed time for filing the final map, as approved by the City Council, the subdivider may cause the subdivision or any part thereof to
be accurately surveyed and a final map to be prepared and filed. The final map shall conform to the tentative map, as approved, and shall comply
with all provisions of Section 1.00 through 15.00. (Ord. 848, 11-15-82)
(B) The final map shall be filed with the City Clerk not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date by which the map must be recorded in order to permit
the actions by the City Engineer, the City Council and the County Clerk-Recorder as required by Sections 1.00 through 15.00 and the Subdivision
Map Act.
(C) See Section 9-6-6.17 for failure to record a final map within the specified time limits.
9-6-7.02: FILING, PROCEDURE:
(A) When Filed. The final map may be filed when it is completed and all required improvement plans and certificates except the approval certificate of
the City Council has been signed and acknowledged where necessary.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 219/436
(B) With Whom Filed. The filing shall be with the City Clerk.
(C) Documents Filed.
1. The original final map and seven (7) copies shall be filed.
2. Evidence of title, acceptable to the County Clerk-Recorder, shall be secured from a title company indicating that, as shown by the public records,
the parties whose signatures appear on the map and consent to the recordation of the map are all the parties having a record title interest in the
land being subdivided whose signatures are required by the Subdivision Map Act.
3. Memorandum for the City Engineer containing the following data shall accompany the map:
(a) The total area of the tract submitted,
(b) The total area in roads and the total lineal length of roads,
(c) The total area in lots,
(d) The total number of lots,
(e) The area in parks, school sites or other lands offered for dedication or reserved for future public or quasi-public uses,
(f) The proposed use of the lots,
(g) Total areas for each of the proposed uses.
4. Two (2) copies of the protective covenants, if any, that are to be recorded shall accompany the map.
5. Improvement plans shall be submitted showing all of the improvements required herein, and all others proposed to be installed by the subdivider,
in, on, over or under any roadway, right-of-way, easement or parcel of land dedicated by the map.
6. All notes, sheets and drawings showing traverse closure and the computation of all distances, angles and courses shown on the final map and
ties to existing and proposed monuments and adjacent subdivisions shall accompany the map when required by the City Engineer.
7. All fees as hereinafter specified shall be paid.
8. A statement from the County Treasurer-Tax Collector shall be secured showing that there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof
for unpaid taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable.
9. A statement shall be secured from the County Auditor-Controller giving his estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which are a lien
but which are not payable.
10. The necessary agreements or contracts, bonds and deposits as hereinafter specified shall accompany to allow the recordation of the map.
9-6-7.03: PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT:
(A) A preliminary soil report shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the State, based upon test borings or excavations unless waived
as hereinafter provided. Said borings or excavations shall be taken at specific locations determined by the City Engineer or at random locations if
no specific locations are established. Not less than one test shall be made for every forty (40) lots or ten (10) acres, whichever represents the
lesser area, and in no case shall there be no less than two (2) borings for each subdivision. The City Engineer may require additional tests when
he determines the soil conditions within the subdivision are so varied that additional tests will be needed. If the City Engineer has knowledge of the
soil qualities of the subdivision, he may waive some or all of the borings. The borings shall be at least ten feet (10') in depth. The depth of borings
shall be adjusted to represent soil profiles after any proposed lot gradings and shall take into consideration the soil composition after excavations
and embankments have been completed. The preliminary soil report shall contain the following information:
1. The maximum amount of excavation and fill to be expected;
2. The location of foundations in relation to excavations and fills;
3. The expansive qualities of the soils encountered where foundations are to be placed in and shall state the percentage of swell of a soil section
taken from a representative undisturbed core sample under a load of six hundred twenty five (625) pounds per square foot, laterally restrained,
saturated and allowed to swell. If footings are to be placed in fills, the expansive tests shall be performed under a load of six hundred twenty five
(625) pounds per square foot, laterally restrained and compacted to ninety percent (90%) of maximum density with the moisture content below
the shrinkage limit. The percentage of expansion shall be recorded after twenty four (24) hours. If the swell of the sample exceeds three percent
(3%) it shall be presumed that the soil involved is critically expansive and a soil investigation as required in subsection (B) below will be required.
4. Recommended bearing values for the soils;
5. Whether other soil problems exist which, if not corrected, could lead to structural defects;
6. Copies of the test boring analysis. (Water well drilling logs shall not be substituted.)
(B) Soil Investigations. If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils, or other soils or fills would be of such depth that
foundations will not rest on original ground, a soil investigation shall be prepared for each lot in the subdivision by a civil engineer who is registered
by the State. The soil investigation report shall include the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 220/436
1. The physical properties of subsurface formations;
2. The composition of subsurface soil and rock and ground water conditions;
3. The stability of anticipated cut or fill slopes;
4. The general type of site grading;
5. Recommendations on corrective actions which are likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed. These
recommendations may include the requirement that the corrective work must be under the supervision of a registered civil engineer.
The soil investigation shall be reviewed by the City Engineer who shall approve the investigation if he determines that the recommended action
is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed.
(C) Waiver of Soil Report. The City Engineer may waive the preliminary soil report if he has knowledge of the soil qualities within the subdivision.
9-6-7.04: REVIEW BY CITY ENGINEER:
(A) Upon receipt of the final map, the City Clerk shall refer five (5) copies of the map, accompanied by the memorandum for the City Engineer and one
copy of protective covenants, to the City Engineer for review and report.
(B) The City Engineer shall refer all easements for public utilities, including anchorage easements, to the proper public utility for review and
recommendation.
(C) The City Engineer shall check and determine the correctness of surveying data, plans, profiles and specifications of improvements, certificates of
dedication, acceptances of dedications and acknowledgements, and such other matters as require checking to insure compliance with Sections
1.00 through 15.00.
(D) If the final map and all accompanying materials are in the correct form prescribed by Sections 1.00 through 15.00, and the matters shown thereon
are sufficient, their correctness shall be certified on the map by the City Engineer by his signature within twenty (20) days of receipt.
(E) The City Engineer shall thereupon transmit said map together with said other materials to the City Clerk for presentation to the City Council.
9-6-7.05: CITY COUNCIL, DECISION:
(A) Approval of Map.
1. At its next regular or adjourned meeting after the filing of a final map with the Clerk, the City Council shall consider said map to determine if it is
in conformity with all the requirements of Sections 1.00 through 15.00.
2. The City Council shall at that time accept or reject any or all offers of dedication and shall, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any
roads or easements, require that the subdivider agree to improve the roads and easements. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets,
paths, alleys or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the City Council may by resolution at any
later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage
easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
3. Upon approval of the map by the City Council by resolution the City Clerk shall present the map duly certified to the County Clerk-Recorder for
recordation.
(B) Disapproval of Map:
1. If the City Council determines either that the map is not in conformity with the requirements of Sections 1.00 through 15.00, or the approved
tentative map, or that the proposed improvements do not meet City improvement standards, the City Council shall by resolution disapprove such
final map, specifying its reason or reasons therefor, and the City Clerk shall, in writing, advise the subdivider of such disapproval and the reason
or reasons therefor.
2. The subdivider may file a new final map with the City Clerk altered to conform to all the requirements of Sections 1.00 through 15.00.
9-6-7.06: PREPARATION, LICENSED PERSONNEL:
The final map shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor who shall set monuments in conformity with monument standards
so that the survey is readily retraceable. All data, profiles and other engineering drawings submitted with the final map shall be prepared and signed by
a registered civil engineer.
9-6-7.07: PREPARATION, PRINTING, SIZE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 221/436
(A) The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester
base film, including affidavits, certificates and acknowledgements, except that such affidavits, certificates and acknowledgements may be legibly
stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. Signatures shall be in opaque black ink. If ink is used on polyester base film the ink surface
shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.
(B) The size of each sheet of the map shall be eighteen inches by twenty six inches (18" x 26"). A line shall be drawn around each sheet leaving an
entirely blank margin of one inch (1").
9-6-7.08: PREPARATION, SCALE, NUMBERING:
The scale of the map shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'); except that subdivisions with lots of two and one-half (2) acres or greater
may use a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), or the City Engineer may require one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') if complexity of
detail so warrants.
When the final map consists of more than two (2) sheets a key map drawn to a scale of one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000') shall be
placed on sheet number one indicating the relationship among all sheets.
The particular number of each sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each
adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.
9-6-7.09: TITLE:
The title of each final map shall consist of a tract number conspicuously placed at the top of the sheet followed by the words "consisting of ..... sheets"
(showing the number thereof) followed by the words "In the City of Selma".
9-6-7.10: PROPERTY DESCRIPTION:
Below the title shall appear a description of all the property being subdivided, by reference to such map or maps of the property shown thereon as
previously recorded or filed in the County Clerk-Recorder's office or previously filed with the County Clerk-Recorder pursuant to a final judgment in any
action in partition, or previously filed in the office of the County Clerk-Recorder under authority of Chapter 3, Part 2 of Division 4 of the Business and
Professions Code, or by reference to the plat of any United States survey.
Each reference in such description to any tract or subdivision, shall be spelled out and worded identically with the original records and must show a
complete reference to the book and page of records of the County Clerk-Recorder. The description shall also include reference to any abandonment
with the date, book and page of records of the County Clerk-Recorder.
9-6-7.11: SUBDIVISION BOUNDARY:
The boundary line of a subdivision shall be indicated on the final map by approximately one-sixteenth inch (1/16") wide border outside such boundary
line and shall not obliterate any line, figure or other data appearing on the map.
All lines shown on the map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision itself shall be clearly distinguishable from those lines which are a part of
the subdivision.
9-6-7.12: CERTIFICATES AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:
Certificates and acknowledgements as are required by Sections 1.00 through 15.00 and the Subdivision Map Act shall appear on the title sheet of the
final map, unless their omission is permitted in the manner provided by the Subdivision Map Act.
When a soil report has been prepared this fact shall be noted on the final map as specified in Section 11568 of the Subdivision Map Act.
9-6-7.13: LOTS AND PARCELS DESIGNATED:
A lot shall be shown in its entirety on one sheet:
(A) Designation. The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all lots intended to be reserved for private purposes, all parcels
offered for dedication for any purpose and any private roads with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case.
Parcels offered for dedication other than for roads, alleys, pedestrian walkways, water lots or easements shall be designated by number.
(B) Lot Numbers. The lots shall be numbered consecutively beginning with the number "1" and shall continue without omission or duplication
throughout the entire tract.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 222/436
(C) Area Designation. Each lot containing an area of one acre or more shall have designated thereon the net acreage of such lot shown not less
accurately than to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre.
9-6-7.14: BEARINGS, LENGTH OF LINES, CURVE DATA:
(A) The bearing and length of each lot line, block and boundary line shall be shown on the final map, provided that, when bearings or lengths of lot
lines in any series of lots are the same such bearings or lengths may be omitted from each interior parallel lot line of such series. Each required
bearing and length shall be shown in full and no ditto mark or other designation of repetition shall be used.
(B) The length, the radius, the total central angle of each curve and the central angle and length of each segment within each lot shall be shown
thereon.
(C) The distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by easements shall be so arrowed or shown as to indicate clearly the actual
length of each lot line.
9-6-7.15: HIGHWAYS, ROADS AND PUBLIC USE AREAS:
(A) Data Required:
1. For each highway and road the following shall be shown:
(a) Width of existing right-of-way;
(b) Width of portion to be dedicated, if any;
(c) Center line with right-of-way width on each side;
(d) Center line data as follows:
i. Distance between center lines of streets and points of tangency,
ii. Length of each tangent,
iii. Radius,
iv. Central angle,
v. Length of each curve.
2. For each alley and pedestrian walkway the following shall be shown:
(a) Total right-of-way width;
(b) Bearings and distances as needed.
3. For each water lot and other parcel offered for public or private use the following shall be shown:
(a) The intended use;
(b) Dimensions of parcel (with bearings and distances as needed).
(B) Non-Access Line. Non-access lines shall be shown on the final map. The certificate shall indicate therein where direct access rights are being
relinquished. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
(C) Road Names: Each road shown on the final map shall have a name. The road name shall be subject to approval by the City Council and subject to
the following:
1. Road names in the City shall be simply spelled, and euphonic if possible.
2. No duplicate, similar spellings, or similar sounding names of roads shall be allowed.
3. Family names (given and last) of historical significance to the community (not in conflict herewith) shall be the only names of persons for
consideration. Such family name or other name of historical significance shall be referred to a recognized authority on local history (to be
appointed by the City Council) for a review and report on the historical significance of the name.
4. Only one road name shall be used on any single alignment. Names on present road alignments whether in the City or County, shall be continued
when new sections of such roads are developed. A single alignment is defined as one which does not deviate from a straight line by more than
one hundred twenty five feet (125').
5. Cul-de-sacs with a neck of less than fifty feet (50') (measured from right-of-way line to beginning of curve) shall bear the name of the main road.
Any cul-de-sac with a neck beyond said fifty feet (50') shall be named according to provisions of this policy for new roads.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 223/436
6. A road making a ninety degree (90) turn or greater shall bear a separate name. Minor jogs in which the road continues in substantially the same
direction shall be excepted from this provision.
7. In the determination of the suffixes of public roads:
(a) The through roads continuing the alignment of Fresno County roads from the rural area shall be designated as "Avenue".
(b) All other roads shall be designated as "Street". The designation "Court", "Lane", "Way", or "Circle" shall be applied only on cul-de-sacs,
meandering roads, or very short roads not sharing the alignment with another road and not in conflict with other provisions of this Section.
(c) Special action of the City Council shall be required for a road to be designated "Boulevard" except for Golden State Boulevard and Nelson
Boulevard.
8. Patterns of road names on neighboring alignments are encouraged.
9. No further development of the alphabet roads north of Oak Street alignment shall be permitted.
10. The words "Avenue", "Boulevard", "Place", or other designation of any such road or way, shall be spelled out in full on the final map and have a
proper indication of north, south, east or west as a prefix thereto. (Ord. 813, 5-19-80)
(D) Dedication. If a highway, road, alley, pedestrian walkway, water lot or other parcel intended for public use is being dedicated by a final map it shall
be properly designated on the map and set out in the owner's certificate of dedication on the map.
(E) Private Roads. The same data shall be shown for private roads to define their boundaries as is required for public roads in subsection (A) of this
Section, and also sufficient mathematical data to show clearly the portion of each lot within such road. Private roads shall be designated by name
and shall have inserted within the limits thereof the words "Not a Public Road" and shall be shown on the map by heavy dashed lines.
(F) Private Roads, Dedication. If a road is approved by the City Council as a private road it shall be dedicated for the private use of the lot owners
which it is intended to serve. Where the approved private road shall be intended to serve a lot or lots, each consisting of less than twenty (20)
acres, that road shall be offered for dedication for public use but rejected at the time of the approval of the final map.
9-6-7.16: EASEMENTS:
(A) Location, Width and Ties. The final map shall show the width, the side lines or center lines and sufficient ties to definitely locate each easement to
which the lots in the subdivision are subject. If the location of such easement cannot be definitely determined, a statement shall be placed on the
map acknowledging the existence of such easement.
(B) Designation, Notes and Figures. Each easement shown for any canal, ditch, storm drain, sewer or utility shall be designated by a fine dashed line
and clearly labeled and identified with all notes and figures pertaining thereto subordinate in form and appearance to those relating to the
subdivision itself. If the easement is of record, the record reference shall be shown.
(C) Dedication. If an easement is being dedicated by a final map it shall be properly set out in the owner's certificate of dedication on the map.
9-6-7.17: COUNTY OR CITY BOUNDARY LINES:
Each County or City boundary line crossing or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown upon the final map and such line shall be clearly designated
and tied in. No lot shall be divided by a County, City, school or special district boundary line.
9-6-7.18: SURVEY MONUMENTS:
The final map shall show the location and type of all monuments placed in accordance with Section 9-6-7.25.
9-6-7.19: LAND SUBJECT TO INUNDATION:
(A) Flood Water. If any portion of the land within the subdivision shown on any final map is subject to inundation or flood hazard by storm waters, such
fact and portion shall be clearly shown by a prominent note on each sheet of such final map.
(B) Overflow or Ponding. If any portion of such land is or will be subject to periodic sheet overflow, or ponding of local or foreign storm water, the City
Engineer, after consulting with the design engineers, shall so inform the State Real Estate Commissioner.
(C) Natural Watercourses. The location of any watercourse, channel, stream or creek which functions as a drainageway shall be shown on the final
map. In the event said watercourse, channel, stream or creek is to be relocated, only the new location need be shown on the final map.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 224/436
9-6-7.20: ADJACENT SUBDIVISIONS:
The final map shall show the tract number (and name, if any) of abutting subdivisions.
9-6-7.21: SUBDIVISION SHOWN IN SEPARATE UNITS:
The recordation of the final map and the construction of subdivision improvements may, with the approval of the City Council, be performed in two (2)
or more units; however, each unit must have a separate tract number. No bonds, deposits, payments or other security need be furnished for the
deferred unit or units until the final map for the deferred unit or units is submitted to the City Council for approval. Final maps for all units shall be filed
with the City Council within the time limits set forth in this Title for the filing of a final map.
9-6-7.22: PASSAGE OF TITLE:
Title to dedicated property shall pass upon its acceptance by the City Council and recordation of the final map. The responsibility for maintenance of
improvements shall not pass to the City until the improvements have been accepted by the City Council pursuant to Section 941 of the Streets and
Highway Code of the State.
9-6-7.23: ROAD DEDICATION REJECTION:
If at the time the final map is approved any roads are rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the City Council may, by resolution at any
later date and without further action or obligation by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the roads for public use. Such acceptance
shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk-Recorder and the Clerk-Recorder shall make a note of such action on the subdivision plat.
9-6-7.24: ROAD VACATION, RESUBDIVISION:
If a resubdivision of an existing subdivision proposes to realign roads and other easements any previous dedication, whether accepted or rejected,
shall be summarily vacated and abandoned upon approval and recordation of the new map and the recordation of a certified copy of the City Council's
resolution approving the map and vacating the previous roads and other easements.
9-6-7.25: SURVEY PROCEDURES:
(A) Accuracy. The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision, in the preparation of a final map, shall conform to the accepted
standards of the engineering profession. The accuracy of all boundary surveys done in connection with any subdivision shall have a precision of
one in ten thousand (10,000).
(B) Existing Center Lines. In the event the City Engineer, the State Highway Engineer or the County Director of Public works has established the
center line of any street or alley in or adjoining a subdivision, the final map shall show such center line together with reference to a field book or
map showing such center line and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be stated upon the final map.
(C) Existing Monuments. Each final map shall fully and clearly show and identify such monuments or other evidence determining the boundaries of the
subdivision as were found on the ground, together with sufficient corners of adjoining subdivisions, by lot and block number, tract name and place
of record, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation as may be necessary to locate precisely the limits of the subdivision and
to permit the survey to be retraced.
(D) New Monuments:
1. The location, size and depth of all monuments placed in making the survey shall be shown and, if any were reset by ties, that fact shall be
shown. All monuments on the exterior boundary of the subdivision, except those within construction zones, shall be placed prior to the approval
of the final map. All interior monuments shall be set subsequent to the completion of the subdivision improvements and a bond shall be
presented by the subdivider as provided for in Section 66596 of the Subdivision Map Act.
2. Monuments shall be placed and shall be of the type specified below:
(a) All lot corners and changes of direction on all interior and exterior boundaries shall be monumented by three-quarter inch by twenty eight inch
(3/4" x 28") pipe, permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the certificate number of the surveyor or civil engineer setting it, each number
preceded by the letters "L.S." or "R.C.E." respectively as the case may be.
(b) The center line of every street in the subdivision, including border streets, shall have monuments in accordance with the improvement
standards, intervisible, and not more than four hundred feet (400') apart.
3. The City Engineer may allow the use of off-set monuments, properly tied to reference monuments, when necessary due to terrain, waterways or
other monuments other than those specified in subsections (D) 1 and 2 above.
(E) Monuments, Replacement. Before street improvements are accepted, all existing monuments disturbed by the placement of any improvements
shall be reset.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 225/436
(F) Bench Marks. Bench marks shall be set at locations required by the City Engineer. The datum for the area within the City shall be based upon
datum established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Sea Level Datum 1929, as amended.
(G) Standard Plaque, Numbering and Location Information. Identification of monuments and bench marks shall be through the use of a standard
plaque.
Descriptions of all monuments and bench marks shall be furnished to the City Engineer for inclusion in his records.
(H) California Coordinate System. All surveys required by Sections 1.00 through 15.00, or necessary to the subdivision of land, shall conform to the
California Coordinate System when required by the City Engineer. When required, each final map shall show the California coordinate of every
monument and all California coordinates shall be used and shown on all traverse closure sheets and other notes and ties which are required by
Section 9-6-7.02.
(I) Mathematical Accuracy. The blocks and lots of each final map or approved map of record shall have a mathematical accuracy of closure to one in
ten thousand (10,000). (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-8.00: PARCEL MAPS:
9-6-8.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND APPLICABILITY:
(A) Governing Provisions: The design, improvement, and survey data for divisions of land requiring parcel maps and/or tentative parcel maps, and the
procedure to be followed in securing official approval for said maps, shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and by the
provisions of Sections 9-6-1 through 9-6-15.
(B) Applicability. A parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the Subdivision Map
Act, except where the requirement for a parcel map is waived as provided by Section 9-6-1.04(B) (6), and except for subdivisions created by short
term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days' notice in writing) of a portion of an operating right of way of a railroad
corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code; or for land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or
public utility, or to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights of way; provided, however, that upon a showing made
to the Planning Commission based upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a map, this exception shall not apply.
(C) Merger of Contiguous Parcels:
1. Two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been created under the provisions of the Subdivision Act or City ordinance
enacted pursuant thereto or were not subject to such provisions at the time of their creation shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such
contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner, and no further proceeding under the Subdivision Map act or this Chapter shall be
required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels or units, or any of them; except that if any one of such contiguous
parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size to permit use or development under the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or other City ordinance and at least one of such contiguous parcels or units is not developed with a building
for which a permit has been issued by the City Building Inspector or which was built prior to the time such permits were required by the City, then
such parcels shall be merged only to the extent necessary to form one or more units which conform to lot area, width and depth requirements set
by the City Zoning Ordinance, for the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter.
2. Any parcels or units of land merged prior to July 7, 1977, shall be deemed unmerged and separate parcels except where merger is necessary to
form one or more units which conform to the area, width and depth requirements set by the City Zoning Ordinance.
3. Whenever it has been determined that real property has merged pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act or this Chapter, the secretary of the
Planning Commission shall cause to be filed for record with the County Recorder a notice of such merger specifying the names of the record
owners and particularly describing the real property, provided that, at least thirty (30) days prior to the recording of the notice, the owner of the
parcels or units to be affected by the merger shall be advised in writing of the intention to record the notice and specifying a time, date and place
at which the owner may present evidence to the Planning Commission why such notice should not be recorded.
9-6-8.02: TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS:
(A) Filing. The provisions of Section 9-6-6.00 shall govern the filing of tentative parcel maps.
(B) Application Form. Application for the approval of a tentative parcel map shall be made upon the form provided by the secretary of the Planning
Commission. The application shall contain the following information:
1. A legal description of the whole parcel proposed to be divided;
2. Existing use of the parcel to be divided;
3. The proposed use of the parcels to be created;
4. The existing and proposed zoning on the parcel to be divided;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 226/436
5. The source of domestic water supply and the proposed method of sewage disposal;
6. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and owners;
7. Certification by owner that he/she is the owner of the property on the map as proposed for subdivision, has examined the map and consents to
its submission;
8. A preliminary title report describing the status of all interests in the parcel to be divided shall be attached thereto.
(C) Tentative Map, Form and Content. A tentative parcel map shall be legibly drawn on reproducible material to a scale and in a manner prescribed by
the City Engineer to best illustrate the proposed division of land.
The following information shall be shown on the map:
1. The boundary lines of the entire parcel including the area to be divided, with dimensions, based on existing survey data or property description;
2. The proposed division lines with dimensions;
3. Identification of each parcel with a number;
4. All existing buildings and structures located within one hundred feet (100') of all proposed boundary lines, together with their major exterior
dimensions and the distance from said boundary lines (except when located on the opposite side of public rights-of-way);
5. The location of all existing wells, septic tanks and leaching fields located within one hundred feet (100') of all proposed boundary lines, with the
distance from said boundary lines (except when located on the opposite side of public rights-of-way);
6. The location and names of all abutting roads;
7. The location, widths and names of any roads proposed by the subdivider;
8. Source of data from which the map was drawn;
9. Name, address and telephone number of the person preparing the map;
10. The width and location of all existing or proposed easements or rights-of-way within the land being divided or on its boundaries;
11. Land subject to flooding;
12. Watercourses, streams and drainage channels;
13. Such additional information as the City deems necessary due to unusual topography or drainage conditions.
(D) Review and Approval of Tentative Parcel Maps:
1. The procedure for reviewing and approving tentative parcel maps shall be as set forth in Section 9-6-6.08 through 9-6-6.17 for tentative maps.
(E) Review by the Planning Commission:
1. The Commission may make such investigation as it may determine necessary for the purpose of making its decision. The Commission shall
consider the proposed division of land and said tentative parcel map thereof and shall determine whether such comply with this Article and shall
by resolution approve, conditionally approve or disapprove of the design of such map. In approving, conditionally approving or denying a
tentative parcel map, the Planning Commission shall make the findings required in Section 9-6-4.02.
2. If the tentative parcel map shows, or if the Commission determines that any dedication for public use should be required, such map shall be
referred to the Council which may by resolution disapprove or tentatively approve such dedication.
3. The Commission shall make its report on said matter directly to the subdivider. Such report shall be made within thirty (30) days after such map
and negative declaration or environmental impact report as may be required have been filed with the Commission.
(F) Exceptions. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to grant exceptions in the manner provided in Section 9-6-11.00, except that no
referral to and no action by the Council thereon shall be required unless the Commission's decision is appealed as provided below.
(G) Waiver of Parcel Map:
1. Application: A subdivider may, at the time of filing of a tentative parcel map, file a request for waiver of the requirement for a final parcel map.
Such a request shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission in the form of an application therefor furnished by the City.
2. Findings Required: The Planning Commission shall waive the requirement for the filing of a final parcel map if, after consideration of the tentative
parcel map, information submitted therewith, and any such investigation as it may determine necessary for the purposes of making its decision, it
finds that all of the following conditions have been met:
(a) That the subdivider has complied with the provisions of subsection 9-6-8.02 of this Chapter.
(b) That adequate monuments exist in the field which appear of record in the office the the County Recorder to permit the retracement of
boundaries for each parcel to be created.
(c) That no dedications of rights of way or easements are offered or required.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 227/436
(d) That all onsite and offsite improvements as required for parcel maps by Section 9-6-8.04 have been completed.
(e) That the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, design, floodwater drainage control, sanitary disposal facilities,
water supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter.
3. Waiver Certificate: The instrument evidencing the Planning Commission's waiving the requirement for a parcel map shall be known as a
"Waiver's Certificate" which shall be prepared by the subdivider and shall consist of the following form, matters and attachments:
(a) A description of the boundary of the property proposed to be subdivided.
(b) A property plat map prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and legibly drawn, printed or
reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black.
(c) The location of all division lines and the exterior boundary of the land included with the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive lines and
clearly so designated.
(d) The map shall be signed and sealed by the registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.
(e) A certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by the parties having record title interest, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the
waiver's certificate.
(f) The size of each sheet shall be eight and one-half inches (8") by thirteen inches (13"). An entirely blank margin of two inches (2") shall be
left at the top of each sheet.
4. Filing of Waiver Certificate:
(a) The waiver certificate shall be submitted to the secretary of the Planning Commission for his examination prior to filing, together with all
necessary fees for the recordation of the waiver certificate and evidence that all fees as hereinafter required have been paid. The Secretary of
the Planning Commission shall examine the certificate of waiver, and if he finds the same to be substantially in the form required by this
Chapter, and in conformity with the conditions imposed by the Planning Commission in connection with the approval of the tentative parcel
map, he shall accept the same for filing and shall then transmit the same to the City Engineer.
(b) Within twenty (20) days after receiving the waiver certificate or within such additional time as may be reasonably necessary, the City Engineer
shall determine whether the waiver certificate is technically correct and conforms with the approved tentative parcel map. If approved, he shall
so certify upon the waiver certificate.
(c) After affixing his signature upon the waiver certificate, the City Engineer shall deliver the certificate to the secretary of the Planning
Commission who shall present the certificate to the County Recorder for filing. When the certificate is presented to the County Recorder and is
accepted by him, he shall file and index the same in the official records of the County.
5. Waiver of the parcel map shall not preclude the payment of fees as provided by Section 9-6-12. Said fees shall be calculated in the same
manner as though a parcel map had been required and shall be paid prior to the filing of the waiver certificate with the secretary of the Planning
Commission.
(H) Appeals. In case a subdivider or any party is not satisfied with the action of the Planning Commission he may, within fifteen (15) days of its
decision, appeal in writing to the City Council and shall state specifically wherein it is claimed that there was an error or abuse of discretion by the
Planning Commission or whereby its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. The Council shall hear such an appeal at its next
succeeding regular meeting and shall give written notice of such hearing to the appellant and the Planning Commission. The decision of the City
Council shall be final.
9-6-8.03: PARCEL MAPS:
(A) Map Validity: No subdivision that is governed by the provisions of this Article shall be deemed valid until and unless it conforms to the applicable
provisions of Section 9-6-1 through 9-6-15, and has been so certified by the secretary of the Planning Commission or City Clerk and referred to
and filed with the County Recorder.
(B) Proceedings Termination: Failure to file a parcel map within one year after the date on which the tentative parcel map is approved or conditionally
approved by the Planning Commission or City Council, or any extension thereof, shall terminate all proceedings. Before a parcel map may
thereafter be filed, a new tentative parcel map shall be submitted and approved. Upon written application by the subdivider filed prior to the
expiration date of the tentative parcel map, an extension of not more than eighteen (18) months may be granted by the Planning Commission;
provided, however, that no tentative parcel map may be approved for a period exceeding a total of two and one-half (21/2) years.
(C) Parcel Map Withdrawal:
1. In the event the applicant wishes to terminate his application prior to the recordation of the parcel map, he shall submit his request in writing to
the secretary of the Planning Commission. Where an agreement to construct improvements has been executed, the City Council may release
the applicant from his agreement to improve and release to him any surety bond or cash deposit which he may have posted upon completion of
necessary abandonment proceedings;
2. In the event the parcel map has been recorded with the County Recorder, a revised parcel map may be prepared in the manner prescribed in
this Chapter for an original parcel map, and the revised parcel map shall supersede any previous parcel map.
(D) Parcel Map, Form And Content: The subdivider shall file twenty five (25) copies of the parcel map with the secretary of the planning commission
not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date on which the map must be recorded. The format and content of the final map shall be as prescribed in
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 228/436
the following provisions and the subdivision map act:
1. The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor;
2. It shall be a map legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base
film including certificates, except that such certificates may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on
polyester base film the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility; (Ord. 803, 6-18-1979)
3. The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty six inches (18" x 26"). A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet
leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1");
4. The scale of the map shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), except that subdivisions with lots of two and one-half (21/2) acres or
greater may use a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') or the city engineer may require one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') if
complexity of detail so warrants;
5. When the parcel map consists of more than two (2) sheets a key map drawn to a scale of one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000') shall
be placed on sheet number one indicating the relationship among all sheets. The particular number of each sheet and the total number of sheets
comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown;
6. The title of each parcel map shall consist of a parcel map number conspicuously placed on the sheet followed by the words "consisting of .....
sheets" (showing the number thereof) followed by the words "In the City of Selma". There shall appear a description of all the property being
subdivided by reference to such map or maps of the property shown thereon as previously recorded or filed in the county clerk-recorder's office
or previously recorded or filed with the county clerk-recorder pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or previously filed in the office
of the county clerk-recorder under authority of chapter 3, part 2 of division 4 of the Business and Professions Code, or by reference to the plat of
any United States survey. Each reference in such description to any tract or subdivision shall be spelled out and worded identically with the
original records thereof and must show a complete reference to the book and page of records of the county clerk-recorder. The description shall
also include reference to any abandonment with the date, book and page of records of the county clerk-recorder;
7. The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive lines and clearly so designated. The map shall
show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys. The location of any remainder of the original parcel shall be shown, but
need not be shown as a matter of survey but only by reference to the existing record boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a
gross area of five (5) acres or more;
8. A lot shall be shown in its entirety on one sheet. The parcel map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all parcels intended to be
reserved for private purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose and any private roads, with all dimensions, boundaries and
courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels offered for dedication other than for roads, alleys, pedestrian walkways, water lots or
easements shall be designated. The parcels shall be numbered consecutively and shall continue without omission or duplication throughout the
entire subdivision. Each parcel containing an area of one acre or more, excluding public easements of record, shall have designated thereon the
net acreage of such lot shown not less accurately than to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre;
9. Certificates and acknowledgements as are required by the subdivision map act shall appear on the title sheet of the parcel map, unless their
omission is permitted in the manner provided by the subdivision map act;
10. A certificate, either separate document or certificate on parcel map, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in
the real property subdivided, as specified in section 66445 of the subdivision map act, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the
parcel map is required. However, with respect to a division of land into four (4) or fewer parcels, where dedications or offers of dedications are
not required, the certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by the subdivider only;
11. A certificate for the city clerk shall be required where dedications are offered and shall certify the action of the city council to accept or reject the
proposed dedications;
12. Evidence of title, acceptable to the county clerk-recorder, shall be secured from a title company indicating that, as shown by public records, the
parties whose signatures appear on the map and consent to the recordation of the map are all the parties having a record title interest in the land
being subdivided whose signatures are required by the subdivision map act.
(E) Survey Data Requirements For Parcel Maps:
1. The survey data requirements for parcel maps shall be the same as the requirements prescribed for final subdivision maps in sections 9-6-7.15
through 9-6-7.25 of this chapter.
2. A parcel map may be compiled from available record or filed data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps and when the location
of any boundary of the parcel map, either by monuments or possessory lines, is certain. If there is not sufficient survey information on filed maps
and when the location of the boundary of the parcel map is uncertain a field survey shall be made.
(F) Examination Of Parcel Map, Secretary Of The Planning Commission: The secretary of the planning commission shall examine the parcel map, and
if he finds the same to be substantially in the form required by this chapter and in conformity with conditions imposed by the planning commission
in connection with the approval of the tentative parcel map, he shall accept the same for filing and shall then transmit the same to the city engineer.
(G) Examination Of Parcel Map, City Engineer: The city engineer shall examine the parcel map and it shall be certified by him if he shall find that such
map is substantially the same as the approved tentative parcel map and that the map is technically correct and in proper form as required by this
chapter and the subdivision map act. Review of the parcel map shall be completed by the city engineer within twenty (20) days after receiving the
map or within such additional time as may be reasonably necessary.
(H) Verification Of Improvements: If the subdivider states that the required improvements, if there be any, or any part of them have been completed,
they shall be inspected by the city engineer, or any other city officer designated for such purpose by the council, and if the same have been
completed in conformity with the requirements of the planning commission and applicable provisions of sections 9-6-1.00 through 9-6-15.00 of this
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 229/436
chapter he shall certify such fact on the parcel map or attach a certificate thereto so showing. If any of the improvements have not been properly
completed he shall attach his report thereof to the map.
(I) Completion Of Improvements Or Agreement Therefor: The required improvements shall be completed and the certificate of completion so showing
shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission before he shall approve the parcel map, unless the subdivider shall enter into an
agreement with the city council in accordance with the provisions of section 9-6-12.00 of this chapter to ensure completion of the improvements.
(J) Final Certification: When the secretary of the planning commission shall find that the parcel map is substantially in the form required by this
chapter, in conformity with the conditions imposed by the commission in connection with the approval of the tentative parcel map, that, where
required, the agreement and bonds respecting improvements have been approved and filed, and that all certificates of approval herein required
have been made, he shall endorse on such map the final certification thereof.
(K) Acceptance Of Dedications: If dedications are offered or required the secretary of the planning commission shall transmit the parcel map or deeds
of dedication to the council which may accept or reject any or all offers of dedication by resolution. If the offer of dedication is shown on the parcel
map any acceptance and the date thereof shall be certified on such map by the city clerk. Dedications shall be completed prior to filing of the parcel
map with the recorder. If, at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer of
dedication shall remain open and the city council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action
and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the
county recorder.
(L) Recordation Of Parcel Maps: Upon final certification and acceptance or rejection of dedications the city clerk shall present the map to the county
recorder for filing. (Ord. 779, 10-17-1977)
9-6-8.04: DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS:
All divisions of land shall be designed and improvements thereon constructed and dedications therefrom required as in the case of subdivisions as
provided in section 9-6-10.00 of this chapter. (Ord. 779, 10-17-1977)
9-6-8.05: FEES, BOND, DEPOSITS:
Fees, bonds and deposits that are required for the filing, or as a condition of the recordation of a final parcel map, are governed by the provisions of
section 9-6-12.00 of this chapter. (Ord. 779, 10-17-1977)
9-6-8.06: PARCEL MAPS EXCEPTIONS:
See section 9-6-11.00, "Exceptions And Deferrals", of this chapter. (Ord. 821, 2-2-1981)
9-6-9.00: DEDICATIONS, FEES, REIMBURSEMENT AND RESERVATIONS, CERTAIN PUBLIC FACILITIES:
9-6-9.01: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS AND BIKEWAYS:
Pedestrian walkways or bikeways may be required where needed for:
(A) Access to schools, playgrounds or parks, shopping centers or other public areas;
(B) Traffic safety; or
(C) Access through unusually long blocks;
(D) Access to public areas shown on an approved general plan. (Ord. 779, 10-17-1977; amd. Ord. 828, 7-20-1981)
9-6-9.02: PARK AND RECREATION FEES:
(A) Authority: This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by section 66477 of the Government Code of the state of California. The park
and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this section are in accordance with the conservation,
open space and recreation element of the general plan of the city of Selma, adopted by the city of Selma on August 21, 1989. (Ord. 2003-5, 3-17-
2003)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 230/436
(B) Land Or Fee For Park Or Recreational Purposes: As a condition of approval of a final map or parcel map the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a
fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula
contained in this section.
(C) General Standard: It is hereby found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that five (5) acres of
property for each one thousand (1,000) persons residing within this city be devoted to local public park and recreational purposes. (1963 Code)
(D) Standards And Formula For Dedication And Development Of Land:
1. Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the conservation, open space and recreation element of the Selma general plan,
and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of such
subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision.
2. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula:
(a) The formula for determining acreage to be dedicated shall be as follows:
Average number of persons/unit = 1,000 population
5 acres
b) The following table of population density is to be followed:
PARK LAND DEDICATION FORMULA
Types Of Dwellings
Average
Density/DU
Acreage/DU
5 Acres Std.
Low density, single-family (R-1) 3.6 0.0180
Medium density, multiple-family (R-2) 3.5 0.0175
High density, multiple-family (R-3) 3.4 0.017
(c) All dedicated park space must be fully landscaped and shall include adequate irrigation. All designs are subject to the approval of the
recreation and community services department, the community development department and the public works department. The following table
shall apply to the requirements for the development of required dedicated park space:
Item Number Required Acres
Parking spaces 5 1
Picnic shelter 1 2
Accessible restroom 1F/1M 4
Children's play area1 1 5
Note:
1. The children's play area shall include play equipment such as swing sets, jungle gyms or similar equipment that is approved by the
community services department. Each such area shall be not less than 900 square feet in area.
(Ord. 2003-5, 3-17-2003)
(E) Formula For Fees In Lieu Of Land Dedication:
1. General Formula: If there is no park or recreational facility designated in the conservation, open space and recreation element to be located in
whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision the subdivider shall,
in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee equal to the value of the land prescribed for dedication in subsection (D) of this section and in an amount
determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection (G) of this section, such fee to be used for a local park which will serve the residents
of the area being subdivided.
2. Fees In Lieu Of Land; Fifty Parcels Or Less: If the proposed subdivision contains fifty (50) parcels or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to
the land value of the portion of the local park required to serve the needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in
subsection (D) of this section and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection (G) of this section. (1963 Code)
3. Use Of Money: The money collected hereunder shall be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities reasonably related
to serving the subdivision by way of the purchase of necessary land or, if the city council deems that there is sufficient land available for the
subdivision, for improving of such land for park and recreational purposes. Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the fees collected may be
used for improvements or upgrades of existing facilities. All other monies collected will be utilized for the acquisition and development of new
park space and/or improvements thereon. (Ord. 2003-5, 3-17-2003)
(F) Criteria For Requiring Both Dedication And Fee: In subdivisions of over fifty (50) lots the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu
thereof in accordance with the following formula:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 231/436
1. When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed on the conservation, open space and recreation element as the site for a local park
such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of subsection (G) of this section shall be
paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection (D) of this section.
2. When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the
subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of subsection (G) of
this section shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to
subsection (D) of this section, such fees to be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreational facility or for the improvement of
other local parks and recreational facilities in the area serving the subdivision. (1963 Code)
(G) Amount Of Fee In Lieu Of Land Dedication And Development: Where a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication and development, the amount of
such fee shall be based upon the estimated costs of dedication and development of park space. The fee schedule for in lieu of land dedication and
development is as follows:
Single-Family
Dwelling R-2 R-3
5-17-2003 $1,600.00 $1,556.00 $1,511.00
1-1-2004 1,700.00 1,656.00 1,611.00
1-1-2005 1,800.00 1,756.00 1,711.00
1-1-2006 1,900.00 1,856.00 1,811.00
1-1-2007 2,000.00 1,956.00 1,911.00
The fee schedule and collections shall be reviewed annually during this period and the rates shall be adjusted if deemed appropriate by the city
council. The schedule shall be revisited based upon the city's continuing needs no later than May 1, 2007. (Ord. 2003-5, 3-17-2003)
(H) Subdivisions Not Within General Area: Where the proposed subdivision lies within an area not then, but to be, included within the city general plan,
the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, in accordance with the adopted park and recreational principles and standards
of the city general plan and in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(I) Determination Of Land Or Fee: Whether the city council accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a
combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:
1. Recreational element of the city's general plan;
2. Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;
3. Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;
4. The feasibility of dedication;
5. Compatibility of dedication with the conservation, open space and recreation element; and
6. Availability of previously acquired park property.
The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be
final and conclusive.
(J) Credit For Private Open Space: No credit shall be given for private open space in a subdivision.
(K) Procedure: At the time of approval of the tentative map, the city council shall determine, pursuant to subsection (I) of this section whether the land
shall be dedicated and/or fees paid by the subdivider. At the time of the filing of the final map or parcel map the subdivider shall dedicate the land
and/or pay the fees as previously determined.
(L) Commencement Of Development: At the time of approval of the final subdivision map the city council shall specify when development of the park
or recreational facilities shall be commenced.
(M) Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to subdivisions containing less than five (5) parcels and not used for residential
purposes; provided, however, that a condition may be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for
construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four (4) years, the fee may be required to be paid by the
owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit.
The provisions of this section also shall not apply to industrial subdivisions; nor to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of
airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five (5) years old when no new dwelling units are added; nor to parcel maps for a
subdivision containing less than five (5) parcels for a shopping center containing more than three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet of gross
leasable area and no residential development or uses. (1963 Code)
9-6-9.03: SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 232/436
(A) A subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions in one or more school districts maintaining an elementary
school may be required to dedicate to the school district or districts within which such subdivisions are to be located such land as the city council
deems to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon such elementary schools as are necessary to assure the residents of the
subdivision adequate public school service.
Exception: The city council shall not require the dedication of an amount of land which would make the development of the remaining land held by
the subdivider economically unfeasible or which would exceed the amount of land ordinarily allowed under the procedures of the state allocation
board.
(B) This section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten (10) years prior to the filing of the
tentative subdivision map.
(C) The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative subdivision map by the city council. If, within thirty (30) days
after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the City Council, the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the
subdivider to accept the dedication, this requirement shall be automatically terminated.
(D) The required dedication shall be made any time before, concurrently with or up to sixty (60) days after the filing of the final map for any portion of
the subdivision.
(E) In the event the school district accepts the dedication, it shall repay the subdivider or his successors the original cost to the subdivider of the
dedicated land, plus such other additional cost and expenses of the subdivider as are more particularly provided in Section 66478 of the
Government Code.
(F) In the event the land is not used by the school district as a school site within ten (10) years after the dedication, the subdivider shall have the option
to repurchase the property from the district for the amount paid therefor, together with interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per year from the
date of payment by the district to the date the option is exercised.
(G) The school district to which the property is dedicated shall record a certificate with the Clerk-Recorder of the County containing therein all
information required by said Section 66478.
9-6-9.04: RESERVATIONS:
(A) The City may require that areas of real property within a subdivision be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other
public uses subject to the following conditions:
1. The requirement is based upon an adopted specific plan or an adopted General Plan containing a community facilities element, a recreation and
parks element or a public building element, and the required reservations are in accordance with definite principles and standards contained
therein.
2. The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an
orderly and efficient manner.
3. The amount of land reserved will not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible.
(B) The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific or General Plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an
efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period; in such event the subdivider shall make those
changes as are necessary to permit the reserved area to be developed for the intended purpose consistent with good subdividing practices.
(C) The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map enter into a binding
agreement to acquire such reserved area within two (2) years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time
is extended by mutual agreement. The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes
against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved
area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area.
(D) If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall
automatically terminate.
9-6-9.05: DRAINAGE FEES:
Prior to filing of any final map or parcel map the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees for defraying the actual or estimated costs of
constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters from local or neighborhood drainage areas or sanitary sewer
facilities for local sanitary sewer areas established pursuant to Section 66483 of the Government Code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 233/436
9-6-9.06: BRIDGE CROSSINGS AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARES:
The purpose of this Section is to make provision for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing
a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to Section 66484
of the Government Code.
9-6-9.07: SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS:
(A) Supplement Improvements Required. The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain
supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a
subdivision or parcel map and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed for that portion
of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to
serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.
(B) Supplemental Improvements; Reimbursement Agreement, Funding Procedures. No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be
established unless and until a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-6-6.11 of this Ordinance is held thereon by the City
Council, and the City Council finds that the fee or charge and the area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such
supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.
In addition to the notice required by Section 9-6-6.11 of this Ordinance, written notice of the hearing shall be given to the subdivider and to those
who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the latest equalized assessment role, and the potential users of the
supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time. Such notices shall be mailed by the City Clerk at least ten (10) days
prior to the date established for hearing.
(C) Supplemental Improvements; Drainage, Sewerage, Bridges and Major Thoroughfares. If the City has adopted a local drainage or sanitary sewer
plan or map as required for the imposition of fees therefor, or has established an area of benefit for bridges or major thoroughfares as provided in
this Ordinance, the City may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area benefited and may provide for the collection of said charge
as set forth in this Ordinance. The City may enter into reimbursement agreements with a subdivider who constructs said facilities, bridges or
thoroughfares and the charges collected by the City therefor may be utilized to reimburse the subdivider as set forth herein.
9-6-10.00: DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
9-6-10.01: CONFORMANCE:
Design and improvements shall conform to Sections 1.00 through 15.00 and the improvement standards. Design shall also provide for adequate traffic
circulation and should promote the extension of aesthetic values.
9-6-10.02: ROAD DESIGN, LAYOUT:
Layouts shall conform as follows:
(A) Street rights-of-way widths shall be in accordance with Table 1 codified in Section 9-6-10.39.
(B) Streets which are extensions of existing streets shall continue the center line of the existing street, as far as practicable, either in the same
direction or by adjustment curves.
(C) All opposing streets entering upon any given street shall have their center lines directly opposite each other or separated by at least one hundred
twenty five feet (125').
9-6-10.03: ROAD DESIGN, INTERSECTIONS:
The center lines of streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right angles as practicable, shall not be excessively curved and shall conform to the
requirements for sight distance provided in the improvement standards.
9-6-10.04: ROAD DESIGN, RESTRICTED ACCESS STRIPS:
Abutting land, not part of a subdivision, shall not be permitted to a dedicated part-width or dead-end road over a restricted access strip.
(A) Restricted access strips shall be provided along and at the end of part-width and dead-end roads to separate them from abutting land not part of
the subdivision.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 234/436
(B) Said restricted access strip shall be not less than one foot (1') in width and shall be offered for dedication to the City for road purposes.
(C) Said restricted access strip shall be shown on the map and identified as a "Restricted Access Strip ........." (Insert, in alphabetical order, the
appropriate letter designation.)
9-6-10.05: ROAD DESIGN, PART-WIDTH:
The design of the subdivision shall be so that full width local roads will be provided.
9-6-10.06: ROAD DESIGN, STUB ROADS:
Stub roads shall be provided where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future development of adjoining land. The road shall extend to
the boundary line of the property, or within one foot (1') thereof where a restricted access strip is dedicated.
Stub roads which are abutted by more than one lot on either side shall be terminated by a temporary turn-around. The turn-around shall conform to the
improvement standards. A stub road may be approved by the City Council without a temporary turn-around when the road is less than one hundred
fifty feet (150') in length, or its length equals the dimensions of the corner lot along the road, whichever is greater.
9-6-10.07: ROAD DESIGN, CUL-DE-SAC:
Cul-de-sac roads shall be terminated by a permanent turn-around as provided in the improvement standards. Cul-de-sac roads shall not exceed three
hundred feet (300') in length, measured from the center line of the intersecting road to the end of the turn-around, unless an additional fire hydrant is
located at the end of the turn-around, in which case the maximum length may be five hundred feet (500').
9-6-10.08: ROAD DESIGN, FRONTAGE ROADS:
Where lots in a subdivision front on any highway shown in the circulation element of the General Plan, the City Council may require the dedication and
improvement of a frontage road for access to those lots.
Frontage road intersections which open onto any highway shown on the General Plan shall be through the bulb type intersection as provided in the
improvement standard.
9-6-10.09: ROAD DESIGN, ACCESS ROADS:
When a subdivision does not abut upon a public road an access road may be required by the City Council to connect the subdivision with a public
road. When required, the access road shall be considered to be a part of the subdivision and shall meet all requirements of Sections 1.00 through
15.00.
9-6-10.10: FUTURE ROADS, DEDICATION:
Whenever the Commission or the City Council has determined that a particular local road is not at this time warranted, but is anticipated to serve local
neighborhood traffic needs, the City Council may require that the location, width and extent of such road be shown on the final map and offered for
dedication for road purposes.
9-6-10.11: FUTURE ROADS, STATE HIGHWAY:
If a parcel of land to be subdivided includes a portion of the right-of-way for a State highway, the right-of-way which has been certified by the California
State Highway Commission, the subdivider shall either dedicate or withhold from subdivision all the area included in said right-of-way.
9-6-10.12: ROAD DESIGN, GRADE SEPARATION:
Whenever it is proposed to subdivide property abutting an approach to an existing or precise plan lined grade separation, the subdivision shall be so
arranged that any lot abutting such approach shall have suitable access elsewhere and that the street layout adequately provides for and conforms to
such approach.
9-6-10.13: ROAD DESIGN, ALLEYS:
(A) Where Required. An alley, with adequate ingress and egress provided for truck traffic, may be required at the rear or side of lots where the
property is to be used for multiple residential, commercial or industrial use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 235/436
(B) Intersections. Intersecting alleys shall not be permitted.
(C) Width. Alleys, when required, shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') in width.
9-6-10.14: EASEMENTS, LOCATIONS:
(A) Sewer, Gas and Water. Sewer, gas and water mains shall not be on rear or side lot easements unless street location is found to be impracticable
or uneconomical and unless specifically approved by the City Council.
(B) Storm Drains and Flood Control. Easements for storm drains and flood control shall be provided within the subdivision when deemed necessary by
the City Council.
(C) Public Utilities. Easements for underground electrical and telephone facilities shall be provided as requested by the affected utility.
9-6-10.15: EASEMENTS, WIDTH:
All easements within a subdivision shall be not less than sixteen feet (16') in width, being not less than eight feet (8') on each side of abutting
properties. However, easements of a lesser width may be approved by the City Council when it has been determined that the purpose of any
easement may be accomplished by the use of a lesser width.
9-6-10.16: LOT DESIGN, AREA AND FRONTAGE:
(A) The area and dimensions of lots shall be in conformity with the zoning regulations for the zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is
located. A larger minimum lot area may be required when necessitated by topographical and geological consideration.
(B) All lots shall have frontage on at least one public or approved private road as required by the appropriate zoning district. The width of such frontage
shall not be less than that prescribed by the zoning regulations for the zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located.
9-6-10.17: GRADING PLAN:
A grading plan shall be prepared prior to the acceptance and approval of the final subdivision map. The grading plan shall depict the depth and extent
of all excavations and embankments which constitute changes in original grade from that shown on the approved tentative subdivision map. All grades
shall conform to the datum used in the City's master storm drainage plan.
9-6-10.18: LOT DESIGN, SIDE LINE:
The side line of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at right angles to the road which the lot faces, or radial or approximately radial if the road is curved.
9-6-10.19: LOT DESIGN, BOUNDARY LINES:
No lot shall be divided by the boundary line of a county, school or special district.
9-6-10.20: LOT DESIGN, DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS:
Double frontage lots, other than corner lots, which abut two (2) roads and have a depth less than two hundred forty feet (240') will not be approved
except where necessitated by topographical or other physical conditions or where ingress and egress to and from one of the roads is prohibited by law
or where direct access rights have been or will be waived.
9-6-10.21: BLOCK DESIGN, LENGTH:
Blocks shall not exceed thirteen hundred twenty feet (1,320') in length between road center lines, except where topographical or other conditions
require longer blocks.
9-6-10.22: WATERCOURSES:
Where a subdivision or any part thereof is traversed by any watercourse, channel, stream or creek the subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 236/436
indicate the physical limits thereof and provide by dedication sufficient easements to dispose of surface and storm waters originating within the
subdivision. The width and improvements of such dedicated easements shall be approved by the City Council. Intermittent streams shall be delineated
by a dashed line labeled thread of stream.
9-6-10.23: LAND SUBJECT TO INUNDATION:
(A) Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the City Engineer to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other
uses as may endanger health, life or property, or aggravate the flood hazard; and shall be shown on the map as subject to inundation or otherwise
uninhabitable.
(B) Such land may be filled or otherwise improved in a manner and to a degree approved by the City Engineer so it is no longer subject to the
restrictions of this subsection. The required improvements shall be completed or agreed to be completed by secured agreement pursuant to
Section 9-6-10.40 prior to the approval of the final map.
(C) Lands included within areas designated by the Federal Flood Insurance Administration as flood prone areas or shown on maps supplied by the U.
S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, or the U. S. Corps of Engineers as being within flood prone areas, shall not be divided
until a plan provided by the subdivider is approved by the City Engineer showing how all development within the subdivision will be flood-proofed in
a manner which will not adversely affect surrounding properties.
9-6-10.24: DEDICATIONS:
All land shown and designated on the final map for any public use shall be offered for dedication. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-10.25: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
As a condition precedent to the acceptance and approval of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, the minimum
improvements set forth in the City Standard Specifications for Public Works. Additional improvements may be required if deemed by the City Council
to be necessary for the general use of the lot owners in a subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs.
The City Standard Specifications for Public Works is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Section as though fully set forth herein and
all improvements required, pursuant to this Section, shall conform with the City Standard Specifications for Public Works. (Ord. 836, 12-21-81)
9-6-10.26: through 9-6-10.39:
(Rep. by Ord. 836, 12-21-81)
9-6-10.40: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES, AGREEMENTS:
(A) Where the required improvements are not completed before a final map or parcel map is approved, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement
with the City Council prior to the approval of the final map or parcel map to either complete the work or initiate and consummate proceedings under
an appropriate special assessment act for the financing and improvement thereof. Such agreement shall provide for the following:
1. Time limit for completion of required improvements;
2. Changes or alterations that become necessary during the performance of the work;
3. Maintenance for a period of one year after the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective
materials furnished for those portions of the work which contain earth excavations or embankments in excess of eight feet (8');
4. Maintenance for a period of one year after the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective
materials furnished, for electrical and mechanical equipment required for water supply and distribution systems and sewerage collection and
treatment facilities.
(B) At the request of the subdivider, the City Council may renew this agreement at the expiration of this time. Such agreement shall provide for the
release of the required improvement security when the conditions of the agreement are completed.
(C) To assure the City that this work will be completed, improvement security in the form of a cash deposit, faithful performance bond, instrument of
credit or deposit in escrow shall be provided subject to Section 9-6-12.04.
(D) Assessment District Method. Where a special assessment district is formed for the purpose of financing and constructing the designated
improvements, the original improvement security may be reduced in an amount not to exceed ninety percent (90%) of the contract amount thereof
at such time as the contract for the work is executed.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 237/436
9-6-10.41: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES, PLAN SUBMITTAL:
(A) Where improvements are proposed or are required by the provisions of Sections 1.00 through 15.00, improvement plans shall be submitted to the
City Engineer for his review and approval. The improvement plans shall show full details of the improvements as required by the improvement
standards. The improvement plans shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer.
(B) During construction of the improvements this civil engineer shall be available for consultation on the general supervision of the various phases of
the construction operation. He shall also be responsible for providing construction engineering and surveying to enable the work covered by the
improvement plans to be completed.
9-6-10.42: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES, INSTALLATIONS:
All underground utilities required by the final map approval to be installed below the surface improvement in public roads or alleys or easements shall
be constructed prior to the installation of any surface improvements.
9-6-10.43: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES, INSPECTIONS AND ACCEPTANCE:
All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the City Engineer and shall be subject to approval and acceptance by
resolution of the City Council. The cost of all inspections shall be paid by the subdivider as provided in Section 9-6-12.02.
9-6-10.44: PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS; MAINTENANCE, PRIVATE ROADS:
Prior to the recordation of the final map of a subdivision containing any improved private roads, the subdivider shall have provided for their
maintenance the formation of a permanent road division formed in the manner set forth by Article 3, Division 2 of the Streets and Highways Code. The
City Council may waive this requirement when it finds such permanent road division would not be in the public interest, in which event the City Council
may impose such other provisions for maintenance which it deems appropriate. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-10.45: ELECTRICAL TRANSFORMERS:
All electrical transformers serving new single-family housing tracts of ten (10) or more total lots shall be undergrounded. Phased construction or
recordation of a tract shall not preclude this requirement. (Ord. 93-4, 8-2-93)
9-6-11.00: EXCEPTIONS AND DEFERRALS:
(Ord. 821, 2-2-81)
9-6-11.01: GROUNDS:
The City Council may, upon the petition of a subdivider or upon their own motion, authorize modifications of requirements and improvement standards
as set forth in Sections 1.00 through 15.00 whenever the land involved in a subdivision is:
(A) Of such size or shape; or
(B) Subject to such title limitations of record; or
(C) Affected by such topographical location or conditions; or
(D) To be devoted to such usage that full conformity to the provisions of Sections 9-6-1.00 through 9-6-15.00 is impossible or impractical.
9-6-11.02: APPLICATION:
The application for any exception shall be by petition filed with the secretary of the Planning Commission at the time the tentative map or tentative
parcel map is presented to the Planning Commission.
9-6-11.03: FACTUAL DATA REQUIRED:
In order for the property referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this Chapter, it is necessary for the Commission or the City Council
to find that all of the following conditions exist:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 238/436
(A) That there are exceptional circumstances or conditions that affect said property or the reasonable use thereof;
(B) That the exception is necessary to preserve a substantial property right and permit the enjoyment thereof;
(C) That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public safety, health and welfare;
(D) That the granting of the exception will not be injurious to or prevent the logical development of other property in the immediate area.
9-6-11.04: GRANTING:
The Commission, in recommending the granting of an exception for a tentative map or in granting an exception for a tentative parcel map may set
forth such conditions as may be necessary to secure substantial compliance with the objectives of Sections 1.00 through 15.00 protecting the public
health, safety and welfare. For tentative parcel maps the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed to the City Council in
accordance with the procedure in Section 9-6-8.02(F). (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-11.05: DEFERRAL OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENT:
Public improvements required to be installed in conjunction with on-site improvements may be deferred under the following circumstances:
(A) Where the City Engineer finds and determines that the area drainage facilities are inadequate and that the installation of all or a portion of the
required public improvements would endanger the public welfare by reason thereof; or
(B) Where the City Engineer determines that it would be in the best interests of the City to cause all or a portion of the required work to be done on an
area project basis rather than on an individual basis; or
(C) Where the Council finds and determines that such requirements, as applied to an individual property by reason of an exceptional or extraordinary
situation or the condition of such property, or the location thereof, or of the use or development of property in the immediate vicinity of such
property, will involve practical difficulties or would cause undue hardship unnecessary to carry out the purposes and spirit of this Chapter.
9-6-11.06: AGREEMENT FOR DEFERRED IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
No such deferral shall be granted nor become effective unless and until an agreement, between the property owner and the City is properly executed
agreeing that the property owner will undertake the construction of the required improvements as required by these regulations within ninety (90) days
after notice to begin the construction of such improvements is sent by the City to the property owner. Such agreement shall further provide that in the
event of default in undertaking and completing the required improvements within the time specified, the City may cause such work to be done and the
cost thereof to be assessed as a lien against the property. Such agreement shall recite that it runs with the land and shall be recorded in order to
constitute notice to any prospective buyers or encumbrancers. (Ord. 821, 2-2-81)
9-6-11.07: REFERRAL:
For tentative maps, decisions of the Planning Commission shall be referred to the City Council concurrent with the Commission's recommendations on
the map. (Ord. 799, 10-17-77)
9-6-11.08: DECISION BY THE COUNCIL:
The City Council shall consider and render its decision on the exception or deferral concurrent with its review of and decision on the tentative map.
(Ord. 821, 2-2-81)
9-6-12.00: FEES, BONDS AND DEPOSITS:
9-6-12.01: FILING FEES:
Filing fees for the following items shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be paid at the time of filing:
(A) Tentative map or an alternative tentative map.
(B) Tentative parcel map or an alternate tentative parcel map.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 239/436
(C) Final map.
(D) Tentative or final reversion to acreage map.
No refund of a filing fee shall be made for filing of any map, or portion thereof, deleted, withdrawn or abandoned.
9-6-12.02: CHECKING AND INSPECTION FEES:
The subdivider shall pay the fees for checking plans and inspecting all proposed improvements controlled by the City prior to the submission of the
final map to the City Council. Fees for checking and inspection shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
9-6-12.03: RECORDATION:
The fees for recording a final map are established by section 27372 of the Government Code and the fees shall be included in the fees schedule
established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 932, 5-21-90)
9-6-12.04: SECURITY:
The agreements referred to in Sections 9-6-8.03(I) and 9-6-10.40 through 9-6-10.43 shall be accompanied by the security to guarantee performance
as follows:
(A) Improvement security equal in the amount of the estimated cost of all required work to secure the performance of all work as indicated in the
agreement, plus an additional ten percent (10%) of the original estimated cost to cover any changes or alterations that become necessary during
the performance of the work;
(B) Improvement security in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the estimated cost of all required work to secure payment to the contractor, his
subcontractors and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials for such improvements;
(C) Improvement security to secure the maintenance for a period of one year after the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work
or labor done, or defective materials furnished, for electrical and mechanical equipment required for water supply and distribution systems and
sewerage collection and treatment facilities. Said security shall not exceed and amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the estimated cost of
furnishing and installing said facilities. This security shall be in addition to any warranty required of the manufacturer.
(D) Improvement security to secure the maintenance of a private road for a period of one year after the acceptance thereof against any defective work
or labor done or defective material furnished in the construction of the private work which security shall be in an amount equal to the construction
cost thereof;
(E) A bond or a cash deposit in the amount equal to the estimated cost of placing all monuments and lot corners not set at the time the final map is
filed as specified in Section 9-6-7.25(C) and (D).
(F) A bond or cash deposit in the estimated amount of taxes and special assessments collected as taxes which are a lien but which are not yet
payable as referred to in Chapter 5 of the Subdivision Map Act.
(G) In addition to any security required under this Section, the developer shall pay all costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable
attorney's fees, incurred by the City in successfully enforcing the obligation secured.
9-6-12.05: BONDS BY SURETY COMPANIES:
All tax bonds and bonds for special assessments furnished under authority of the Subdivision Map Act and all faithful performance bonds, referred to
in Sections 1.00 through 15.00, shall be furnished by a surety company authorized to write the same in the State and shall be subject to approval and
acceptance by the City Attorney.
9-6-12.06: MONEY OR NEGOTIABLE BONDS:
In lieu of any faithful performance bond required by Section 1.00 through 15.00, the subdivider may deposit with the City Council, or deposit in an
irrevocable escrow with a bank, savings and loan association or title company, a sum of money or negotiable bonds equal to the required amount of
such bond or security for the faithful performance thereof.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 240/436
9-6-12.07: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION FAILURE, PROCEDURE:
If the subdivider fails to complete the improvements in the time specified, or an extension thereof, the City Council may take appropriate legal action
against the subdivider and his bond, with or without first causing such improvements to be completed. In the event of a cash deposit in lieu of a bond
to secure the improvement agreement, the City Council may, at its option, cause the improvement to be completed and retain the cost thereof out of
the deposit. In the event the deposit is insufficient to pay the full cost of the improvement the subdivider shall be liable for any balance.
9-6-12.08: EXONERATION OF BONDS OR MONEY:
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to inspect all improvements installed and monuments set as to their compliance with Sections 1.00 through
15.00 and City standards. No sum of money or bonds given for faithful performance of such work shall be exonerated from the agreement referred to
herein until and unless the City Engineer certifies compliance thereto. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
9-6-12.09: IMPROVEMENT SECURITY, RELEASE:
(A) Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement may be released upon the final completion of the act or the work encompassed by
the agreement and the acceptance of the act or work by resolution of the City Council.
(B) Security securing payment to the contractor, his subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment may, six (6) months after
the performance of the act or the completion of the work and its acceptance by resolution of the City Council, be reduced to an amount not less
than the total of all claims on which an action has been filed and notice thereof given in writing to the City Council, and if no such actions have
been filed, the security may be released in full.
Such release shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty period nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the City
Council for such guarantee and warranty period, nor to costs and reasonable attorney's fees. (Ord. 823, 5-4-81)
9-6-13.00: REVERSION TO ACREAGE:
9-6-13.01: MAP ACT PROVISIONS APPLY:
Subdivision may be reverted to acreage pursuant to Chapter 6 of the Map act. The provisions of Section 66499.11 through 66499.20 shall apply.
9-6-13.02: TENTATIVE MAPS, REQUIREMENTS APPLY:
When making a reversion to acreage map the applicable requirements of Article Six as to filing, map form, tract number and subdivision review
committee review shall be complied with unless waived by the secretary.
9-6-13.03: TENTATIVE MAP, REVIEW, REPORT:
Copies of the tentative map, of a reversion to acreage map, shall be distributed to the City Engineer, City Planner and Superintendent of Public Works.
The City Engineer, City Planner and Superintendent of Public Works shall review and report upon the map in the manner provided in Section 9-6-6.10.
9-6-13.04: PLANNING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION:
The Commission shall consider the tentative map at a regular or special meeting after giving notice of its intent to consider the map in a newspaper of
general circulation, within the area affected, at least once in each of two (2) weeks immediately preceding the meeting at which the tentative map is to
be heard. In making a recommendation to the City Council concerning a reversion to acreage map, the Commission shall determine that the reversion
will have no adverse effect on abutting property or the proper development thereof, and that there exists nonuse of streets and easements within the
area included in the reversion to acreage.
9-6-13.05: CITY COUNCIL, ACTION, REPORT:
The City Council shall act upon the Commission's recommendation at a regular or adjourned regular meeting not less than fifteen (15) or more than
forty (40) days after the filing of the Commission's recommendation with the City Council. The City Council shall give public notice of its intent to
consider the tentative map in a newspaper of general circulation within the area affected at least once in each of two (2) weeks immediately preceding
the meeting at which the map is to be heard. In approving or conditionally approving a reversion to acreage map, the City Council shall find that
dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public
purposes; and either (1) all owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to the reversion; or (2) none of the
improvements required to be made have been made within two (2) years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time
allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later; or (3) no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within
five (5) years from the date such map was filed for record; or (4) that the reversion will have no adverse effect on abutting property or the proper
development thereof.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 241/436
The City Council shall report its action in writing to the subdivider and the Planning Commission and the City Engineer not later than ten (10) days
following such action.
9-6-13.06: TITLE:
Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words "A REVERSION
TO ACREAGE OF ............." (Insert the legal description of the land being reverted.).
9-6-13.07: FINAL MAP, PREPARATION:
A certificate by a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer shall not be required where sufficient recorded data exists from which an accurate
map may be compiled and the source of the data is shown on the map.
9-6-13.08: DEDICATIONS TERMINATED:
Any previous offer of dedication not retained on the reversion to acreage map shall be deemed to be terminated upon approval of the final map by the
City Council and the recordation of the final map.
9-6-13.09: TAX BOND:
A tax bond shall not be required in any cases covered by this Section.
9-6-13.10: CITY ENGINEER, REPORT AND CERTIFICATION:
(A) The City Engineer shall review each map and assure himself that it complies with the requirements of the approved tentative map with previously
recorded property description data and with the provisions of law and Sections 1.00 through 15.00. The City Engineer shall consult with the City
Planner and City Superintendent of Public Works in making these determinations.
(B) If the final map is in the correct form prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act and Sections 1.00 through 15.00, and the matters shown thereon are
sufficient, their correctness shall be certified on the map by the City Engineer.
(C) The City Engineer shall, within twenty (20) days after the receipt of the map, transmit the map together with said other materials to the City Clerk
for presentation to the City Council.
9-6-13.11: CITY COUNCIL, DECISION:
(A) Approval of Map:
1. At its next regular or adjourned meeting after the filing of a final map with the City Clerk the City Council shall consider the map to determine if it
is in conformity with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and Section 1.00 through 15.00 applicable at the time of approval of the
tentative map, or any ruling made thereunder.
2. Upon approval of the map by the City Council the City Clerk shall record the map with the County Clerk-Recorder.
(B) Disapproval of Map:
1. If the City Council determines that the map is not in conformity with either the requirements of Sections 1.00 through 15.00, or the tentative
approval of the reversion to acreage, the City Council shall disapprove such final map, specifying its reason or reasons therefor, and the City
Clerk shall in writing advise the subdivider of such disapproval and the reason or reasons therefor.
2. After the City Council has disapproved any map the proponent may file a new final map with the City Clerk altered to conform to all the
requirements imposed upon him by Section 1.00 through 15.00.
9-6-14.00: SUBDIVISION PENALTIES:
9-6-14.01: SUBDIVIDING, APPLICABILITY:
It is unlawful for any person as principal, agent or otherwise to divide by lease, sale or financing into two (2) or more parcels of land, or to lease or sell,
convey, quitclaim or transfer by contract, deed or otherwise any land or any part thereof whether improved or unimproved in the City unless and until
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 242/436
all of the requirements provided in relation thereto shall have been complied with; provided that this Section does not apply to the leasing of
apartments, offices, stores or similar space within an apartment building, industrial building, commercial building or trailer park, nor does this Section
apply to the leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within an apartment building, industrial building, commercial building or trailer park,
nor does this Section apply to mineral, oil or gas leases or the other exclusions contained in the Subdivision Map Act.
9-6-14.02: SALE VOIDABLE WHEN:
Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell made contrary to the provisions of the Map Act of Sections 1.00 through 15.00 is voidable at the sole
option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his heirs, personal representative or trustee in bankruptcy within one year after the
date of execution of the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell; but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any assignee
or transferee of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person
contracting to sell or his assignee, heir or advisee.
Nothing in this Section shall render void or voidable any trust deed, mortgage or other encumbrance in the hands of a bona fide holder for value.
9-6-14.03: REMEDIES NOT BARRED:
Nothing herein contained shall bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the City or other political subdivision or any other person may
otherwise be entitled. The City or other political subdivision or person may file suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or enjoin any
attempted or proposed subdivision or sale in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or Sections 1.00 through 15.00.
9-6-14.04: PERMIT REFUSAL:
The City shall refuse to grant building and other permits in relation to the property involved until such time as all of the requirements of Sections 1.00
through 15.00 have been complied with.
9-6-14.05: VIOLATION, PENALTIES:
Any offer to sell, contract to sell, sale or deed of conveyance made contrary to the provisions of Sections 1.00 through 15.00 is a misdemeanor and
any person, firm or corporation, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the City jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
9-6-15.00: REVOCATION CLAUSE:
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions hereof. (Ord. 779, 10-17-77)
Footnote 1: See Title XI of this Code.
Footnote 2: See Title XI of this Code.
Footnote 3: Gov. C., sections 66410 et seq.
Footnote 4: Gov. C., section 66498.1.
Chapter 7
ENCROACHMENTS
9-7-1: PUBLIC WAY DEFINED:
"Public way", when used in this chapter, means the space between the right of way lines and includes, but is not confined to, any street, alley, parking
zone or sidewalk. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) It is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any encroachment, excavation or improvement in or along any public way in the city
without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city, and unless in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to remove, top or trim any trees standing in any public way without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city and
unless in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This provision shall not apply to minor trimming and pruning which does not involve the
placing of ladders or equipment in a public way other than according to parking regulations or the falling or piling of debris in a public way1.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to operate any overwidth vehicle, including house moving equipment in the city streets, alleys, or rights of way without
first obtaining a permit to do so from the city, and unless in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 243/436
9-7-3: PERMIT; APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
Each person desiring issuance of a permit shall file with the public works director or city engineer a signed application or request, describing the nature
of the encroachment, excavation, improvement or other work to be done and the location thereof, the names and addresses of the parties to any
contract for the doing of the work, the contractor's license number of any contractor, the city of Selma business license number of any contractor, and
such plans, profiles, specifications and estimates for the improvement as the public works director or city engineer may require. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-
2013)
9-7-4: AGREEMENT TO WORK SPECIFICATIONS:
By signing the application and submitting it to the public works director or city engineer, the signator shall agree with the city as follows:
(A) That the signator shall observe and conform with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter, and shall perform all work in strict accordance with
this chapter and applicable ordinances of the city and laws of the state, and in conformity to the plans, profiles and specifications on file with and
approved by the public works director or city engineer, and in accordance with such standards, terms and conditions mentioned in section 9-7-10 of
this chapter and as may be determined and specified by the public works director or city engineer.
(B) That such work shall be commenced and diligently prosecuted within sixty (60) days after issuance of such permit, and substantially completed
within the time designated by the public works director or city engineer in such permit, and that such work shall be forthwith terminated upon any
revocation or suspension of the permit as provided in this chapter.
(C) To complete, repair or replace, and indemnify the city against any faulty or improper workmanship or materials, or damage to any adjacent public
improvement that may be discovered during the performance of the work and for a term of one year after the completion of the work.
(D) That the signator shall hold the city, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all liabilities, claims, suits, judgments, losses or
expenses resulting from any claim or court action arising out of any accident, loss or damage to person or property, or death alleged to arise from
any work carried out pursuant to such permit or condition resulting from such work.
(E) Authorizing the city to deduct from any cash deposit, the amount of any expense incurred by the city, including a reasonable amount for overhead
and supervision, in the completion of any work or the performance of any other act required of the signator, if the signator fails to properly and
timely perform the same. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-5: ENGINEERING:
(A) It shall be the duty of the public works director or city engineer to survey and set all official line and grade stakes for all work on all public streets,
alleys, sidewalks, and public property within the city and to do any and all work which may at any time be ordered or requested by the city council.
(B) The public works director or city engineer shall keep records of all such work done by him, which records shall be and remain the property of the
city and at all times be open to public inspection. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-6: PERMIT; FEES:
(A) The application mentioned in section 9-7-4 of this chapter shall be signed by the person causing the work or excavation to be done, or if such work
is to be done by a licensed contractor, then it may be signed by such contractor.
(B) The city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees for engineering, inspection, surveying, staking, and other services to be rendered
by the city in connection with work to be performed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Upon the filing of an application to do the work, the
applicant shall pay to the city the estimated cost of such services. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-7: BOND OR DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
(A) The signator of such agreement shall deposit with the director of finance a bond issued by a corporation licensed to transact business in the state,
which shall guarantee the faithful performance of the agreement mentioned in subsections 9-7-4(A), (B), and (C) of this chapter.
(B) In lieu of such bond, the signator of such agreement may deposit with the director of finance cash to secure the faithful performance of the
agreement mentioned in subsections 9-7-4(A), (B) and (C) of this chapter; and the city shall be entitled to deduct from such deposit the expense to
the city of completion of the work or repair of such damage by the city if the signator fails to so perform the same.
(C) The amount of such bond or deposit shall be such reasonable sum as the public works director or city engineer shall determine to be the probable
expense to the city of completion of the work if the signator fails to fully perform the work and repair of any probable damage, in accordance with
the terms of the agreement and permit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 244/436
(D) Such bond or deposit shall not be deemed to be in the nature of a labor and material bond.
(E) On expiration of one year from the date of completion of the work, the bondsman may apply to the city council for release or exoneration of the
bond, or any depositor of such fund or his assigns may apply to the city council for release of his deposit, subject however to the claims of the city
for failure to faithfully perform said agreement; provided further, that in the case of cash deposits, that upon completion of the work to the
satisfaction of the public works director or city engineer, and certification of such fact to the city council and the amount required in his opinion to
protect the city against any faulty or improper workmanship or materials or damage to any adjacent public works that may be discovered within one
year after completion, the city council shall withhold such amount and release the balance of the deposit to the depositor thereof or his assigns.
(F) Persons who frequently undertake activities which are the subject of this chapter and who find it convenient to do so, may enter into a general
agreement with the city in the form required by section 9-7-4 of this chapter which applies to all such activities which are the subject of this chapter
carried on by the signator of such agreement while such agreement is in effect, and who shall furnish the city and deposit with the director of
finance a bond or deposit which guarantees the faithful performance of the agreement mentioned in subsections 9-7-4(A), (B) and (C) of this
chapter with respect to all such activities undertaken while such agreement remains in effect. The amount of such bond or deposit shall be such
reasonable sum as the public works director or city engineer determines to be the probable expense to the city of completion of any work which the
signator may fail to fully perform and the repair of any probable damage to any adjacent public works, and to protect the city against any faulty or
improper workmanship or materials or damage to any adjacent public works that may be discovered within one year after completion; and from
time to time the public works director or city engineer may require additional bonds or deposits if he determines that the extent or nature of the
work carried on by such person reasonably requires increased protection for any of the foregoing purposes. No further permits shall be issued
under such general agreement and bond until the additional bond or deposit is furnished to the director of finance. Such bond or deposit is subject
to release or exoneration as provided in subsection (E) of this section.
(G) For work which does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the public works director or city engineer within his sole discretion may, in lieu
of the above mentioned bond or cash deposit, enter into a written agreement without security with the permittee. After successful completion of the
improvements or payment of the lien, the permittee may apply to the city council for release of the agreement.
(H) For work in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and for good cause shown, the city council may, in its sole discretion, enter into an
agreement without security as provided in subsection (G) of this section. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-8: INSURANCE:
(A) No person shall be entitled to a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless and until he shall have filed and maintained on file with the
public works director or city engineer a certificate certifying that such person carries public liability and property damage insurance issued by an
insurance carrier determined reliable by the city's risk manager insuring the applicant and the city and its agents against loss by reason of injuries
to, or death of, persons or damages to property caused by the applicant, the applicant's agents, or employees in performing any work under such
permit in the amounts set by resolution of the city council. Such certificate of insurance shall provide that liability thereunder shall not be canceled
until after at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice of such cancellation from the insurer to the city.
(B) Public utilities and other public agencies shall not be required to file with the public works director or city engineer the certificate set forth in
subsection (A) of this section provided there shall be filed and maintained with the city engineer a certificate showing the maintenance of a
satisfactory plan of self-insurance or that sufficient evidence is presented to the public works director or city engineer that the public utility or other
public agency is of sufficient financial responsibility to provide the necessary indemnification. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-9: EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC ENTITIES:
No bond or deposit is required with respect to the United States government, or any department thereof, the state of California, or any department or
agency thereof, and/or any local public entity, as defined by Government Code section 900.4. (Ord. 2015-2, 2-17-2015)
9-7-10: STANDARDS, TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
(A) Except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter, the standards of design and materials and the method of doing the work for any curb, gutter,
sidewalk, pavement, ramp, subgrade or drainage facility are as set forth in the standard specifications of the city.
(B) The public works director or city engineer may in his discretion permit modifications of the standards mentioned in the preceding subsection to
conform with prevailing standards of other improvements in the area of the proposed improvement if he finds that such modifications will not be
detrimental to the public interest.
(C) The public works director or city engineer shall have authority to determine and specify:
1. The standards of design, materials and method of doing work for any improvement for which no standard is provided by this section;
2. The location and grades of all improvement;
3. The days or hours and conditions on or under which such work may be done, if necessary to conform to any public work in progress or about to
be undertaken, or as may be necessary to prevent any undue interference with traffic or to protect the public safety;
4. Devices and precautions necessary for the protection of the public way, or public improvements or public utilities standing or lying therein, and
the safety of the persons using the public way and to prevent any undue interference with traffic thereon.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 245/436
(D) Conformity with the standards, terms and conditions mentioned in this section shall be deemed to be a condition of the permit and part of the
agreement mentioned in section 9-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-11: PERMIT; APPLICATION; REFERRAL TO COUNCIL:
If the public works director or city engineer determines that unusual circumstances make it advisable, he may refuse to grant the permit and submit the
application to the city council for consideration. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-12: PERMIT; APPEALS:
If the public works director or city engineer denies an application or imposes terms or conditions which the applicant believes to be unreasonable, or
sets the amount of bond or deposit which the applicant believes to be unreasonable, the applicant may appeal to the city council for issuance of the
permit. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-13: DETERMINATION BY COUNCIL:
Upon any such referral or appeal the city council shall determine whether the permit shall be issued and/or the terms and conditions thereof and/or the
amount of bond or deposit; and the decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-14: PERMIT; ISSUANCE NOT MANDATORY:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to make it mandatory that the public works director or city engineer or the city council issue any such permit.
(Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-15: CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNER:
The issuance of any permit shall not be deemed to imply or guarantee in any way that the city owns free title to the real property on which the work is
to be done, nor that the city has sufficient title to the real property to grant the permittee the right to do work under the surface of the public way. It is
the sole responsibility of the permittee to secure such consent as may be necessary from the owner of the public way or any other property upon
which such work or excavation is done. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-16: PERMIT; DISPLAY:
The permit shall be shown on demand to all authorized representatives or peace officers of the city. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-17: PERMIT; NONTRANSFERABLE:
No permit may be assigned; and upon any attempted assignment or transfer thereof, the permit shall be rendered null and void. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-
2013)
9-7-18: PERMIT; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
(A) If the public works director or city engineer determines that the work has not been commenced within sixty (60) days after issuance of the permit,
or has not been diligently prosecuted, he may revoke the permit.
(B) If the public works director or city engineer determines that the work has not been diligently prosecuted, or is not being carried out in accordance
with the agreement and/or terms and conditions of the permit, he may suspend the permit.
(C) Such revocation or suspension shall be accomplished by the mailing of written notice thereof by ordinary mail to the address shown upon the
application or agreement or by personal delivery of such written notice to the permittee. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-19: NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF WORK:
Immediately prior to commencement of any part of the work the permittee shall notify the public works director or city engineer of the time thereof. If
the work stops for a period of more than ten (10) days, the permittee shall notify the public works director or city engineer of the time of resumption
thereof. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-20: ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS OF WORK:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 246/436
At any time prior to completion of the work, the public works director or city engineer may prescribe such additional conditions as he may deem
necessary for the protection of any public way or improvements or any public utilities standing or lying therein, and the safety of the persons using the
public ways and to prevent any undue interference with traffic. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-21: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
The permittee shall take all precautions necessary to protect the safety of the traveling public. Barricades, lights, warning signs and flagmen shall be
provided and maintained by the permittee whenever necessary, at his own expense, until any excavation is refilled or obstruction removed, and the
public way is safe for the use of the traveling public. The public works director or city engineer may specify in the permit the safety devices and
precautions to be used by the permittee provided however, failure of the public works director or city engineer to specify such safety devices or
precautions shall not relieve the permittee of any obligation to furnish all of the safety devices or precautions which may be necessary. Warning signs,
lights and devices shall conform to the requirements of section 21401 of the Vehicle Code of the state. If the public works director or city engineer
finds, at any time, that suitable safeguards or precautions are not provided by the permittee, the public works director or city engineer may provide and
maintain such safeguards or precautions as he deems necessary or he may revoke or suspend the permit as provided in section 9-7-18 of this chapter
and restore the public way to its former condition, all at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-22: REMOVAL OF DEBRIS:
The permittee shall not allow unreasonable amounts of debris to accumulate upon the public way, and if the public works director or city engineer
determines that the accumulation of debris is such as to be a hazard to the safety of the persons using the public way or to prevent any undue
interference with the traffic thereon, he may order the permittee to remove the debris, and failure of the permittee to do so shall constitute a grounds
for revocation or suspension of the permit, as provided in section 9-7-18 of this chapter and/or the city may remove the debris at the expense of the
permittee. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-23: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAY:
Immediately upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the permittee shall refill any and all excavations or remove any obstructions in the
public way in a good and workmanlike manner. All excavations shall be refilled in a manner to ensure against settlement. Saturated or unsuitable
materials shall be removed from the excavation and the excavation shall be backfilled with suitable materials and thoroughly tamped. If a treated or
modified subgrade of public way has been removed and destroyed as a result of the excavation, the permittee shall replace the subgrade to a
thickness of not less than that of the adjacent subgrade. Crushed rock may be used to replace modified subgrade. If a treated or modified surface of a
public way has been removed and destroyed as a result of an excavation the permittee shall replace the surface to a thickness and width of not less
than that of the original surface and he shall use the same type of material as the original surface. All work performed pursuant to this section shall be
to the satisfaction of the public works director or city engineer. If the permittee fails or refuses to repair and restore the public way or any subgrade to
the satisfaction of the public works director or city engineer within a reasonable time, the public works director or city engineer shall cause the
damaged portion of the public way or subgrade to be repaired and restored and the permittee shall reimburse the city for the full cost of such work. If
at any time subsequent to the first repair of the surface or subgrade it becomes necessary to again repair the surface or subgrade due to settlement or
any other cause directly attributed to such excavation or construction, the public works director or city engineer shall cause such repairs to be made
and the permittee shall reimburse the city for the full cost of the additional repairs. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-24: NOTICE OF COMPLETION:
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the permittee shall file with the public works director or city engineer the notice of completion of
work on a form prescribed by the public works director or city engineer. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-25: PERMIT; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
It is unlawful for the permittee to make or cause to be made any excavation, encroachment or construction, or to place upon, maintain or leave any
obstruction or impediment to travel, or to pile or place any material in or upon any highway, or to install or maintain, or to cause to be installed or
maintained any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, curb, gutter, sidewalk or other structure in, upon or under the surface of any public way at any location
or in any manner other than as set forth in the application for the permit or the agreement or contrary to the standards provided in this chapter or any
terms or conditions imposed by the public works director or city engineer as in this chapter provided. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-26: PERFORMANCE OF OBLIGATION BY AGENT OR EMPLOYEE:
Performance of any of the duties and obligations imposed upon a permittee by the permit or this chapter by an agent, employee or independent
contractor employed by the permittee shall be deemed to constitute performance of such duties and obligations by the permittee. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-
2013)
9-7-27: OTHER REMEDIES:
No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or any person may otherwise be entitled.
(Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
9-7-28: PENALTIES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 247/436
See section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2013-2, 4-1-2013)
Chapter 8
PARK REGULATIONS
9-8-1: APPLICATION:
The terms public park or recreation area as used herein shall include all land, lakes, rivers, beaches, and roadside rests, together with the
improvements and facilities provided thereon or therein, which are owned or operated by the City as a public park or public recreation area and the
provisions of this Chapter shall apply thereto.
9-8-2: DESIGNATION OF CITY PARKS:
The following areas are designated as City Parks of the City: Berry Park, Brentlinger Park, Sheridan Park, Peter Ringo Park, Lincoln Park,
Thompson/Floral Park, and all public school sites in the City used to conduct City recreation programs.
9-8-3: DAMAGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any public park or recreation area to pick or damage any flowers, foliage, or fruit or to break, dig up, or in any way
mutilate or damage any tree, shrub, plant, grass, railing, wall, seat, fence, or other structure or to cut, carve, write, paint, or otherwise make any mark
thereon or to fasten to any tree, stone, fence, wall, monument, or other structure any sign, notice, advertisement or other inscription. No person shall
dig up or remove any dirt, stones, rock, or other thing whatever, make any excavation, lay or set off any blast or otherwise alter the natural features of
any park or recreation area without the specific permission of the Director of Public Works of the City.
9-8-4: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person within any park or recreation area to do any of the following:
(A) Deposit, place, throw, or in any manner dispose of any rubbish, trash, garbage, can, bottle, glass or paper of any decaying or putrid matter of any
kind whatsoever except in containers provided for such purpose.
(B) Contaminate in any way any watershed, lake, river or other water supply and in this respect it shall be unlawful to wash any clothing or cooking
utensils in such waters.
(C) Light any fire except in places specifically provided therefor, and all dead wood, moss, dry leaves, chips, or other combustible material which may
have gathered around any place provided for fires shall be carefully removed before lighting any fire. When the fire is not longer needed, it shall be
completely extinguished with water.
(D) Possess or use any fireworks of any kind whatsoever except for a public display pursuant to a permit therefor.
(E) Possess any firearm or discharge such firearm within, into, or across such park or recreation area, provided that this provision shall not apply to
any peace officer or concessionaire in the lawful discharge of his duty.
(F) Kill, wound, chase, or capture any wild bird or animal, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to the duly authorized agents of the City
in the necessary control of predatory birds or animals.
(G) Engage in gambling in any form.
(H) Permit any dog, cat, fowl, or other domestic animal under his control to enter or go at large within such park or recreation area; provided, however,
that this shall not apply to dogs upon a leash and under the immediate control of the person in possession thereof; nor shall it apply to any
domestic animal when specific permission therefor has been granted by the Council.
(I) Operate an automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle in excess of posted speed limits or into any areas where signs prohibiting the same have been
placed.
(J) Solicit, sell, or peddle any food, drink, circulars, papers, goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind except pursuant to specific concession or permit
therefor secured from the City.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 248/436
(K) Admission Charge: Promote, conduct or manage any game, contest, show, exhibition, concert or lecture when an admission charge thereto is
made or an offering received except in strict accordance with a written permit therefor obtained from the director of public works.
(L) Distribution Of Advertising: To distribute any handbills, or circulars, or to post, place or erect any bills, notice, paper, or advertising device or matter
of any kind.
(M) Disturbing The Peace: To indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening, indecent or immoral conduct, or abusive, threatening, profane language, or to
throw stones or missiles.
(N) Solicitation Or Conducting Business: To practice, carry on, conduct, or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession, without the written
permission of the council.
(O) Designated Areas: To play, or engage in any game, excepting at such place as shall be especially set apart for that purpose.
(P) Hours: To remain, stay or loiter, in any public park between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the following
day, without written permission of the council.
(Q) Utility Pipes: To open, expose, or interfere with any water or gas pipe, hydrant, stopcock, sewer, basin, or other construction, in any park where
prohibited.
(R) Towing Of Vehicles: To hang behind any vehicle, or to tow any vehicle of any kind in any park, excepting, however, in case of breakdowns within
the park, the disabled vehicle may be towed to the nearest point of exit. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
(S) Alcoholic Beverages: To bring into any park, or recreation area and within a sixty foot (60') radius thereof, or possess or consume in any such area
any alcoholic beverage, except that it shall be lawful to bring into, possess and consume any alcoholic beverage within the Vance Center building
and within the Salazar Community Center building. "Alcoholic beverage" includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and any liquid or solid
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. (Ord. 833, 12-7-1981)
(T) Activities And/Or Games: To engage in the following activities and/or games: discus throwing, javelin throwing, field hockey, baseball (hardball),
rock throwing, bean shooters, gas model airplanes, fireworks, boomerangs, slingshots, air guns, golf and archery, except in officially designated
areas. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
(U) Bounce Houses: Erect, display or utilize recreational facility or facilities commonly known as bounce house(s) or platform(s) without a written
permit from the city recreation and parks department. Issuance of the permit is subject to the following requirements:
1. That the owner/operator of the aforementioned facility provide a certificate of insurance naming the city of Selma as an additional insured. The
amount of insurance will be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); and
2. That the facility not contain any water or climbing feature; and
3. That the setup, use, and take down of the feature not impair the use and enjoyment of other park users or fail to conform with any regulation(s)
in this code. (Ord. 2007-2, 1-16-2007)
9-8-5: CAMPING, USE RESERVATIONS AND FEES THEREFOR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp within any park or recreation area without having first secured a written permit therefor from the council and
no person shall camp outside of a campsite or site designated in such permit. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
9-8-6: PERMIT FOR PARK USE:
No company, society, or organization of more than twenty five (25) persons shall hold or conduct any picnic, celebration, parade, service, or exercise
in any public park, without first obtaining permission from the director of public works, and it shall be unlawful for any person to take part in any picnic,
celebration, parade, service, or exercise held in or conducted contrary to the provisions hereof. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
9-8-7: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Person desiring to reserve park and picnicking facilities must obtain a permit therefor from the director of public works who may assign and reserve
particular areas therefor on a first come, first serve basis. It shall be unlawful for any person other than those designated in the permit to occupy any
areas so assigned when the signs making known such reservation have been posted or such persons have been otherwise informed thereof by the
director of public works. Any person desiring to reserve an area to accommodate twenty five (25) or more persons shall make a deposit with the
director of public works at the rate of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred (100) persons or any part thereof. Said deposit shall be for the
purpose of guaranteeing that the person obtaining the reservation will clean up the area and that no damage to any park property will occur. Said
deposit shall be returned if the area is left clean and no such damage is committed. Otherwise, such deposit will be retained by the director and paid
over to the treasurer for deposit in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 249/436
9-8-8: BLOCKING PASSAGEWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to assemble, collect, or gather in any walk, driveway, passageway or pathway in any park or in any other place set
apart for the travel of persons or vehicles in or through any park or to occupy the same so that the free passage or use thereof by person or vehicles
passing along the same shall be obstructed in any manner. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
9-8-9: MEETINGS IN PARKS; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or address any public assemblage, meeting, or gathering, or to make or deliver any public speech,
lecture, or discourse, or to conduct, or to take part in any public debate, or discussion, in any public park, belonging to or under the control of the city,
without first having obtained a permit in writing from the director of public works. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
9-8-10: MOLESTING ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, pursue, annoy, throw stones or missiles at, or molest or disturb in any way, any animal, bird or reptile within
the confines of any park. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
9-8-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In order to promote the safety, comfort and convenience of persons using any park or recreation area, the council may from time to time by resolution
adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and make the same applicable generally or to a particular park or
recreation area or portion thereof. Such rules and regulations may include regulating the speed of vehicles, establishing campsites, parking areas, and
areas where parking or driving of vehicles is prohibited, areas where certain games or activities are prohibited, and such other rules and regulations as
in the opinion of the council are necessary for the safety, comfort and convenience of persons using such park or recreation area. When such rules
and regulations have been adopted and signs erected within the park or recreation area or portions thereof affected thereby informing the public of the
substance of such rules and regulations, it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply therewith. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
9-8-12: LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The chief law enforcement official of this chapter shall be the chief of police. (Ord. 805, 6-4-1979)
Chapter 8.1
SKATEBOARDS
9-8.1-1: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall apply to the use and operation of skateboards, in-line skates, common roller skates and scooters on all streets, alleys, sidewalks
and rights of way in the city, whether public or private, and all other property owned by the city and upon private property for which a request for the
application of this chapter has been established. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-2: SKATEBOARD DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, "skateboard" means a plank or board, whether of wood, fiberglass, plastic, metal or any other material, with wheels
attached thereto, and foot propelled without a steering apparatus. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-3: COMMON ROLLER SKATE DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, "common roller skate" means a shoe, boot, or an apparatus worn on a shoe or boot with wheels attached, whether
permanently or temporarily, to such shoe, boot or apparatus. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-4: IN-LINE SKATE DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, "in-line skate" means a common roller skate with wheels in a straight line resembling the blade of an ice skate. (Ord.
2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-5: SCOOTER DEFINED:
For purposes of this chapter, "scooter" means a plank or board, whether made of wood, fiberglass, plastic, metal or any other material, with wheels
and steering apparatus attached and is foot propelled or motorized. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 250/436
9-8.1-6: USE AND OPERATION:
(A) Except as otherwise specifically allowed in this chapter, no person shall use or operate a skateboard, common roller skates, in-line skates, or a
scooter on a public or private street or alley in the city if there is a sidewalk adjacent and parallel to the street or alley. If no such sidewalk is
present, skateboards, common roller skates, in-line skates, or scooters may be used or operated on a street or alley as far to the right hand side of
the roadway as is practicable and travel in the same direction as traffic.
(B) No person shall use or operate a skateboard in Berry park (except in the designated skate park) or on those certain streets generally identified as
Floral Avenue westerly of the Union Pacific Railroad crossing to the city limits (westerly boundary line), Whitson Avenue, 2nd Street from California
State Highway 99 to Lincoln park and the central business district as defined in section 10-12-11 of this code.
(C) No person shall use or operate a skateboard, common roller skates, in-line skates or scooter on any public or private street, alley, sidewalk or right
of way or on any property owned or controlled by the city in a manner which endangers the safety of any other person or property. No person using
or operating a skateboard, common roller skates, in-line skates, or a scooter on a public or private street, alley, sidewalk, or right of way or any
other property owned or controlled by the city shall pass a pedestrian in a manner forcing or causing them to yield the right of way or otherwise
move to avoid contact. If such street, alley, sidewalk, or right of way is not sufficiently wide to allow the skateboarder, common roller skater, in-line
skater, or person operating a scooter to pass the pedestrian while maintaining such separation, the skateboarder, common roller skater, in-line
skater, or person operating a scooter shall cease to operate the skateboard, common roller skates, in-line skates, or scooter and walk past the
pedestrian until such time as the skateboarder, common roller skater, in-line skater, or scooter can maintain a safe separation distance.
(D) The use of loud noise, brilliant lights, sound, outcry, amplified loudspeaker, radio, phonograph, horn or any other instrument or device for such
purposes is prohibited. For the purpose of this subsection, "loud" is defined in excess of fifty (50) decibels.
(E) The provisions of subsection 9-8-4(S) of this title are hereby expressly incorporated in this chapter (inter alia the prohibition of alcoholic
beverages).
(F) No person shall use or operate a skateboard, common roller skates, in-line skates, or scooter within twenty feet (20') of the entrance to any shop,
store, or commercial building while such shop, store, or commercial building is open for business.
(G) The use of ramps, jumps or any other portable device used to force the skateboard, common roller skates, in-line skates, or scooter off the
pavement shall be prohibited on any public street, alley, sidewalk or right of way, public property or property owned or controlled by the city and on
any private property unless consented to by the owner or owner designee thereof.
(H) No person shall be towed on a skateboard, common roller skates, in-line skates, or scooter by the use of any mechanical device.
(I) No person shall use or operate a skateboard, common roller skates, in-line skates or scooter more than one-half (1/2) hour after sunset or one-half
(1/2) hour prior to sunrise without the use of an arm mounted light or reflective arm band or reflective clothing; exception: a public owned and
designated skateboard park.
(J) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the use or operation of skateboards, common roller skates, in-line skates, or scooter shall
be prohibited upon any public or private property or property owned or controlled by the city when such property has been posted pursuant to this
section. The city and any owner or owner designee of public or private property are authorized to post or erect signs at their own expense,
prohibiting the use or operation of skateboards, common roller skates, in-line skates or scooter in or on their property. The Selma police
department is authorized to enter upon any city public or private property so posted to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Example sign:
Skateboards, Common Roller Skates, In-Line Skates, or Scooters Prohibited on Posted Property by SMC Section 8.1-6, Selma Police
Department.
(K) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a motorized scooter, as defined in section 407.5 of the California Vehicle Code, which is operated
in accordance with the provisions of sections 21200-21235, inclusive, of the California Vehicle Code.
(L) The city council may provide additional rules and regulations by resolution which shall be enforced and subject to the penalties as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-7: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to any private or public facility constructed and engineered for skateboarding, provided such facility is operating in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-8: SKATE PARK DESIGNATED:
The city council may, from time to time, designate certain areas for skateboard or in-line skating use. No person shall use the skateboard areas for
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 251/436
uses other than skateboarding or in-line skating except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. The use of any public skateboard facility shall
be deemed a hazardous recreational activity within the provisions of section 831.7 of the Government Code of the state of California. The city of
Selma may not be held liable for any injuries incurred by persons that participate in any such hazardous recreational activity.
The city of Selma designates and maintains as a skate park the facility located in Berry park. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-9: REQUIRED RIDING EQUIPMENT IN SKATE PARKS:
It is unlawful for a person to ride or use a skateboard or in-line skates in a skate park unless a person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads
and where the skate park has a sign posted that provides that anyone riding a skateboard in the park must wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads
or be subject to citation. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-10: IN-LINE SKATING PERMITTED:
In-line skating shall be permitted in the city's designated skate park facility. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-11: USE OF TOBACCO PROHIBITED:
Use of tobacco for any purpose (e.g., smoking or chewing) by any person while in, on or placing himself or herself within any designated skate park
facility of the city is prohibited. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-12: BICYCLES AND SCOOTERS PROHIBITED:
The riding or other use of bicycles and scooters is prohibited in the city's designated skate park facility. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
9-8.1-13: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be grounds for removal from designated skateboarding/skating areas and shall be punishable as
an infraction under the provisions of section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
Chapter 9
STORM DRAIN SYSTEMS
9-9-1: PURPOSES:
The Council hereby declares and finds that the development of land for urban uses substantially accelerates the concentration of surface and storm
waters and that it is necessary to establish and collect drainage fees to defray all or a part of the actual or the estimated cost of constructing planned
drainage facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters from drainage areas in order to promote and protect the public safety, peace, comfort,
convenience and general welfare and for the accomplishment of the purposes more particularly set forth as follows:
(A) To provide for planned drainage facilities within the City required for the removal of surface and storm waters;
(B) To provide for an additional method of financing the construction of planned drainage facilities;
(C) To provide a reliable source of information regarding the development of planned drainage facilities for present and prospective residents,
developers and investors in property;
(D) To obviate the menace to public safety arising from inadequate provisions for the removal of storm waters which run off and accumulate as the
result of development of property;
(E) To promote conditions that will provide the deterioration of property values in existing developments and encourage new development of desirable
residential, commercial and/or industrial properties through the construction of planned drainage facilities;
(F) To prevent the deterioration of public streets and other public facilities which would result from failure to construct planned drainage facilities; and
(G) To provide for the collection of drainage fees for the construction of planned drainage facilities at the time of the division of land, as authorized by
the Subdivision Map Act of the State1 and the provisions of this Code, or at the time of other development thereof, except as excepted in this
Chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 252/436
9-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases listed below whenever used in this Chapter shall have the following definitions:
COVERED AREA: Area of property covered by improvements including, but not limited to, roofs, walkways, parking lots, parking area, etc.
DEVELOPMENT: Any building, structure or other improvement, or the construction, erection or installation thereof, in, over or upon any parcel of land,
or the division of any parcel of land. "Development" shall not include any temporary facility or the construction, erection or installation thereof, which is
accomplished in accordance with the terms of any permit issued therefor or pursuant to such other assurance as the Director may require; provided,
that such temporary facility may be maintained for only a limited time, not to exceed one year or, if erected or installed for use in the performance of
the work of a construction project, until the completion of such work.
DIRECTOR: The City Engineer/Director of Public Works.
DIVISION: The dividing of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels, including, but not limited to, a division as described in Title 9, Chapter
6 of this Code.
DRAINAGE FEES: The fees established and levied as provided in this Chapter to pay all or any part of the costs of the planned drainage facilities and
their appurtenances.
DRAINAGE MASTER PLAN: A specific plan adopted by the Council for the systematic execution of the conservation and public facilities elements of
the Selma General Plan relating to flood control and drainage, and delineating therein a plan and map of the drainage area showing generally its
boundaries and the location of the planned drainage facilities.
GROSS ACREAGE: The area of a parcel of land, or of a lot or parcel in a proposed division, including those portions of all abutting streets and alleys
measured to the center lines thereof or to a line parallel with and thirty feet (30') outside the property line, whichever shall be the lesser, except that if a
parcel abuts more than one street, the portion of the street abutting the shortest side, or one side in the case of a square parcel, shall not be included.
IMPROVEMENT: Without limitation, any addition to or alteration of an existing building or structure, or paving or other improvement which restricts the
perviousness of the soil.
PARCEL OF LAND: Any real property, improved or unimproved, shown on the latest adopted County tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units.
PAVING: The placing of concrete, asphalt, oil or any other means of soil stabilization or consolidation which, as determined by the Director, may
materially decrease the permeability of the natural soil.
PLANNED DRAINAGE FACILITIES: The facilities which are required to provide drainage, generally as set forth in the Master Plan. Such facilities may
be modified during final design with the approval of the Director, provided that such modification will not result in the reduction in the degree of
protection provided in the area under construction.
STORM DRAIN FUND: A separate fund into which all drainage fees collected shall be deposited and the moneys in which shall be expended solely for
the acquisition or construction of planned drainage facilities for which such fund was established.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning provisions set forth in Title 11 of this Code.
9-9-3: DRAINAGE FEES REQUIRED; WHEN PAYABLE:
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, a drainage fee shall be paid to the City on each parcel of land prior to the commencement of the work
of any development thereon.
(B) In the case of the division of any parcel of land, a local drainage fee shall be paid:
1. Prior to the approval by the Council of the final map thereof; or
2. Prior to the final approval of any division in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-6-8 of this Code. Such fee shall be paid on the gross
acreage of each lot or parcel in any such division, except any portion thereof for which fees have previously been paid.
(C) Except in the case of a division, drainage fees shall not be payable on account of any development work which consists solely of the construction,
erection or installation of:
1. Fences, pole lines, underground conduits or pipelines, or similar developments which, as determined by the Director, do not materially impair the
permeability of the natural surface of the parcel of land; or
2. Concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveway approaches, paving or other street improvements within any street or alley.
(D) No drainage fee shall be payable on account of any development or improvement consisting solely of additions to, alterations of or reconstruction
of any residential building or structure unless the covered area by the cumulation of additions made after the adoption of this Chapter equals or
exceeds an increase of fifteen percent (15%) of the covered area as it existed on the date of adoption of this Chapter.
(E) No drainage fee shall be payable on account of any development or improvement consisting solely of additions to, alterations of or reconstruction
of any building or structure, other than residential covered by subsection (D) hereinabove, unless the additions or alterations are such that, under
the applicable provisions of the Building Code,2 the entire building or structure must be made to conform to the requirements for new buildings or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 253/436
structures or unless the area covered by the cumulation of additions made subsequent to the adoption of this Chapter equals or exceeds an
increase of twenty five percent (25%) of the covered area as it existed on the date of adoption of this Chapter.
(F) Deferrals:
1. Payment of the drainage fee on a parcel zoned for industrial development payable under the provisions of Section 9-6-8 of this Code, or payable
upon a developed industrial zoned subdivision lot, or payable because of installation of an industrial development may be deferred at the request
of the owner, provided the Director determines that planned drainage facilities designed to serve the parcel of land are not available and cannot
be made available within a reasonable period of time.
2. Any deferment authorized by the provisions of paragraph 1 of this subsection shall be allowed only if all the owners of the parcel enter into a
written agreement which shall provide that:
(a) The fee shall be paid to the City at the earliest of the following occurrences: three (3) months after notice to the owner or owners by the
Director that the construction of such planned drainage facilities designed to serve such parcel is to be commenced within one year of the date
of such notice.
(b) At the time of payment of the deferred fee, the fee shall be reduced by a credit which shall be an amount equal to the actual cash
expenditures incurred by the owner for the construction or any temporary drainage facilities required by the Director as part of the initial
development to serve the property until such time as planned drainage facilities become available.
(c) The agreement creates a valid lien upon such parcel to the extent of the fee (such lien may be subordinated at the discretion of the Director,
and the form and substance of the agreement, procedures, documents, covenants, etc., necessary to place the agreement and lien into effect
shall all be determined by the Director, subject to the approval of the City Attorney); and
(d) The owner of such parcel agrees to pay all court costs and attorney's fees and waives any and all defenses, legal or equitable, other than
liquidated monetary off-sets against the City if an action at law or foreclosure suit is brought to enforce payment of the fee or recovery of the
fee through the lien.
(G) When the drainage fee applicable to any parcel of land shall have been fully paid pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, or shall have been
assessed against it by the levying of an assessment therefor in a special assessment proceeding, no further drainage fees shall be payable with
respect to such parcel; provided, however, if after such full payment, the use of such parcel of land shall be changed to a use which, under the then
current fee schedule, requires a higher local drainage fee than the use upon the basis of which such payment was made, then such parcel of land
shall be subject to the payment of an additional fee, which shall be the fee applicable to such parcel of land in its changed use under the fee
schedule in effect at the time the additional fee is payable, less the total of any fees previously paid.
(H) No building permit or other permit for any development shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter unless the drainage fee required
by this Chapter has been fully paid.
9-9-4: DEVELOPMENT WITHOUT PAYMENT OF DRAINAGE FEES PROHIBITED:
No person shall construct, erect or install, or cause or permit to be constructed, erected or installed, any development on any parcel of land on which
the drainage fee required by the provisions of this Chapter has not been fully paid.
9-9-5: FEE SCHEDULE; COMPUTATION OF DRAINAGE FEES:
(A) Concurrently with the adoption of the drainage master plan, or any amendment thereto, the Council shall fix, by resolution, a schedule of per gross
acre fees calculated to raise the sum of money necessary to pay the estimated costs of the planned drainage facilities as set forth in the drainage
master plan. Such schedule shall be conditioned and based on the following findings by the Council. That:
1. The planned drainage facilities are in conformity with the conservation and public facilities elements of the General Plan, the drainage master
plan; and
2. The development or improvement of property will require the construction or acquisition of the planned drainage facilities described in the
drainage master plan; and
3. The fees are fairly apportioned within the drainage area either on the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed for subdivision or on the
need for such facilities created by the proposed subdivision and development of other property within such area; and
4. Planned drainage facilities, which facilities are in addition to any existing drainage facilities serving such local drainage area at the time of the
adoption of the drainage master plan, are necessary to complete the drainage master plan for the city; and
5. The fee apportioned to any property proposed for subdivision within such drainage area does not exceed the prorata share of the amount of the
total actual or estimated costs of all facilities within such area which would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned
uniformly on a per-acre basis; and
6. The drainage facilities planned are in addition to existing facilities serving the drainage area at the time of the adoption of the drainage master
plan for the area.
(B) In the computation of the drainage fee payable because of the development or improvement or any parcel of land, a credit for drainage fees or
other charges for drainage previously paid, or drainage facilities installed with respect to such parcel shall be allowed, subject to the conditions and
limitations set forth in this Section. Credits for actual cash expenditures for the construction of drainage facilities constructed and still in existence
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 254/436
and use in any street, alley or public easement and not constructed by special assessment proceedings shall be allowed, subject to the following
conditions and limitations:
1. The facilities considered for such credits shall have been constructed in conformance with the standards of the City in effect when such facilities
were constructed.
2. The Director shall certify that such facilities are in conformance with, or compatible for use in connection with, the planned drainage facilities
installed or to be installed in the drainage area.
3. The credit allowed shall not exceed the value of such facilities, as determined by the Director by applying estimates of construction costs
prevailing at the time the credit is allowed.
4. The facilities shall have been constructed and paid for with respect to the parcel of land for which credit is claimed. If the facilities were
constructed for the benefit of other parcels of land in addition to the parcel for which credit is claimed, the Council may, in the absence of
agreement of the owners of the respective parcels as to the apportionment of the cost, estimate the total cost of such facilities at the time of
construction and apportion the total credit allowable for such facilities among the several parcels by such method as it shall, in its sole discretion,
deem equitable. Proof to the satisfaction of the Council shall be made, by the person claiming credit hereunder, of the amount of any actual cash
expenditure on the facilities for which credit is claimed.
(C) Credits for assessments previously levied for planned drainage facilities by special assessment proceedings shall be allowed, subject to the
following conditions and limitations:
1. Such facilities shall have been constructed in conformance with the standards of the City in effect when such facilities were constructed.
2. The credit allowed shall be equal to the amount of the assessment and any supplemental assessment levied upon the parcel of land, which
amount was paid in cash or which became security for a bond or bonds issued in the special assessment proceedings. If one assessment was
levied for drainage facilities and other improvements in the same proceeding, the Director shall determine, from the engineer's report in the
assessment proceedings, if available, otherwise on cost estimates applied by the Director, the proportion of the assessment attributable to such
facilities, and the amount so determined by him shall be the credit allowed.
(D) If a drainage fee was paid on all or a portion of the parcel of land under the provisions of subsection 9-9-3(D) of this Chapter which is a part of a
division, and an additional drainage fee is payable under any provision of this Chapter, a credit shall be allowed equal to the amount included in the
fee paid under the provisions of subsection 9-9-3(B) of this Chapter for the gross acreage of such parcel or portion. (Ord. 878, 5-20-85)
Chapter 10
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
9-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this Section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them
in the following definitions:
COMMISSION: The Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES: Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms,
crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located
aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT OR DISTRICT: That area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures
are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-10-3 of this Chapter.
UTILITY: Shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or
devices. (Ord. 654, 12-2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-2: PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL:
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities
for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each
such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 654, 12-2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-3: COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS:
If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such
removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such District and shall fix the time within
which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive
underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 255/436
materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 654,
12-2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-4: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
therein as provided in Section 9-10-3 of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue,
employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead
facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 9-10-9 of this Chapter, and for
such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. (Ord.
654, 12-2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-5: EXCEPTION, EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without
authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. The Council may grant special permission, on such terms as, the Council may deem
appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, and construct, install, maintain, use or
operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 654, 12-2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-6: OTHER EXCEPTIONS:
This Chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9-10-3 of this Chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to
the following types of facilities:
(A) Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(B) Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.
(C) Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated
overhead structures are not prohibited.
(D) Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500
volts.
(E) Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.
(F) Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services.
(G) Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets,
and concealed ducts.
(H) Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 654, 12-
2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-7: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES:
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9-10-3 of this Chapter, the Clerk shall notify all affected utilities
and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said Clerk shall further notify such affected
property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of
the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
Commission.
Notification by the Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9-10-3 of this Chapter, together with a copy of
this Chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 654, 12-2-1968,
eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-8: RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES:
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9-10-3 of this
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 256/436
Chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 654, 12-2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-9: RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
(A) Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a District shall perform construction and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 9-10-8 of this Chapter and the termination facility on or
within said building or structure being served all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file
with the Commission.
(B) In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting said property does not comply with the provisions of subsection (A) of this
Section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 9-10-3 of this Chapter, the City Engineer shall post written notice
on the property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead
service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. (Ord. 654, 12-2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-10: RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY:
City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or
user of such poles to remove the some within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 9-10-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 654, 12-2-
1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
9-10-11: EXTENSION OF TIME:
In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9-10-3 of this Chapter cannot be performed within the
time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other
circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to
the time of such limitation. (Ord. 654, 12-2-1968, eff. 1-2-1969; amd. Ord. 99-11, 11-15-1999)
Title 10
TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
(A) The following words and phrases when used in this Title shall for the purpose of this Title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
Chapter.
(B) Whenever any words or phrases used in this Title are not defined herein, but are now defined in the Vehicle Code of this State, such definitions are
incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein as though set forth herein in full.
ALLEY: The word "Alley" shall mean any unnamed street less than twenty five feet (25') in width between property lines.
CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT: The term "Central Traffic District" shall mean all streets and portions of streets within the area described as
follows: All that area bounded and within that area enclosed by the following streets: Commencing at Highway 99 and North Street, thence
southerly along Highway 99 to West Front Street; thence northerly along West Front Street to Third Street, thence easterly along Third Street to
Mill Street, thence northerly along Mill Street to North McCall Avenue, thence northerly along North McCall Avenue to Arrants Street, thence
westerly along Arrants Street to North Street, thence westerly along North Street to 99 Highway.
LOADING ZONE: The term "Loading Zone" shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading
or unloading of passengers or materials.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: The term "Official Time Standard" shall mean whenever certain hours are named herein, standard time or daylight
saving time as may be in current use in this City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: The term "Official Traffic Control Devices" shall mean all signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this Title placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS: The term "Official Traffic Signals" shall mean any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated,
by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority or public body of official having jurisdiction.
PARK: The word "Park" shall mean to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 257/436
PARKWAY: The word "Parkway" shall mean that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
PASSENGERS LOADING ZONE: The term "Passengers Loading Zone" shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
PEDESTRIAN: The word "Pedestrian" shall mean any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: The term "Police Officer" shall mean every officer of the Police Department.
STOP: The word "Stop" when required, shall mean complete cessation of movement.
STOP or STAND: The word "Stop" or "Stand" when prohibited, shall mean any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
TRAFFIC: The word "Traffic" shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or
together while using any street for purposes of travel.
HOLIDAYS: The word "Holidays" shall mean any day designated as such in Section 6700 of the Government Code of the State; provided however,
that Saturday afternoon shall not be considered a holiday for the purposes of this Title. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
CURB: The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein
used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights of way of public
utility companies. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
10-2-1: POLICE ADMINISTRATION:
There is hereby established in the Police Department a Traffic Division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly
responsible to the Chief of Police.
10-2-2: DUTY OF TRAFFIC DIVISION:
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the Police Department to enforce the street traffic
regulations of this City and all of the State Vehicle Laws applicable to street traffic in this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic
accidents and to cooperate with the Traffic Engineer and other officers of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the Division by this Title.
10-2-3: TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES:
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Traffic Division shall cooperate with the Traffic Engineer in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.
10-2-4: TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS:
The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location. The reports shall be available for the use and information of the Traffic Engineer.
10-2-5: ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT:
The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the Council. The report shall contain information on traffic matters in
the City as follows:
(A) The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data.
(B) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police.
(C) The plans and recommendations of the Division for future traffic safety activities. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
10-2-6: TRAFFIC ENGINEER:
The office of Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The Chief of Police shall serve as Traffic Engineer in addition to other functions, and shall exercise
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 258/436
the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this Title. The term "Traffic Engineer" as used in this Code, shall refer to the Chief of Police
in all instances, except in those instances where the particular function involved requires the attention of a licensed engineer. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
10-2-7: DUTIES OF TRAFFIC ENGINEER:
It shall be the general duty of the Traffic Engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and
signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions
and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers
and duties imposed by this Title and other provisions of this Code.
10-2-8: TRAFFIC COMMISSION:
(Rep. by Ord. 829, 8-3-81)
10-2-9: DUTIES OF TRAFFIC COMMISSION:
(Rep. by Ord. 829, 8-3-81)
10-2-10: TRAFFIC COMMISSION MEETINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 829, 8-3-81)
Chapter 3
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
10-3-1: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
(A) It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of
this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.
(B) Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(C) Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-3-2: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
See section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2001-8, 11-19-2001)
10-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
No person shall wilfully fail to refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police officer or fire department official when directing traffic. (Ord. 406, 6-6-
1949)
10-3-4: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY OTHER THAN OFFICIALS PROHIBITED:
No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person
authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal; except that persons may operate any mechanical push button
signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 746, 5-3-1976)
10-3-5: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any
county or city and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state
statute. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 259/436
10-3-6: EXEMPTIONS TO CERTAIN VEHICLES:
(A) The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department,
any public ambulance or any public utility or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized
emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the vehicle code in response to an
emergency call.
(B) The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of his wilful disregard of the safety of
others.
(C) The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while
necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery
of United States mail. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-3-7: REPORT OF DAMAGE TO CERTAIN PROPERTY:
(A) The driver of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned
by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, ornamental lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in
damage to any ornamental shade tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty four
(24) hours after such accident make a written report of the accident to the police department.
(B) Every such report shall state the time and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and the person
driving or in charge of the vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damaged in the
accident.
(C) A driver involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time the driver is physically
incapable of making a report, but in such event the driver shall make a report as required in subsection (A) of this section within twenty four (24)
hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
Chapter 4
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10-4-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
(A) The traffic engineer shall have the exclusive power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control
devices when and as required under the traffic regulations of the city to make effective the provisions of this title.
(B) Whenever the vehicle code of this state requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice
to the public of the application of such law the traffic engineer is hereby authorized to install the necessary devices subject to any limitations or
restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
(C) The traffic engineer may also place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or
warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance
with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Ord.
406, 6-6-1949)
10-4-2: WHEN TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES:
No provision of the Vehicle Code of this Title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in
place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic regulations. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
10-4-3: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle and the motorman of any streetcar shall obey the instruction of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in
accordance with this Ordinance unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 746 5-3-76)
10-4-4: INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
(A) The Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions
are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life
or property from exceptional hazard.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 260/436
(B) The Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by resorting to field observation, traffic counts
and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and
safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of
Public Works.
10-4-5: LANE MARKINGS:
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by
vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the
highway. When authorized signs have been placed designating off-center traffic lanes, no person shall disobey the instructions given by such signs.
10-4-6: REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by
State law or this Title whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist
or obtain thereto.
10-4-7: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; HOURS OF OPERATION:
The Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this Title. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
10-4-8: OBEDIENCE TO BARRIERS AND SIGNS:
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Traffic
Engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by
any department of this City. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
Chapter 5
TURNING MOVEMENTS
10-5-1: AUTHORITY TO PLACE TURNING MARKERS; OBEDIENCE:
(A) The Traffic Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
(B) When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
10-5-2: AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS:
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall
place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours,
in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when the turns are permitted.
10-5-3: OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS:
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
(A) When signs are in place, U-turns and left turns shall be permitted at the automatic signal at Whitson and Second Streets, allowing U-turns and left
turns for traffic on Whitson Street traveling in a Northwesterly direction and Southeasterly direction. (Ord. 687, 7-2-71, Eff. 8-1-71)
10-5-4: AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT RIGHT TURNS AGAINST SIGNAL:
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections within any business district at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
any such sign. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 261/436
Chapter 6
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
10-6-1: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS; SIGNS REQUIRED:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates any one-way street or alley, the Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
10-6-2: OBEDIENCE TO ONE-WAY SIGNS:
When signs are erected on any one-way street or alley giving notice thereof, no person shall drive any vehicle in a direction contrary thereto. (Ord.
406, 6-6-49)
10-6-3: ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
In accordance with Section 10-6-1, and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the following streets:
(A) Tucker Street between Second Street and Selma Street, running from Second Street to Selma Street;
(B) The alley between East Front Street and High Street, running from First Street to Second Street;
(C) The alley between Selma Street and Third Street, running from Tucker Street to Mill Street;
(D) The alley between East Front Street and High Street, running from First Street to North Street; (Ord. 628, 6-5-67)
(E) The alley between High Street and Grant Street, running from First Street to North Street; (Ord. 732, 4-21-75)
(F) The alley between McCall Avenue and Grant Street, running from Arrants to McCall Avenue. (Ord. 724, 12-16-74)
10-6-4: PARKING PARALLEL ON ONE-WAY STREETS:
(A) Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches (18") of the left-hand curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.
(B) In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
(C) The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left hand side of any one-way street or
when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two (2) or more separate
roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.
(D) The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this Section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process
of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend
beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
Chapter 7
SPECIAL STOPS
10-7-1: TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO ERECT STOP SIGNS:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at
which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the City
Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other
intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or
maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign shall conform with,
and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 262/436
10-7-2: STOP AT THROUGH STREET OR STOP SIGN REQUIRED:
(A) Those streets and parts of streets described in Section 10-7-4 hereof are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes of this Section.
(B) The provisions of this Section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are described in
Section 10-7-5 hereof.
(C) The provisions of this Section shall apply to those highway railway grade crossings as described in Section 10-7-6.
(D) When stop signs are erected as herein provided at the entrance to any intersection or at any railway grade crossing, every driver of a vehicle and
every motorman of a streetcar shall stop as required by the Vehicle Code.
(E) The provisions of this Section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are described in
Section 10-7-7 hereof requiring the installation of yield signs. (Ord. 632, 8-21-67)
10-7-3: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
10-7-4: THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED:
In accordance with the provisions of Section 10-7-2 (A), and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at the
entrances to those intersections described as follows:
All intersections on McCall Avenue from High Street to the North City Limits;
All intersections on Second Street from Nebraska Avenue to High Street;
All intersections on Whitson Street from Thompson Avenue to Park Street;
All intersections on Stillman Street from McCall Avenue to Orange Avenue;
All intersections on Stillman Street from Orange Avenue to Dockery Avenue;
All intersections on Floral Avenue from West Front Street to McCall Avenue;
All intersections on Floral Avenue from McCall Avenue to Dockery Avenue;
All intersections on McCall Avenue from Whitson Street to Valley View Avenue;
All intersections on Rose Avenue from McCall to Easterly City Limits;
All intersections on Dockery Avenue from Floral Avenue to Rose Avenue;
All intersections on Dockery Avenue from Rose Avenue to Peach Street;
All intersections on Logan Street from Floral Avenue to Arrants Street;
All intersections on Young Street from Thompson Avenue to Second Street;
All intersections on Valley View Avenue from McCall Avenue to Thompson Avenue;
All intersections on Thompson Avenue from Valley View Avenue to Nebraska Avenue;
All intersections on Thompson Avenue from Nebraska Avenue to Pine Street.
All intersections on Park Street from Sheridan Street to Thompson Avenue.
All intersections on Wright Street from Arrants Street to Floral Avenue, from Floral Avenue to Huntsman Avenue, and from Huntsman Avenue to the
northerly City limits.
All intersections on Mill Street from McCall Avenue to and including Orange Avenue.
All intersections on Thompson Avenue from Floral Avenue to Dinuba Avenue.
All intersections on Arrants Street from McCall Avenue to Orange Avenue.
All intersections on Mill Street from Second Street to Dockery Avenue.
All intersections on Sylvia from Second Street to Thompson Avenue.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 263/436
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, Park Street at the intersection with Skelton Street, shall not be a through street and shall be an
intersection controlled by stop signs. (Ord. 632, 8-21-1967; amd. Ord. 653, 12-12-1968; Ord. 722, 11-4-1974; Ord. 728, 3-3-1975; Ord. 759, 10-4-
1976; Ord. 855, 6-6-1983; Ord. 873, 11-19-1984; Ord. 2017-5, 11-6-2017)
10-7-5: STOP INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED:
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 10-7-2(B) of this chapter, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall
stop at the entrances to those intersections described in the list of stop intersections ("list") on file with the Director of Public Works and a copy which
is on file with the City Clerk. Said list is incorporated herein by reference and may be amended by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City
Council. Said list shall be categorized and alphabetized as the Director of Public Works determines the most efficient and usable for the City and the
public. (Ord. 2004-3, 2-17-2004)
10-7-6: RAILROAD STOPS DESIGNATED:
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 10-7-2(C) of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall
stop before crossing the railroad tracks at those highway grade crossings described as follows:
None at this time. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-7-7: YIELD INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED:
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 10-7-2(E) of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall
yield the right-of-way at the entrances to those intersections described as follows:
Arrants Street, High Street and Logan Street, one yield sign, requiring traffic entering High Street from Logan Street traveling south to yield to traffic on
High Street entering to right of traffic island.
Van Horn Street and Nebraska Avenue, one yield sign, requiring traffic on Van Horn (extended) traveling northeast to yield to traffic on Wilson Street
traveling northwest. (Ord. 638, 1-15-1968)
Chapter 8
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
10-8-1: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
10-8-2: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
No driver of a vehicle or motorman of a streetcar shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the
vehicles in the processions are conspicuously so designated.
10-8-3: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle
upon any roadway. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
10-8-4: RIDING OR DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently
constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further,
that said sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches (2") thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the City
Traffic Engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
10-8-5: NEW PAVEMENT; DRIVING ON:
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a
barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across the pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any
portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 264/436
10-8-6: RECKLESS DRIVING ON VACANT LOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate an automobile in or upon any vacant lots, school grounds, church grounds or any other place,
except public highways, in the City in such a way, and manner as to indicate a wanton or wilful disregard for the safety of persons or property, or in
such a way as to endanger the person or property of another. (Ord. 322, 2-20-39)
10-8-7: OFF HIGHWAY USE OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR BIKES:
It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate any motorcycle or motor bike of any kind on any private property or unoccupied public property within
one-quarter () of a mile of any school, hospital, convalescent home or residential area as herein defined except upon a regularly established private
road, driveway or parking lot appurtenant to a structure on that property. A residential area within the meaning of this Section means any area onequarter
() mile in depth abutting a public or private road and one-quarter () mile in length measured along such road and which contains any
apartment house, condominium, multiple unit dwelling structure or four (4) or more residences of any kind or combination. This Section shall not apply
to lands within a National forest or to property specifically devoted to a raceway, hill climb, motorcycle trail or similar use pursuant to a permit therefor
issued by a governmental agency. (Ord. 725, 1-20-75)
Chapter 9
PEDESTRIANS
10-9-1: CROSSWALKS ESTABLISHED:
(A) The Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway as follows:
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at intersections within the central district and at such intersections outside the district, and at other
places within or outside the district where the Traffic Engineer, determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway
subject to the limitation contained in subsection (B) of this Section.
(B) Other than crosswalks at intersections no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet (400') in length.
Elsewhere not more than one additional crosswalk shall be established in any one block and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as
practicable at midblock. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
(C) The City Traffic Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in
the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
10-9-2: PEDESTRIANS TO USE CROSSWALKS:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district.
10-9-3: CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES:
No pedestrians shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a marked crosswalk.
10-9-4: STANDING IN ROADWAY:
No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This
provision shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty. (Ord. 406, 6-6-
49)
Chapter 10
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10-10-1: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
(A) The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except
when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device.
(B) The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the state Vehicle Code or this code, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 265/436
specified times. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-2: STANDING IN PARKWAYS PROHIBITED:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-3: USE OF STREETS FOR STORAGE OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
(A) No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a
consecutive period of seventy two (72) hours.
(B) In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street or alley in excess of a consecutive period of seventy two (72) hours, any member of
the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove the vehicle from the street or alley in the manner and subject to the
requirements of sections 22651 and 22652 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 738, 12-15-1975)
10-10-4: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
(A) Displaying the vehicle for sale.
(B) Washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-5: SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING:
(A) Whenever any provision of this title or other law of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking shall
be permitted, the traffic engineer shall mark or sign the street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
(B) When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as herein provided, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to
the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings, with the front wheel closest to the curb within six inches (6") to said curb.
(Ord. 746, 5-3-1976)
(C) Angle parking shall be permitted upon those streets and parts of streets described in section 10-10-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-6: ANGLE PARKING DESIGNATED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
In accordance with section 10-10-5 of this chapter, and when signs or markings are in place giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles may stand or park
a vehicle only as indicated by such marks or signs on the following streets or portions thereof:
The southwesterly side of West Front Street from North Street to Second Street;
The northeasterly side of East Front Street from a point one hundred thirty feet (130') south of the centerline of North Street to a point two hundred
twenty feet (220') north of the centerline of Third Street;
Both sides of High Street from North Street to Second Street;
The northwesterly side of Second Street from Tucker Street to East Front Street;
The southeasterly side of Second Street from Tucker Street to East Front Street;
Both sides of First Street from High Street to East Front Street;
The south side of Stillman Street from a point three hundred thirty feet (330') east of the centerline of Olive Street to a point forty feet (40') west of the
centerline of Dockery Avenue;
The west side of Mitchell Street from a point eight hundred ninety feet (890') north of the centerline of Nebraska Avenue to a point one thousand two
hundred forty feet (1,240') north of the centerline of Nebraska Avenue;
The southwesterly side of East Front Street from a point forty seven feet (47') south of the centerline of First Street to a point two hundred twenty one
feet (221') north of the centerline of Second Street;
Both sides of Grant Street from First Street to North Street;
Both sides of Evergreen between Locust and the Mill Ditch alignment;
Both sides of Sylvia Street from First Street to Third Street;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 266/436
Pea Soup Andersen Boulevard between State Highway 43 and Auto Mall Drive;
The north side of Art Gonzales Parkway from a point forty feet (40') north of the centerline of Highland Avenue to a point two hundred seventy four feet
(274') north of the centerline of Highland Avenue;
The southeasterly side of First Street from Bauder Street to Highway 99; and
Both sides of First Street to a point one hundred fifty six feet (156') northeasterly of the centerline of High Street. (Ord. 2009-9, 12-7-2009)
10-10-7: LOADING OR UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB; PERMIT:
The traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of the permit. The permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or
to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to the person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee
or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-8: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
(A) The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when
such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
(B) When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in
any such designated place. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-9: PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS:
(A) The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not
exceed twenty feet (20'), or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty
feet (30').
(B) When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
such street in violation of any sign or marking. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-10: STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED; SIGNS REQUIRED:
The traffic engineer shall appropriately sign or mark the following places and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
in any of the following places:
(A) At any place within twenty feet (20') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone.
(B) At any place within twenty five feet (25') of an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district except that a bus may stop at a
designated bus stop.
(C) Within twenty five feet (25') of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device.
(D) At any place where the traffic engineer determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate unusual traffic hazard. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle on the northeasterly side of Whitson Street from Thompson Avenue
southeasterly to a point of two hundred fifty feet (250') from the easterly line of Thompson Avenue. (Ord. 619, 9-6-66)
(F) At any place on the northwesterly side of Second Street between the north bound on-ramp and the south bound off-ramp of Freeway 99; and, at
any place on the southeasterly side of Second Street between the south bound on-ramp and the north bound off-ramp of Freeway 99. (Ord. 691, 2-
16-71, eff. 3-16-71)
(G) On both sides of Floral Avenue between Whitson and Highland Avenue. (Ord. 814, 6-2-80)
(H) At any place on the north and south sides of Huntsman Avenue between Thompson Avenue and Wright Street, which shall also be a tow away
zone. (Ord. 820, 12-15-80)
(I) On the north side of Floral Avenue between the centerline of the south bound off ramp of Freeway 99 and the City limit line westerly thereof. (Ord.
826, 6-1-81)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 267/436
(J) On the north side of Rose Avenue between Olive and Orange Avenues. (Ord. 850, 1-3-83)
10-10-11: UNLAWFUL PARKING; PEDDLERS, VENDORS:
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this Section no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise,
fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited, offered for sale, bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon, eating car or vehicle, on
any portion of any street within the City, except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide
purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons
delivering articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.
(B) No person shall park or stand on any street, any lunch wagon, eating cart, vehicle or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy or
other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Council which shall designate the specific
location in which the cart shall stand.
(C) No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while
awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Council which shall designate the specific
location where the vehicle may stand.
(D) Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this Section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall
park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as designated in the permit. In the event that the holder of any such
permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this Section, the permit shall be forthwith revoked by
the Council upon the filing of the record of the conviction with the Council, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to the person until six (6)
months have elapsed from the date of the revocation.
10-10-12: EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS:
(A) Whenever the Traffic Engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the Traffic Engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be
erected or posted indicating that operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the Traffic Engineer shall
direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. The signs shall remain in place only during the existence of the emergency and the Traffic
Engineer shall cause the signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
(B) When signs authorized by the provisions of this Section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the directions and provisions of the signs. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-13: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH LOADING ZONES:
(A) The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
1. At any place in the central traffic district or any business district.
2. Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
(B) In no event shall more than one-half (1/2) of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
(C) Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line stenciled with black letters, "Loading Only", upon the top of all curbs within the zones.
(D) Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line stenciled with black letters, "Passenger Loading Only", upon the top of all curbs in the
zones. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-14: CURB MARKINGS INDICATING NO PARKING:
(A) The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this Title to place, and when required herein shall place, the
following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:
1. Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red
zone marked or signed as a bus zone.
2. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except
Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of
passengers shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes.
3. White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three
(3) minutes and such restrictions shall apply between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sundays and
holidays and except as follows: (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 268/436
(a) When the zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times. (Ord. 746, 5-3-1976)
(b) When the zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when the theater is closed. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
4. Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than the time posted by an adjacent sign, at any time, according to the directive of the
Director of Public Works. (Ord. 97-7, 10-20-1997)
(B) When the Traffic Engineer, as authorized under this Title, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-15: EFFECT OF PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD:
(A) Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and
shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes.
(B) The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages
and United States mail.
(C) Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal
baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.
(D) Within the total time limits herein specified, the provisions of this Section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable
loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-16: STANDING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for
such time as is permitted in Section 10-10-15 of this Chapter. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-17: STANDING IN PASSENGER LOADING ZONE:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for
such time as is specified in Section 10-10-15 of this Chapter. (Ord. 406, 6-6-1949)
10-10-18: STANDING IN ALLEY:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Ord. 406, 6-6-
1949)
10-10-19: BUS ZONES TO BE ESTABLISHED:
(A) The City Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of
passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth herein.
(B) The word "Bus" as used in this Section shall mean any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley coach, or passenger stage used as a common
carrier of passengers.
(C) No bus zone shall exceed eighty feet (80') in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the Traffic Engineer showing
the necessity therefor, the Traffic Engineer may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of one hundred twenty five feet (125').
(D) Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection.
(E) The Traffic Engineer shall paint a red line stencil with white letters "No Standing", together with the words "Bus Zone" upon the top or side of all
curbs and places specified as a bus zone.
(F) No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
10-10-20: SIGNS DESIGNATING LIMITED PARKING REQUIRED:
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any of the streets or City parking lots
enumerated as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 269/436
(A) In Section 10-10-21 and 10-10-22 hereof for a period of time longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day, except Sunday and holidays. (Ord. 580, 12-2-63)
10-10-21: PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN ENUMERATED STREETS:
In accordance with Section 10-10-20, parking is limited to two (2) hours between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of
any day, except Sundays and holidays, upon any of the following enumerated streets: (Ord. 842, 6-7-82)
Both sides of High Street between Arrants Street and Second Street. (Ord. 889, 9-15-86)
The southwesterly side of Mill Street between Second Street and Selma Street.
The southwesterly side of Tucker Street from Second Street to a point two hundred thirty nine feet (239') southeasterly of the center line of Second
Street.
The northeasterly side of East Front Street from North Street to Third Street.
The southwesterly side of East Front Street from the center line of First Street north for a distance of two hundred seventy four feet (274').
The westerly side of Second Street between High Street and East Front Street.
The easterly side of Second Street between Mill Street and East Front Street.
Both sides of First Street between Grant Street and East Front Street.
The west side of Wright Street and from Barbara Street for a distance of two hundred eighty five feet (285').
The west side of McCall Avenue from High Street north to the first alley. (Ord. 842, 6-7-82; amd. Ord. 898, 2-1-88)
Both sides of Arrants Street between Grant Street and McCall Avenue.
Both sides of Grant Street between North and Arrants Streets.
Both sides of Lee Street between Arrants Street and the first alley north of Arrants Street. (Ord. 870, 7-16-84)
Both sides of North Street between High and Grant Streets. (Ord. 884, 4-7-86)
The north side of Arrants Street between Lee and Wright Streets.
The south side of Arrants Street between Wright Street and a point approximately eighty feet (80') west of Grant Street. (Ord. 889, 9-15-86)
The southerly side of East Front Street between First Street and Second Street. (Ord. 901, 6-6-88)
10-10-22: PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN CITY PARKING LOTS:
Parking is limited to two (2) hours between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sundays and holidays
upon any of the following enumerated City parking lots:
(A) The north one-half (1/2) of the City parking lot located on the southeast corner of High and First Streets.
(B) The north first row of parking stalls (ten [10] stalls) on the City parking lot located on the southeast corner of First Street and East Front Street.
(Ord. 842, 6-7-82)
10-10-23: ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street in the central traffic district for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the
hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day. This section shall not apply to the vehicle of any regularly licensed physician
when actually engaged in making professional calls. (Ord. 746, 5-3-1976)
10-10-23.1: PARKING IN PARKS AND OTHER RECREATIONAL AREAS:
No person shall drive or park a vehicle in a public park or recreation area, except by special permit issued by the police department. Authorized signs
shall be posted at all entrances to parks or recreation areas giving notice of this section. (Ord. 694, 7-3-1972, eff. 8-4-1972)
10-10-24: PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN ENUMERATED STREETS:
No stopping, standing or parking shall be permitted on the following streets between ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 270/436
Olive Avenue, both sides between Rose and Stillman Avenues.
Stillman Street, south side only between Orange and Dockery Avenues. (Ord. 850, 1-3-1983)
10-10-25: APPROVAL OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
(A) Any provision of this title which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the
department of public works is required by state law, shall cease to be operative six (6) months after receipt of the council of written notice of
withdrawal of approval of the department of public works.
(B) Whenever this title delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which
by state law requires the prior approval of the department of public works, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the
council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval in writing of the department of public works when and to the extent
required by division 9 and division 11 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 580, 12-2-1963)
10-10-26: RESTRICTIONS ON PARKING OF TRUCKS AND TRUCK TRACTORS AND/OR TRAILERS:
No person shall park a truck or truck tractor and/or trailer having a gross minimum weight in excess of five (5) tons on the side of any street or alley
where the immediately adjacent private property has other than commercial, manufacturing, or both types of usage, except, however, for the purpose
of loading or unloading of merchandise or materials. No person shall park such truck or truck tractor and/or trailer between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day on the side of any street or alley whose immediately adjacent private property has commercial,
manufacturing, or both types of usage. This section shall not apply to any utility vehicle exempt under section 22512 of the Vehicle Code of the state.
(Ord. 2005-10, 11-7-2005)
10-10-27: EXCEPTIONS TO RESTRICTIONS:
The restrictions set forth in section 10-10-26 of this chapter shall not apply to the parking of trucks with gross weight in excess of five (5) tons where
such parking is one hundred feet (100') back from the following intersections:
The west side of East Front Street from Center Street to Nebraska Avenue.
Both sides of West Front Street from Third Street to Golden State Boulevard.
Both sides of Park Street from Golden State Boulevard to McCall Avenue.
Both sides of Todd Street from Golden State Boulevard to McCall Avenue.
Signs to this effect shall be posted, as appropriate. (Ord. 2005-10, 11-7-2005)
10-10-28: PARKING SPACE MARKINGS:
The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized
parking is permitted. When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall
be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 746,
5-3-1976)
10-10-29: UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS:
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of
numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. (Ord. 746,
5-3-1976)
10-10-30: TRUCK-TRAILER PARKING PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2005-10, 11-7-2005)
10-10-31: PARKING PROHIBITED IN DESIGNATED FIRE LANES:
All private access roadways for fire apparatus and other emergency vehicles shall not be obstructed in any manner. "NO PARKING" signs not less
than seventeen inches by twenty two inches (17" x 22") in size shall be posted and maintained by the property owner as required by the fire chief.
Curbing adjacent to such access roadways shall be painted as required by the fire chief. The owner or person in lawful possession of the property over
which the private access roadway for fire apparatus and other emergency vehicles exists shall cause the removal of a vehicle parked on such property
in violation of this section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 271/436
(A) The "NO PARKING" signs required by this section shall contain the words "NO PARKING" in letters not less than four inches (4") in height. Each
sign shall also contain in capital letters at least three inches (3") high the words "TOW AWAY". Each sign shall contain the words "SELMA POLICE
DEPARTMENT" in capital letters at least one inch (1") in height and the telephone number of that department in numerals at least one inch (1") in
height. Each sign shall bear the name of the owner or person in lawful possession of the property at the time of any removal of any vehicle and
who has authorized the removal of any vehicle from such private property. Such name shall be in capital letters one inch (1") high.
(B) No person shall open, move, tow or take possession of any vehicle on private property or attach any towing equipment thereto or take possession
of any personal property contained therein or attached thereto, unless and until he shall have given notice to the police department of his intention
so to do in such manner as may be specified by the chief of police. Any person causing removal of vehicles in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall also comply with the provisions of California Vehicle Code section 22658 and any amendments thereto. (Ord. 815, 12-15-1980)
10-10-32: HANDICAPPED AND SMALL CAR PARKING STALLS IN CITY OWNED OFF STREET PARKING LOTS:
(A) No person shall park a vehicle in a parking stall that is designated, signed, and marked for handicapped parking, in a city parking lot, unless such
person is handicapped and carries proper identification in the vehicle as provided by the state.
(B) No person shall park a vehicle other than a small car in a parking stall that is designated, signed, and marked for small car parking in a city parking
lot. (Ord. 819, 10-6-1980)
Chapter 11
RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS
10-11-1: CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT:
(A) No person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the central traffic district between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. of any day:
1. Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half feet (8') in width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends
more than twenty feet (20') to the front or rear of the vehicle.
2. Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the central traffic district.
3. Any freight vehicle with a trailer.
4. Any vehicle conveying refuse, rubbish, garbage or dirt.
5. Any vehicle carrying crude or fuel oil.
(B) Provided that the Chief of Police may by written permit authorize the operation of any such vehicle for the purpose of making necessary
emergency deliveries to or from points within the central district.
10-11-2: VEHICLES USED FOR ADVERTISING PURPOSES:
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound amplifying or loud
speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the central traffic district. (Ord. 406, 6-6-49)
10-11-3: TRUCK ROUTES:
(A) Whenever any provision of this Title designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four (4) tons, the Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to designate the street by appropriate signs as
"Truck Traffic Routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four (4) tons. (Ord. 702, 7-2-73, Eff. 8-1-73)
(B) When any such truck routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight
limit of four (4) tons shall drive on such routes and none other except when necessary to traverse another street to a destination for the purpose of
loading or unloading, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably necessary and providing further that there shall
be no truck loading of agricultural products on City streets. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction
of the Public Utilities Commission or any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any
public utility. (Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
(C) Those streets and parts of streets described as follows are hereby declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a
maximum gross weight of four (4) tons:
First Street from Whitson Street to McCall Avenue;
McCall Avenue from Floral Avenue to the northerly City limits;
Second Street from Nebraska Avenue to Whitson Street;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 272/436
McCall Avenue from Whitson Street to the southerly City limits;
Rose Avenue from McCall Avenue to the easterly City limits;
Floral Avenue from West Front Street to Dockery Avenue;
West Front Street from the northerly City limits to the southerly City limits;
Whitson Street from the northerly City limits to the southerly City limits. (Ord. 702, 7-2-73, Eff. 8-1-73)
Chandler Street from Arrants Street to Thompson Avenue.
Arrants Street from West Front Street to Chandler Street.
Thompson Avenue from Chandler Street to Floral Avenue. (Ord. 761, 11-1-76)
10-11-4: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM USING CERTAIN STREETS:
(Rep. by Ord. 746, 5-3-76)
Chapter 12
BICYCLES
10-12-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the City any bicycle propelled wholly or in part
by muscular power, without first obtaining from the Chief of Police a license therefor. (Ord. 443, 5-19-52)
10-12-2: APPLICATION; ISSUANCE:
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, bicycle licenses for a three (3) year period from the date of
issue, beginning on the first day of January of the issuing year. The licenses when issued shall entitle the licensee to operate the bicycle for which the
license has been issued upon all the streets, alleys and public highways, exclusive of sidewalks, thereof, in the City.
10-12-3: LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION CARDS:
The City shall issue, through the Chief of Police, uniform license plates and tags, together with registration cards. It shall be the duty of the Chief of
Police to keep a record of the license number, the serial number of the bicycle, the make, type and model of the bicycle, and the name and address of
the licensee. (Ord. 726, 1-20-75)
10-12-4: SECONDHAND BICYCLE DEALERS:
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make daily reports to the Chief of Police, giving the name
and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame thereof, and the number of the
metallic license plate found thereon, if any. All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make a
daily report to the Chief of Police, giving a list of all sales made by the dealers, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom
sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and the frame number thereof, and the number of the metallic license plate attached thereto,
if any.
10-12-5: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report the sale or transfer by returning to the Chief of Police the
registration card issued to the person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or
transferred, and such report shall be made within five (5) days of the date of the sale or transfer.
It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of the bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor within five (5) days of the sale or transfer.
10-12-6: DESTRUCTION OF BICYCLE NUMBER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this
Chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or time alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time in
which the license plate, seal or registration card is operative; provided, however, nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting the Chief
of Police from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient
for identification purposes. (Ord. 494; 2-18-57)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 273/436
10-12-7: LICENSE FEE:
The fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) for each three (3) year period, and shall be paid in advance. Pursuant to
Section 10-12-5 of this Chapter the license may be transferred when the ownership of the bicycle is transferred, and a fee of twenty five cents (25)
shall be paid for the registration of the transfer. A fee of fifty cents (50) shall be paid for a duplicate registration card or license plate at the time of
filing application for the same. All fees collected under this Chapter shall be paid into the office of the Clerk and by the Clerk deposited in the General
Fund of the City. (Ord. 726; 1-20-75)
10-12-8: OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE; PENALTY:
Whenever any bicycle is operated upon any street, alley or highway within the City without the registration fee having first been paid as required by
this Chapter such fee shall be delinquent.
(A) A penalty shall be added upon any application of annual renewal of registration made on or after February 15 of any year unless the bicycle has
not been operated on the highways, streets or alleys, since the expiration date. (Ord. 494; 2-18-57)
(B) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (A) of this Section, if any fee is not paid within thirty (30) days after the same becomes delinquent a
penalty shall be added thereto.
(C) In every event the penalty shall be equal to the fee and shall be collected therewith. (Ord. 443; 5-19-52)
10-12-9: RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION:
A penalty shall be added upon any application of annual renewal of registration made on or after July 1 of each year unless the bicycle has not been
operated on the highways, streets or alleys, since the expiration date. (Ord. 494; 2-18-57)
10-12-10: DELINQUENT FEES; LIEN:
Every registration or transfer fee and any penalty added thereto, from the date the same became due, shall constitute a lien upon the bicycle for which
due.
(A) The Chief of Police shall collect the fee and penalty by seizure of the bicycle for which the same is due from the person in possession thereof, if
any, and by the sale of the bicycle, such sale to be conducted and carried out by the Chief of Police in the same manner as is provided by law for
the seizure and sale of personal property by the Assessor for the collection of taxes due on personal property.
(B) Every lien and every cause of action for any delinquent fee or penalty under this Chapter shall expire at the expiration of one (1) year from the date
any such fee became due.
(C) No fee when paid and receipted shall be returnable. (Ord. 443; 5-19-52)
10-12-11: SIDEWALK RIDING PROHIBITED:
When signs are posted in the area, it shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon any public sidewalk in the Central Business District. The
Central Business District is hereby designated as that area bounded as follows:
"Commencing at the intersection of McCall and Arrants Streets, thence Southeasterly to North Street; thence Southwesterly to Sylvia Street; thence
Southeasterly to McCall; thence North to Whitson Street; thence Southeasterly to W. Front Street; thence Northwesterly to the Southeasterly line of
Orange Avenue projected Southwesterly; thence Northeasterly to Mill Street; thence Northwesterly to McCall Street; thence North to Arrants Street,
the point of beginning. Both sides of all streets mentioned are intended to be included within said Central Business District." (Ord. 641; 2-5-68)
Chapter 13
ABANDONED; WRECKED VEHICLES
10-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
VEHICLE: The term "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
HIGHWAY: The term "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the purposes of
vehicular travel. Highway includes street.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 274/436
PUBLIC PROPERTY: The term "Public Property" does not include "highway". (Ord. 639; 2-5-68; Eff. 4-1-68)
OWNER OF THE LAND: The term "Owner of the Land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on
the last equalized assessment roll.
OWNER OF THE VEHICLE: The term "Owner of the Vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.
10-13-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to:
(A) A vehicle or parts thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property; or
(B) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
(C) Nothing in this Section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this Chapter. (Ord. 686; 8-2-71; Eff. 9-1-71)
10-13-3: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATION:
This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in
addition to the other regulatory Codes, Statutes, and Ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or
agency having jurisdiction.
10-13-4: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police. In the enforcement of
this Chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to
the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter.
10-13-5: CONTRACT OR FRANCHISE REMOVAL ALLOWED:
When the Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon
private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter.
10-13-6: COSTS:
The Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any
vehicle or part thereof) under this Chapter. (Ord. 639; 2-5-68; Eff. 4-1-68)
10-13-7: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE VEHICLE:
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property
within the City, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed
herein.
10-13-8: NOTICE TO BE GIVEN:
A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the
owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine
ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS
THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and Address of owner of the land)
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to
(Section of Municipal Code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle
registered to , license number , which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (Municipal Code Chapter number).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 275/436
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of
this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs,
assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such ten (10) day
period, the (locally designated officer) shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and
assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten (10) day period denying
responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statements shall be
construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of
the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.
Notice Mailed __________________ s/_____________________________
(date) (locally designated officer)
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS
THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle -- notice should be given to both if different)
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle-make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned
pursuant to (Section of Municipal Code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (Municipal Code
Chapter number).
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of
this notice.
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after
the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such ten (10)
day period, the (locally designated officer) shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.
Notice Mailed __________________ s/_____________________________
(date) (locally designated officer)
10-13-9: PUBLIC HEARING:
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the Chief of Police within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of
intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the (hearing body or officer) on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle
or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal
of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten (10) day
period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by
registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such
condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten (10) days
after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a
public nuisance without holding a public hearing.
10-13-10: HEARING OFFICER:
All hearings under this Ordinance shall be held before the Chief of Police who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Said facts and
testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private
property or public property. The Chief of Police shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at
the hearing, or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the
land, with his reasons for such denial.
The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose
of this Chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the
public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or
public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the
administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the
vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which
the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if
an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision.
10-13-11: APPEAL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 276/436
Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the said hearing officer within five (5) days
after its decision.
Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.
The Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 8.
In conducting the hearing the City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.
10-13-12: DISPOSAL:
Five (5) days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five (5) days from the date of mailing of notice of
the decision if such notice is required by Section 10, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal,
the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall
not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
10-13-13: NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration
available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates.
10-13-14: COLLECTION OF COSTS:
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10 are not paid within
thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land
pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same
priority as other City taxes.
10-13-15: MISDEMEANOR TO ABANDON:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any
licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or
public property not including highways within the City for a period in excess of ten (10) days unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or
parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard.
10-13-16: MISDEMEANOR TO FAIL TO REMOVE VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part
thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this Chapter or State law where such
State law is applicable. (Ord. 686; 8-2-71; Eff. 9-1-71)
Chapter 14
SPEED
10-14-1: SPEED LIMIT:
It is hereby determined upon the basis of a traffic survey conducted during May 2017, that the following speed limits will facilitate the orderly
movement of vehicular traffic and are reasonable and safe and are declared the prima facie speed limits and shall be effective when appropriate signs
giving notice thereof are erected upon the street(s). (Ord. 2017-3, 9-18-2017)
10-14-1A: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT DECLARED FIFTEEN MILES PER HOUR:
(Rep. by Ord. 93-10, 12-6-1993)
10-14-2: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT DECLARED TWENTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR:
Barbara Street from Jasper Street to Mitchell Avenue
Dockery Avenue from north end of Maple Street to Floral Avenue
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 277/436
Evergreen Street from Country Club Lane to Dockery Avenue
E. Front Street from Arrants Street to Third Street
W. Front Street from North Street to McCall Avenue
Huntsman Avenue from Wright Street to Thompson Avenue
McCall Avenue from Arrants Street to High Street
McCall Avenue from W. Front Street to Whitson Street
Nebraska Avenue from end west of Young Street to McCall Avenue
Nebraska Avenue from Second Street to Sheridan Street
Orange Avenue from Mill Street to Rose Avenue
Second Street from McCall Avenue to Whitson Street
Sheridan Avenue from Nebraska Avenue to Valley View Street
Stillman Street from Chandler Street to McCall Avenue
Stillman Street from Dockery Avenue to McCall Avenue
Third Street from end northeast of Bauder Street to Nebraska Avenue
Third Street from end southwest of Young Street to Mill Street
Thompson Avenue from Arrants Street to Whitson Street
All other local streets in residential and business districts in the City not included in this section. (Ord. 822, 2-17-1981; amd. Ord. 888, 8-4-1986; Ord.
927, 3-19-1990; Ord. 93-10, 12-6-1993)
10-14-3: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT DECLARED THIRTY MILES PER HOUR:
Barbara Street from Mulberry Street to Wright Street
Dockery Avenue from Nebraska Avenue to Rose Avenue
Evergreen Street from Dockery Avenue to Orange Avenue
Floral Avenue from west city limits to Whitson Street
E. Front Street from Nebraska Avenue to Third Street
W. Front Street from McCall Avenue to Whitson Street
McCall Avenue from Arrants Street to Floral Avenue
Mill Street from Dockery Avenue to Second Street
Mitchell Avenue from Blaine Street to Nebraska Avenue
Mitchell Avenue from Nebraska Avenue to Pine Street
Mitchell Avenue from city limit south of Nebraska Avenue to Nebraska Avenue
Nebraska Avenue from Second Street to 160 feet west of Thompson Avenue
Orange Avenue from Floral Avenue to Rose Avenue
Second Street from Nebraska Avenue to Whitson Street
Sylvia Street from Second Street to Thompson Street
Thompson Avenue from Floral Avenue to Whitson Street
Thompson Avenue from Valley View Street to Nebraska Avenue
Wright Street from Arrants Street to north city limits
Young Street from Nebraska Avenue to Thompson Avenue (Ord. 822, 2-17-1981; amd. Ord. 888, 8-4-1986; Ord. 927, 3-19-1990; Ord. 93-10, 12-6-
1993)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 278/436
10-14-4: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT DECLARED THIRTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR:
Chandler Street from Arrants Street to Thompson Avenue
Dockery Avenue from Floral Avenue to Rose Avenue
Highland Avenue from city limit north of Golden State Boulevard to Golden State Boulevard
Highland Avenue from Floral Avenue to Whitson Street
McCall Avenue from city limit south of Blaine Avenue to Whitson Street
Nebraska Avenue from city limit east of East Front Street to East Front Street
Nebraska Avenue from Thompson Avenue to west city limits
Orange Avenue from city limit north of Barbara Street to Floral Avenue
Rose Avenue from city limit east of Country Club Lane to McCall Avenue
Rose Avenue from Thompson Avenue to Highland Avenue (Ord. 822, 2-17-1981; amd. Ord. 888, 8-4-1986; Ord. 927, 3-19-1990; Ord. 93-10, 12-6-
1993)
10-14-5: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT DECLARED FORTY MILES PER HOUR:
Highland Avenue from Stillman Street to Floral Avenue
McCall Avenue from Dinuba Avenue to Floral Avenue
Thompson Avenue from Dinuba Avenue to Floral Avenue
West Front Street from North Street to Whitson Street
Whitson Street from Highland Avenue on the north to Todd Street on the south (Ord. 822, 2-17-1981; amd. Ord. 888, 8-4-1986; Ord. 927, 3-19-1990;
Ord. 93-10, 12-6-1993)
10-14-6: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT DECLARED FORTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR:
Dinuba Avenue from city limit east of McCall Avenue to McCall Avenue
Dinuba Avenue from city limit at Thompson Avenue to 1,320 feet east of Thompson Avenue (Ord. 822, 2-17-1981; amd. Ord. 888, 8-4-1986)
10-14-7: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT DECLARED FIFTY MILES PER HOUR:
Golden State Boulevard from Todd Street to the south city limit (Ord. 927, 3-19-1990)
10-14-8: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMIT DECLARED FIFTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR:
Golden State Boulevard from the north city limit to Highland Avenue (Ord. 927, 3-19-1990)
Chapter 15
SKATEBOARDS1
(Rep. by Ord. 2006-3, 3-20-2006)
Chapter 16
FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
10-16-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to invoke the power conferred to local agencies by section 21100(e) of the California Vehicle Code which authorizes
the appointment of persons other than traffic officers to direct traffic in such prescribed situations and locations as may require traffic direction for
orderly traffic flow.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 279/436
10-16-2: RULES GOVERNING FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
(A) Each vehicle participating in a funeral procession shall be operated with its headlights and, if so equipped, its emergency flashers turned on.
(B) No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession, provided that the vehicles comprising such
procession are conspicuously so designated by having their headlights and, if so equipped, emergency flashers turned on.
(C) The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to rules and
regulations promulgated by the Police Department.
10-16-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall stop traffic at intersections or otherwise lead or escort a vehicular funeral procession without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this
Chapter.
10-16-4: AUTHORIZED TRAFFIC DIRECTION:
(A) Any person issued a valid funeral escort permit pursuant to this Chapter and leading or escorting a vehicular funeral procession shall obey all
traffic laws, including all speed laws, except that such person is authorized to stop cross-traffic, to enable all vehicles in the funeral procession to
proceed together as an unbroken chain, at intersections controlled by:
1. Stop signs, providing that the permittee remains in the intersection until all funeral procession vehicles have cleared the intersection.
2. Signal lights, providing that the lead vehicle in the procession enters the intersection with a green light and the permittee remains in the
intersection at all times when the procession is proceeding through the intersection.
(B) A permittee is authorized to direct traffic in the manner specified in this Section only when using a vehicle conspicuously designated "Funeral
Escort", wearing an official insignia issued by the Police Chief, and carrying a valid permit issued to him or her as an individual pursuant to this
Chapter. No permittee shall wear a uniform similar to that of a Selma Police Officer.
(C) The City Clerk/Finance Director may order the revocation of a funeral escort permit, in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 10-16-
10, if the permittee has directed traffic in a manner contrary to that specified in this Section.
10-16-5: PERMIT PROCEDURE:
Applications for a funeral escort permit shall be filed with the City Clerk/Finance Director and shall contain the following:
(A) Name and address of applicant.
(B) Proof of insurance in compliance with Section 10-16-9.
(C) Proof of satisfactory completion of a traffic safety program of instruction, as described in Section 10-16-11.
(D) Proof that the applicant holds a valid California vehicle operator's license, properly endorsed for the type of vehicle the applicant intends to use
while directing vehicular funeral processions.
(E) Permit and insignia fees, as established by resolution of the Council.
(F) Such other information as may be required by the Police Chief or City Clerk/Finance Director.
10-16-6: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Permits authorized by this Chapter may be denied by the City Clerk/Finance Director upon original or renewal application upon the following grounds:
(A) The application is incomplete; or
(B) Applicant has been convicted of a crime, and the time for appeal has elapsed, or when an order granting probation is made suspending the
imposition of sentence, irrespective of the entry of a subsequent order under California Penal Code section 1203.4; provided, however, that the
permit may be denied upon this ground only if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties associated with leading or
otherwise escorting a vehicular funeral procession.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 280/436
10-16-7: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Funeral escort permits shall be issued by the City Clerk/Finance Director and shall expire on September 30 of the calendar year following the date of
issuance unless sooner revoked. Permits shall not be transferable.
10-16-8: INDEMNITY AND HOLD HARMLESS:
The funeral escort permittee and his or her funeral escort service employer, if any, shall assume all responsibility for his or her activity and operation,
shall bear all losses and damages directly or indirectly resulting to him or her, any subcontractor, the City or City employees that are the result of the
performance or character of the operation, unforeseen difficulties, accidents, occurrences or other causes not predicated on negligence of the City.
The permittee or his or her funeral escort service employer shall assume the defense of and indemnify and save harmless the City and its officers and
employees from all claims, loss, damage, injury, and liability of every kind, nature and description, including punitive damages, directly or indirectly
arising from the escorting of a vehicular funeral procession.
10-16-9: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
During the term of a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, the permittee or his or her funeral escort service shall maintain in full force and effect at
the permittee's or his or her employer's own cost a comprehensive auto and general liability insurance policy in an amount no less than three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) single limit per occurrence, and the funeral home engaging the escort service shall maintain in full force and effect
such a policy in an amount no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) single limit per occurrence, which policies shall:
(A) Be issued by an admitted insurer or insurers as defined by the California Insurance Code.
(B) Cover all losses and damages as specified in Section 10-16-8 of this Chapter.
(C) Stipulate that the policy will operate as primary insurance and that no other insurance effected by the City or other named insured will be called on
to contribute to a loss covered thereunder.
(D) Provide that no cancellation, change in coverage, or expiration by the insurance company or the insured shall occur during the term of the funeral
escort service permit, without thirty (30) days' written notice to the City prior to the effective date of such cancellation or change in coverage.
In the event of failure of any permittee or his or her funeral escort employer to maintain in effect such insurance policy or in the event such permittee
escorts a funeral procession for a funeral home which does not have in effect a policy of insurance as required herein, the City Clerk/Finance Director
shall order the cancellation of his or her permit as provided in this Section and Section 10-16-10.
10-16-10: PROCEDURE FOR PERMIT DENIAL AND REVOCATION:
(A) The City Clerk/Finance Director may revoke, refuse to issue, or refuse to renew a funeral escort service permit only after a hearing granted upon
three (3) days' written notice to the permittee. Such notice shall specify the specific ground for the proposed action. At the hearing, to be held by
the City Clerk/Finance Director or his designee, the permittee shall be given the opportunity to present witnesses and documentary evidence, to be
represented by counsel and to examine all witnesses presented. Issuance of a written notice of cancellation by an insurance company shall be
conclusive proof at the hearing of the effective cancellation of an insurance policy. A decision of the City Clerk/Finance Director revoking or denying
the permit shall be effective upon the effective date of the cancellation of said insurance or the date when the written decision is signed by the City
Clerk/Finance Director, whichever is earlier. The taking or pendency of an appeal under subsection (B) of this Section shall not stay the
effectiveness of such decision.
(B) If the permittee is dissatisfied with the decision of the City Clerk/Finance Director in ordering the revocation or denial of the permit, such person
may appeal to the City Administrator by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the City Administrator within fifteen (15) days of the date of the order
of the City Clerk/Finance Director. The City Administrator or his designee shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal. The permittee shall be accorded the same hearing rights provided in subsection (A) hereof. The City Administrator may sustain, reverse or
modify the order of the City Clerk/Finance Director. The decision of the City Administrator shall be final.
10-16-11: TRAFFIC SAFETY INSTRUCTION PROGRAM:
Each applicant for a funeral escort permit shall submit to the Police Chief or his designee evidence of the curriculum, including instruction of materials
and skills taught and practiced, of an instructional program of traffic safety which the applicant has satisfactorily completed. The Police Chief or his
designee shall review and approve each submitted instructional program if the Police Chief or his designee reasonably believes that the program
provided the applicant sufficient training to direct traffic as specified in Section 10-16-4 in a safe and lawful manner.
10-16-12: OFFICIAL INSIGNIA:
The Police Chief shall approve an official insignia which must be worn by all permittees while directing traffic in the manner specified in Section 10-16-
4. (Ord. 918, 7-3-89)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 281/436
Title 11
ZONING
Chapter 1
ZONING
11-1-1: ZONING DEFINITIONS; PURPOSE:
Whenever the following words and terms are used in this title they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them unless the content makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building or structure, which is subordinate to and the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building
structure or use on the same lot. If an accessory building is attached to the main building by a common wall, or a connecting roof, such accessory
building shall be deemed to be a part of the main building.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A residential dwelling unit - either attached to the primary unit or a detached structure - that provides complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons on the same parcel as a legal detached single unit. An accessory dwelling unit shall include
permanent provisions that include, but are not limited to, living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. An accessory dwelling unit includes an
efficiency unit as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 17958.1 and a manufactured home as defined in California Health and Safety
Code section 18007.
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS: Living or sleeping quarters within an accessory building for the sole use of occupants of the premises, guests of
such occupants, or persons employed on the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities, and shall not be rented.
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily and normally incidental to, subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to the main use of the premises.
ALLEY: A public or private way permanently dedicated or reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ANIMATED SIGNS: Any sign which through motion, flashing lights or changes in color or intensity moves or gives the impression of movement.
Animated signs also include wind activated spinners, propellers, vanes and similar devices.
APARTMENT: See definition of dwelling unit.
APARTMENT HOTEL: A building containing both individual guestrooms and suites, such as in hotels, and dwelling units.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of dwelling, multiple.
AUTO OR AUTOMOBILE: Includes passenger cars, SUVs, vans, trucks (all sizes), and commercial buses, new or used, retail or wholesale, with or
without motive power, unless otherwise specifically provided herein.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles or trailers, and/or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked
vehicles or their parts.
BALLOONS: Any inflated device displayed for advertising purposes whether airborne or displayed on the ground.
BARBED WIRE: Any wire having sharp points, barbs at intervals, or twisted wires armed with barbs.
BARBER POLES: A revolving or nonrevolving sign which is mounted on a building vertically and shall not exceed three feet (3') in height and does not
display any colors other than red, white, and blue and which advertises a barbershop.
BLOCK: All property fronting on one side of a street between points where such street is intersected or intercepted by streets, railroad rights of way, or
city boundary or terminated by a dead end. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of the street from which it
so intercepts.
BOARD: The board of zoning adjustment.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building where lodging and meals are provided for compensation for five (5) but not more than fifteen (15) persons, not
including rest homes.
BUILDING: A permanently located structure having a roof. House trailers, and other vehicles, even though permanently immobilized, shall not be
deemed to be buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the
highest point of the roof.
BUILDING SITE: The ground area of one or more lots, as defined herein, when used in combination for a building or permitted group of buildings,
together with all open spaces as required by this title, and when so combined as a single building site, the common line dividing any two (2) or more
contiguous lots so combined may be exempt from the provisions requiring side yards with respect thereto.
CARPORT: See definition of Garage, Private.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign in which the copy can easily be changed by the changing of placards, tiles or similar means. Electronic reader
boards are not considered changeable copy signs for this title.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 282/436
CHURCH: Includes, but shall not necessarily be confined to, any building, structure or open space where a group of two (2) or more persons, not
immediate members of one family only, regularly gather for purposes of divine worship.
CLUB: An association of persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is
customarily carried on as a business.
COLLOCATION: A condition where two (2) similar uses, processes or devices share a common site and/or are placed on or within a common
structure or construct. The city may, in the city's sole determination, consider an adjoining site as a collocation.
COMMERCIAL COACH: A vehicle with or without motive power designed and equipped for human occupation for industrial, professional or
commercial purposes and shall include travel coach.
COMMISSION: The planning commission.
COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT BUILDING: A building housing electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public utility
communications business with or without personnel.
CONCERTINA WIRE: An entanglement of coiled, usually of barbed or razor wire, that can be compressed into a compact roll for transporting and
extended for use as an obstacle and deterrent to intrusion.
CONVALESCENT HOME: See definition of Rest Home.
CORPORATE FLAG: A flag displaying the emblem or logo commonly associated with a given business entity.
DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign which lists tenants and their location in a multi-tenant complex. A directory sign may include a map.
DRIVE-IN: See definition of Restaurant, Drive-In.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family, and multiple dwellings; but not
including hotels, apartment hotels, boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses, rest homes and nursing homes, childcare nurseries, or
house trailers, even though permanently immobilized.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by, or occupied by, four (4) or more families living independently of
each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by, or occupied by, one family for residential purposes.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by, or occupied by, three (3) families living independently of each other
(triplex).
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by, or occupied by, two (2) families for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT: Two (2) or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment house, or apartment hotel, designed for occupancy by one family, for living or
sleeping purposes, and having only one kitchen.
ELECTRIFIED FENCE: Any fence which is charged by electricity from any source.
ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SIGN: A sign display which has a changeable message which may be changed by electronic processes or by remote control.
ELECTRONIC READER BOARD: An illuminated sign capable of changing its display by changing the intensity or color of individual lights through
electronic means.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION SIGNS: Signs for the strict purpose of identifying a contact person during an emergency.
EMERGENCY SHELTER: Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a
homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than five (5) persons not necessarily
related by blood or marriage, living together in a dwelling unit. Full time domestic servants of any such persons may reside on the same premises, and
shall not be counted with respect to this definition.
FENCE: A structure or barrier intended to prevent intrusion or escape or mark a boundary of property or to enclose a designated area. Such structures
or barriers are commonly constructed of, but not limited to, posts and boards, wire, pickets, rails, ornamental or wrought iron or concrete blocks, bricks
or other combinations of materials.
FENCE, OPEN OR LATTICE TYPE: A fence, fifty percent (50%) or more of the surface of which is open to the passage of air.
FENCE, SCREEN: A fence, ninety percent (90%) or more of the surface of which is closed to the passage of light on a horizontal plane.
FLASHING SIGNS: Any sign which appears to have any form of intermittent illumination including, revolving lighting devices, blinking lights, sequins or
similar devices.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign structure which is not attached to a building or similar structure.
FREEWAY ORIENTED SIGN: A sign which is in close proximity to the freeway with the intent of drawing customers from the freeway and which is
associated with a business which can be expected to earn a large portion of its earnings from transit traffic.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or portion of a main building, designed or used only for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or
operated by occupants of the premises and includes "carport".
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 283/436
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage used for the care, repair or equipping of automobiles, or where such vehicles are kept or
stored for compensation, or for hire or sale.
GRANNY FLAT: A dwelling designed for occupancy by one or two (2) persons, for living or sleeping purposes, and having kitchen facilities. Such units
shall be allowed within Single-Family Zoned Districts for occupancy by relatives of the primary dwelling owner. One relative must be sixty (60) years of
age or older. Such units shall not exceed six hundred forty (640) square feet and must be developed under the conditional use permit procedure.
GROUP HOUSES: Two (2) or more separate buildings, each containing one or more dwelling units.
GUESTHOUSE: See definition of accessory living quarters.
GYMNASIUM: A noncommercial public building or room containing equipment for physical education, exercise or sports.
HEALTH CLUB: A commercial establishment requiring payment for use of space or equipment for physical education, exercise or sports.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS: Ornamental devices placed for the recognition of a particular nationally, culturally or religiously recognized day of
celebration or remembrance and do not contain advertising.
HOTEL: A building in which there are six (6) or more guestrooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation. "Hotel" shall not
be construed to include motel, trailer court, sanatorium, hospital or other institutional building, or jail or other building where persons are housed under
restraint.
INSTITUTION: A use that is public or private and provides some service to the community not normally associated with retail or wholesale trade.
Examples of institutions include, but are not limited to, universities, seminaries, service clubs, rest homes, boy scout camps, zoos and similar uses.
JUNKYARD: An area, yard or building used for storage, sorting or processing scrap metal, scrapped automobiles and machinery and parts, rags,
paper, boxes and scrap lumber, or other salvage materials.
KITCHEN: Any room used or intended or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food.
LIVING AREA: Living area means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit as defined by the Building Code, including basements and attics but
does not include a garage or any accessory structure.
LODGE: An order or society of persons organized for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a
service which is customarily carried on as a business.
LOT: A single parcel of land under a single or undivided ownership, legal or equitable, for which a legal description is filed of record, or the boundaries
of which are shown on a subdivision map or record of survey map filed in the Office of the County Recorder. The term "lot" shall include a part of a lot,
when such part is used as though a separate lot for all of the purposes and under all of the requirements of this title. The term "lot" shall include two
(2) or more abutting lots when combined and used as though a single lot.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty five
degrees (135).
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the bisecting points of the front and the rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot, or a reversed corner lot.
LOT, KEY: The first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot, whether or not separated by an alley.
LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street and in the case of a corner lot, the line separating the
narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore shaped lot, a line
ten feet (10') in length within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front line or a rear lot line.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the street side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which it rears.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear
lot lines.
LOUNGE: A bar, nightclub, tavern, billiard hall, tearoom, cafe or other similar type business or use which is not a liquor store nor restaurant in which
alcoholic beverages are sold or may be consumed.
MAJOR ARTERIAL: Any street designated by the Selma general plan as an arterial, super arterial, or expressway.
MASSAGE: Any method of treating a patron for medical, hygienic, exercise or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, manipulating,
tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the epidermis and/or muscles and/or internal organs. The term massage shall include, but not be limited to,
services provided by masseurs, therapists or practitioners of Swedish, shiatsu, sports, reiki, hydrotherapy, Japanese, reflexology, therapeutic, deep
tissue massages or therapies and any similar treatments.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS: Any establishment, having a fixed place of business, engaging in, conducting, carrying on or permitting the engaging
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 284/436
in, conducting or carrying on of massages, baths, or health treatments involving massages or baths as the principal use, however, it shall not include
services provided by persons licensed by the State to provide medical services, or those facilities which meet the criteria of an accessory massage
establishment as defined in this section.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, ACCESSORY: Any establishment, having a fixed place of business, engaging in, conducting, carrying on or
permitting the engaging in, conducting or carrying on of massages, baths, or health treatments involving massages or baths where areas dedicated for
performing massages do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of a business; and where the providing of massages is a use which is
commonly and customarily found associated with the primary use of the property. For the purposes of this title, a commonly and customarily
associated use shall be massage establishments which are part of a gymnasium, spa, health club, licensed chiropractor or physical therapist's office,
barber or beauty shop, and any other use determined by the Planning Commission to be in compliance with this definition. Accessory massage
establishments shall not be subject to review by the Community Development Department or the Planning Commission, except as necessary to
establish conformity with this definition. Accessory massage establishments shall not include services provided by persons licensed by the State of
California to provide medical services.
MOBILE HOME: A vehicle other than a motor vehicle designed or used for human habitation, equipped with bathroom and kitchen facilities, and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle, but excluding a "dependent mobilehome", a "recreation vehicle", a "trailer coach" or a "travel trailer", as defined by the
State of California Health and Safety Code.
MOBILE HOME ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any awning, portable, demountable or permanent cabana, ramada, storage cabinet,
carport, fence, windbreak or porch established for the use of the occupant of the mobile home.
MOBILE HOME LOT: Any area or tract of land or portion of a mobile home park, travel trailer park, recreational trailer park, temporary trailer park or
tent camp designed or used for the occupancy of one mobile home, travel trailer, camp car or camp party.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area or tract of land where one or more mobile home lots are rented or leased to accommodate mobile homes.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed primarily for use by automobile tourists or transients,
where a majority of such units are open individually and directly to the outside. An establishment shall be considered a motel, in any case, when
required by the Health and Safety Code of the State, to obtain the name and address of guests and a description of their vehicles and its license. The
term "motel" shall include "tourist court", "auto court", and "motor lodge".
MOVABLE SIGNS: Any sign which is not permanently attached to a structure or the ground.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this title, and which does not conform to
the applicable regulations of this title or amendment thereto. A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of any
amendment of this title, and which does not conform to the applicable regulations of such amendment or subsequent amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupies any building or land at the time of the adoption of this title, and which does not conform to
the applicable regulations of this title or amendment thereto. A use which lawfully occupies any building or land at the time of the adoption of any
amendment of this title, and which does not conform to the applicable regulations of such amendment or a subsequent amendment.
NURSING HOME: See definition of rest home.
ON SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign which assists motorists in determining the proper direction or flow of traffic.
OPEN AIR RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, open air.
OUTSIDE RETAIL SALES: A business where the display and sale of items to the public customarily takes place outside. "Outside retail sales"
includes, but is not limited to, nurseries, used car sales, and year round firewood sales.
PASSAGEWAY: A pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the accessory dwelling unit.
PERMANENT WINDOW SIGNS: Permanently painted or attached window signs for the purpose of imparting information on the operations of a
particular business, including hours of operation, credit cards honored, and status of the business.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial or professional establishment specializing in rendering services, and in which the sale of
commodities is only incidental thereto.
PLAYBILL CABINETS: A wall cabinet for the purpose of displaying a sign which advertises a current or future attraction at a theater.
POLITICAL SIGNS: Any sign that is displayed with the purpose of promoting or denouncing a candidate or ballot measure.
PRESCRIPTION PHARMACY: A place for the sale of pharmaceutical and related items that is restricted to drugs, chemicals, and household medical
supplies intended for the use, medication, treatment or prevention of disease in man. Such pharmacy shall only be allowed in the R-O (residential
office) zone or R-3 (multiple-family) zone when on the same property or adjacent to, a medical, dental, or healing arts building or similar complex.
PROJECTING SIGNS: Any sign which extends more than twelve inches (12") from the building to which it is attached.
RAZOR WIRE: Any wire incorporating sharp blades or razors as barbs, whether or not coiled as concertina.
RECREATION AREA, PRIVATE NONPROFIT: Any area, including accessory building and structures, used or designed for recreation, not conducted
for a profit, the use of which is restricted to an established membership (and their guests) residing within the immediate geographical area.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Travel trailers, camper shells, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted buses for personal use, boats and
houseboats, trailers of all types, motorcycles or any off road recreational vehicle, new or used, retail or wholesale, with or without motive power.
REST HOME: An establishment or home for the care and nursing of convalescents, invalids and aged persons; excluding cases of communicable
diseases, mental sickness or disorders, and surgical or obstetrical operations. The term shall include "nursing home".
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 285/436
RESTAURANT: The term "restaurant" shall have its ordinary meaning and usage, except that no business or use shall be classified as a restaurant in
which alcoholic beverages are served, or in which alcoholic beverages may be served.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: An establishment which serves food or beverages to persons while seated in or on a motor vehicle.
RESTAURANT, OPEN AIR: An establishment which serves food or beverages to persons for consumption on the premises, but outside of a building.
REVOLVING SIGNS: Any sign which rotates by mechanical, electrical or natural means.
ROOF SIGNS: Any sign which is attached to a building and extends either above the roofline or parapet of the building or a sign on a mansard roof
which extends above the bottom two-thirds (2/3) of the mansard.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR HIGH: An institution of learning which offers instruction in the several branches of study required to be taught in the
public schools by the Education Code of the state. The term shall include "junior high school".
SERVICE STATION, AUTO: A service station for retail sale of gasoline, oil and new automobile accessories, auto lubrication and servicing, as follows:
(A) Gasoline sales shall be limited to not more than two (2) pump islands, and not more than three (3) pumps each;
(B) Lubrication shall be limited to one grease rack;
(C) Washing, waxing and polishing (not including mechanical car washing or steam cleaning);
(D) Tire sales, changing, repairing and balancing (not including recapping);
(E) Battery sale, installation and charging;
(F) Minor repairs, adjustments and installation, including fan belts, spark plugs, water hoses, oil filters, windshield wipers, lights and other
accessories;
(G) All operations, excepting sale of gasoline and oil, shall be conducted in a building enclosed on at least three (3) sides.
SERVICE STATION, SUPER: A service station for retail sale of gasoline, oil and new automobile accessories, and automobile lubrication and
servicing as follows:
(A) Washing, waxing and polishing (not including mechanical car washing or steam cleaning);
(B) Tire service (not including recapping);
(C) Battery sales, installation and charging;
(D) Repairs, adjustments and replacements (not including disassembly of engines, transmissions, differentials, generators, starters);
(E) Brake repairing (not including relining).
SHOPPING AND OFFICE CENTER: A group of retail or office businesses which share parking, access, covenants or a common theme with adjacent
businesses. Such centers are generally, but not always, on the same parcel of land.
SIGN: Any visual device or representation designed and used for the purpose of identifying or attracting attention to a premises, product, service,
person or event. The term "sign" includes, but is not limited to, banners, pennants, streamers, unusual paint, color, nonstructural displays, architectural
projections, displays of goods or services when located outside a building and other similar devices or ploys.
SPA: A resort hotel which provides facilities for recreational or health purposes.
STREET: A public or private way permanently dedicated, reserved, or regularly used as a primary means of access to abutting property.
STREET LINE: The boundary line between the right of way or easement for a street, and the abutting property.
STREET, SIDE: A street bounding a corner lot, adjacent to a side line of the lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof
joists, girders or rafters, or any change in the exterior dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location and includes "buildings" and "signs".
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING: Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an on site or off site
service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 286/436
and, when possible, work in the community.
TARGET POPULATION: Persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or
other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Service Act (division 4.5
[commencing with section 4500] of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors,
families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and
homeless people.
TEMPORARY NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS: Signs that are not intended to be displayed for longer than forty (40) days and are not strictly for the
purpose of generating retail or wholesale business.
THEATER MARQUEE: A wall sign with changeable copy for the advertising of current or future attractions for a movie or live theater or similar
performance oriented facilities which change the featured entertainment often.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGNS: Signs which display only the current time, date and temperature.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the
termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be
no less than six (6) months from the beginning of assistance.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle other than a mobile home, designed or used for human habitation and which may be moved upon a public highway
without a special permit without violating any provision of the Vehicle Code.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Any area or tract of land where one or more travel trailer lots are rented or leased to accommodate travel trailers.
VEHICLE, HEAVY EQUIPMENT AND BOAT DEALERSHIPS: A place where one or more franchises to sell new cars, trucks, tractors, motorcycles,
aircraft, boats or similar vehicles exists.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached to the wall of a building and projecting more than twelve inches (12").
WIRELESS AND NONWIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: Shall be considered to be any and all communications equipment
including, but not limited to, antennas, satellite dishes, microwave relay stations, and all similar devices designed for the transmission and/or reception
of communications signals including all accessory structures or constructs, that are not exclusively intended for private personal use.
YARD: Open and unoccupied space on a lot.
YARD, FRONT: A yard, the depth of which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot,
which yard extends across the full width of the lot. Same as "required front yard".
YARD, REAR: A yard, the depth of which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot,
which yard extends across the full width of the lot. Same as "required rear yard".
YARD, SIDE: A yard, the width of which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot, not
including any portion of the required front yard or required rear yard. Same as "required side yard". (Ord. 2015-10, 12-7-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-1, 3-4-
2019)
11-1-2: ADOPTION OF PLAN AND REGULATIONS:
There is hereby adopted a precise land use plan for the city and zoning regulations for the execution and enforcement of the precise land use plan.
(Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-1-3: PURPOSE OF PLAN AND REGULATIONS:
The purpose of the plan and regulations shall be to furnish a guide for orderly physical growth and development of the city and to promote and protect
the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare, and to implement the general plan. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-1-4: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING TITLE. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-1-5: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapter 4 of title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California, commonly known as the
conservation and planning law1. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-1-6: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
No building or land shall be used for any purpose, and no building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered in any manner,
except in conformity with the regulations applicable to the zone in which the same is located and as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 533, 6-5-
1961)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 287/436
11-1-7: PENALTIES:
(A) Any person violating any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or, at the discretion of the city attorney, an infraction. A person shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which a violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted by the
person, firm, corporation or organization.
(B) Penalties for infractions shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall periodically review the penalties for infractions and set
new penalties by resolution as required to maintain the effectiveness of this Code.
(C) All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and exclusive. (Ord. 95-8, 8-7-95)
11-1-8: MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS IN OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
Notwithstanding anything set forth or provided for in this Code, if other provisions of the Municipal Code, or other applicable laws, rules, or regulations,
are more restrictive than the provisions set forth in this Code, then the other such laws, rules, or regulations shall be applicable. (Ord. 95-8, 8-7-95)
11-1-9: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any property which is illegally changed or modified so that it is not maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in this Title of the Municipal
Code shall be defined as a public nuisance for the purposes of this Title. Illegally changed or modified shall include failure to secure appropriate
permits and licenses as may be required under this Title. (Ord. 95-8, 8-7-95)
11-1-10: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
(A) First And Second Offense For Similar Nuisance:
1. Notice: Upon identification of a violation of this Chapter, the Community Development Director or his authorized representative shall issue a
notice to the occupant of the property, if any, and mail a copy of the notice to the owner of the property as shown on the latest tax assessment
rolls of the Fresno County Assessor. A copy of the notice shall be kept by the Community Development Department. The notice shall contain the
following information:
(a) The location of the subject property by street number and/or the approximate location of the property if no street address is available.
(b) A description of the nuisance.
(c) A direction to abate the nuisance within fifteen (15) days from the date on the notice.
(d) A statement that the owner of the property may appeal the notice to the Planning Commission within ten (10) days of the date shown on the
notice. In the event of an appeal, the owner shall be responsible for paying all applicable fees required for processing an appeal. If the appeal
is successful, any fees paid to the City for processing the appeal shall be refunded.
If significant progress is being made to abate the nuisance or an unusual hardship would be created by strict imposition of the fifteen (15) day
abatement period, the Community Development Director may at his discretion extend the time allowed to abate the nuisance up to fifteen (15)
additional days.
2. Citation: If the nuisance has not been abated prior to the deadlines stated in subsection 11-1-10(A)(1), then the Community Development
Director or his authorized representative shall issue a citation for an infraction, unless a determination has been made by the City Attorney that a
misdemeanor charge is more appropriate. The citation shall be issued to the property owner where the nuisance exists by certified mail or by
personal delivery to the owner. If the property has an occupant other than the owner, a copy of the citation shall also be posted at the property or
delivered to the occupant. The citation shall contain the following:
(a) The location of the subject property by street number and assessor parcel number.
(b) A description of the nuisance and the applicable Municipal Code section.
(c) A notice to appear before the Municipal Court at a specified date and time.
(d) A statement that the City may cause the abatement of the nuisance and the cost of the abatement shall be a lien against the property.
A copy of the notice shall be kept by the Community Development Department. The address of the owner shall be taken from the latest
County Assessor's office tax roll.
3. Abatement Prior To Court Date: If the nuisance is abated prior to the date shown on the citation for a court appearance, the property owner or
his representative may contact the community development director for an inspection of the property. If the director finds that the nuisance has
been abated, then the director or his authorized representatives shall transmit such information to the municipal court to have the citation
dismissed.
4. Municipal Court: The owner shall be required to appear before the municipal court for a hearing by that court if the citation has not been
dismissed and received by the court prior to the hearing date. In addition to any action required to abate the nuisance, the court may impose
fines in accordance with the adopted fine schedule and levy any court costs as may be required by the court.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 288/436
(B) Third And Subsequent Offenses For Similar Nuisances: Third and subsequent offenses shall follow the procedures stated above except, that there
shall be no notice issued and the abatement procedures shall begin with the issuance of a citation.
(C) Abatement Of Nuisance: The city may abate the nuisance, provided that notice has been given as set forth above. In the event the city abates the
nuisance, the city may place a lien against the property for the full cost of the abatement. In accordance with California Government Code section
38773.7, the city may require the owner to pay treble the costs of abatement, upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment
within a two (2) year period. The process for recovering expenses for abatement by the city shall be as follows:
1. Recovery Of Costs: Any costs incurred by the city shall be recovered through a lien against the property. Recoverable costs shall include, but
not be limited to, staff time, materials and cost of abatement by third parties under contract to the city. An accurate record of the expense
incurred by the city shall be maintained.
2. Notice Of Assessment: The notice of assessment shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with article 3
commencing with section 1415.1 of chapter 4 of title 5 of part 2 of the California Code for Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent
search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and publication
thereof in the "Selma Enterprise" at least one time. The notice shall contain the following information:
(a) The amount of the lien, the date of the abatement order, the street address, the legal description, assessor's parcel number of the parcel on
which the lien is imposed, the name and address of the recorded owner of the property and the mailing address of the city.
(b) A statement that the cost will become a lien against the property unless paid within sixty (60) days of the date of the assessment notice.
(c) A statement that if the owner objects to the assessment as indicated, an appeal may be filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the
assessment notice.
(d) The nuisance abatement lien will be recorded in the Fresno County recorder's office and from the date of recording shall have the full force,
effect and priority of a judgment lien.
3. Hearing On Objections: If the owner files an objection within the thirty (30) day time period, then the city clerk shall cause the objection to be
placed on the next regular city council meeting agenda, providing that at least ten (10) days' notice may be given. The city council shall review
the evidence and any testimony given at the meeting and make a determination of the assessment. The action of the city council shall be final.
4. Assessment For Nuisance Abatement: Any assessment for nuisance abatement shall be as determined by the city council by a resolution. (Ord.
95-8, 8-7-1995)
11-1-11: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
(A) Specific uses of land, buildings, and structures listed as prohibited in each district are hereby declared to be detrimental to public health, safety,
and welfare and are, for such reasons, expressly prohibited.
(B) The enumeration of prohibited uses shall not by implication enlarge the scope of permitted uses; they are for purposes of clarity only. (Ord. 2006-4,
4-17-2006)
Chapter 2
ZONING BOUNDARIES; MAP
11-2-1: NAMES OF ZONES:
The zones established are as follows:
R-1 One-family zone
R-1-9 One-family zone
R-1-12 One-family zone
R-2 Multiple-family zone
R-2-A Multiple-family zone (no new districts formed)
R-2-M Multiple-family mobile home park zone (no new districts formed)
R-2-AP Multiple-family precise plan zone (no new districts formed)
R-2-P Multiple-family precise plan zone (no new districts formed)
R-3 Multiple-family zone
R-3-A Multiple-family zone
R-3-P Multiple-family zone
R-4 Multiple-family zone
C-O Commercial - office zone
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 289/436
C-1 Neighborhood commercial zone
C-2 Community commercial zone
C-3 Service commercial zone
C-3-P Service commercial precise plan zone (no new districts formed)
C-H Commercial - highway zone
C-R Commercial - regional zone
CBD Central business district zone
P-M-D Planned medical development zone
PV Pioneer village zone
Precise plan zone (no new districts formed)
S-P Specific plan zone
BP Business park zone
M-1 Light manufacturing zone
M-1-P Light industrial planned unit development zone
M-2 Heavy manufacturing zone
Public facilities zone
OS Open space zone
Ponding basin zone
School zone
Cemetery zone
(Ord. 2002-7, 6-17-2002; amd. Ord. 2007-6, 6-4-2007)
11-2-2: MAP:
A copy of the zoning boundaries map, as amended from time to time, shall be filed in the office of the community development department of the city
of Selma. A copy shall also be filed with the city clerk of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2004-5, 4-19-2004)
11-2-3: DIVISION OF ZONING MAP:
For purposes of convenience in administration, the zoning map may be divided into parts and subparts, which may be separately shown or employed
for purposes of amending the zoning map or any official reference thereto. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-2-4: CHANGES IN BOUNDARIES OR ZONES:
Changes in classification of zones and boundaries of zones may be made by:
(A) Adoption of an amended zoning map, or part or subpart thereof, showing the change thereon, in the manner provided for amendment of this title.
(B) Other amendment of this title which describes the change, without adoption of an amended map. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-2-5: UNCERTAINTY OF BOUNDARIES:
If there is uncertainty as to any boundary of any zone, the following rules shall apply:
(A) Where such boundary is shown as approximately following the line of any street, alley, or other public way, or any lot line, such line shall be
deemed to be such boundary.
(B) Where such boundary does not follow any existing line, as mentioned in subsection (A) of this section, the location of same shall be as shown by
the dimensions indicated on the zoning map, if any, or by use of the scale appearing thereon.
(C) If any part of any public street, alley or way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to any adjoining property to which it may
revert shall apply to such part of the vacated or abandoned street, alley or way.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 290/436
(D) If any land is not shown on the zoning map as within a zone, or if any land is annexed to or consolidated with the city subsequent to the effective
date of this title, it shall be deemed to be within an R-1 zone, until otherwise zoned as provided herein. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
Chapter 3
R-1 ONE-FAMILY ZONE
11-3-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the R-1 one-family zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-3-2: USES:
In an R-1 zone the following uses only are permitted:
(A) One-family dwellings, consisting of not more than one such one-family dwelling per lot.
(B) Accessory buildings and structures, including, but not confined to, private garages and carports of three (3) car maximum aggregate capacity,
accessory living quarters, and swimming pools.
(C) Flower and vegetable gardens, agricultural crops, orchards and vineyards, horticultural collections, nursery stock (but excluding the following: any
sign or structure for the purpose of sale of any product; commercial greenhouses; and commercial farming buildings).
(D) Small domestic pets, such as cats, dogs and birds.
(E) Renting rooms and boarding, as follows:
1. Renting not more than two (2) rooms in a dwelling to not more than a total of four (4) persons.
2. Providing table board to not more than four (4) boarders.
3. A combination of the foregoing, but accommodating not more than four (4) persons in any case.
(F) Home occupations, carried on by an occupant of a dwelling as a subordinate and incidental use, subject to the following provisions, may be
approved by the secretary to the commission, subject to the provisions of sections 11-25-1 and 11-25-3 of this title:
1. The establishment or operation of a home occupation for hire or financial gain shall not be permitted unless a home occupation use permit has
been issued therefor and is in effect, and such use is conducted pursuant to the permit. The permit shall be issued pursuant to the provision of
section 11-25-1 of this title and the payment of the fees set forth therein, and section 11-25-3 of this title and after the payment of the business
license for said home occupation as set forth in title V of this code.
2. The term of said permit may be established by the secretary to the commission, in the manner provided in section 11-23-6 of this title.
3. Such permits may be revoked and modified pursuant to the provisions of chapter 24 of this title.
4. Any amendment of this title or any resolution affecting the terms and conditions for the conduct of home occupations shall apply to permits
theretofore as well as those thereafter issued, upon expiration or renewal thereof.
5. There shall be no employment of help other than the members of the resident family, who are occupants of the dwelling for which the permit is
sought.
6. There shall be no use of material or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of normal household or hobby uses.
7. Sales of goods on the premises shall be limited to the products of the home occupation, and no other merchandise or goods shall be sold, kept
or displayed for the purpose of sale on the premises.
8. The use shall not generate pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the zone in which it is located.
9. The permit holder shall not employ the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises, other than a vehicle not to
exceed one ton, owned by operator of such home occupation, which shall be stored in an entirely enclosed garage.
10. No excessive or unsightly storage of materials or supplies, indoor or outdoor, for purposes other than those permitted in the zone, are allowed.
11. It shall not involve the use of signs or structures.
12. No more than one room in the dwelling shall be employed for the home occupation. Garages shall not be used for conduct of home
occupations. Provided, however, permits issued prior to December 7, 1981, are not subject to the requirement forbidding the use of the garage.
13. No building or space outside of the main building shall be used for home occupational purposes except for agricultural uses in the R-A
(residential agriculture) zone.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 291/436
14. In no way shall the appearance of the structure be so altered or the conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure
may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials or construction, lighting, signs, sounds or noises,
vibrations, heat, glare, etc.).
15. There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential or agricultural purposes as
defined in the zone.
16. Applicants shall consult with surrounding property owners and provide evidence to the secretary of the commission that consultation has been
completed. In the event there are objections from any of six (6) surrounding property owners, the secretary shall not approve a home occupation
permit application. The applicant may appeal the decision of the secretary, to the planning commission, within ten (10) days following notice of
the decision by the secretary to not issue the permit.
(G) Transitional and supportive housing as defined in section 11-1-1 of this title.
(H) Storage of petroleum products underground for the use on the premises, exclusive of gasoline and similar highly inflammable products.
(I) Vehicle parking, if used for personal transportation by occupants of the dwelling, their guests and employees, but in no case shall a commercial
vehicle exceed a weight of four (4) gross tons.
(J) Private nonprofit recreation area, subject to conditional use permit and other requirements of chapter 16 of this title.
(K) Churches, except tents, subject to the requirements of chapter 17 of this title, and subject to issuance of a conditional use permit and other
requirements of chapter 16 of this title.
(L) Temporary tract offices, model homes, and construction materials storage yards within and limited to serving the tract being developed. Said
storage yards shall be removed by the developer if there has been no construction activity within the tract for a continuous period of six (6) months,
unless an extension is granted by the planning commission before the expiration of the six (6) month period.
For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title.
(M) Second dwelling units (granny flats), pursuant to Government Code section 65852.1, subject to first securing a conditional use permit, and
complying with provisions of chapter 20.1 of this title. Such dwellings shall not be greater than six hundred forty (640) square feet in floor area. The
second dwelling unit shall comply with the city's adopted site development standards for provision of second units developed under the
requirements of Government Code section 65852.1.
(N) Reconstruction of multiple dwelling units on a single legal parcel with a conditional use permit and subject to the following criteria:
1. The multiple dwelling units were legally constructed. For the purposes of this subsection, "legally constructed" shall include all multiple dwellings
which have approved entitlements, approved building permits for construction or conversion, or can be shown by city records to have existed
prior to 1970.
2. The lot can be shown to accommodate reasonable facilities for the scale of the development, such as open space, parking and common areas.
A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of private open space per unit shall be provided.
3. A minimum of one on site parking space per unit shall be provided. Where parking in excess of one space per unit exists, parking spaces
numbering not less than the existing number shall be provided upon completion of the reconstruction.
4. There shall be no increase in the intensity of the land use over that which previously existed. No increase in the number of units shall occur. The
average size of all units on the property shall not be increased, except as required to meet any minimum size required by this code.
5. The proposed height and bulk of the dwellings shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
6. The exterior materials and architecture shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-7-2015)
11-3-3: HEIGHT:
(A) Building height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see section 11-20-4 of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-3-4: FRONT YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 92-06, 11-2-1992)
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3-5: SIDE YARD:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 292/436
(A) Every interior lot shall have side yards with a minimum of five feet (5') on each side of the main building, except if an existing lot is less than fifty
feet (50') in width, each side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, or three feet (3'), whichever is more.
(B) Corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this code, shall have side yards abutting the street not less than fifteen feet (15') in width, excepting
garages and carports fronting on a street side yard shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3-6: REAR YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a rear yard with a minimum depth of fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 92-06, 11-2-1992)
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3-7: BUILDABLE AREA:
The buildable area or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, shall not exceed forty percent (40%), except a minor variance of
five percent (5%) of the buildable area or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, may be approved at the discretion of the
community development director where such additional lot coverage will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely affect
the aesthetics of the local area. Such variances may be applied only to structures already possessing a certificate of occupancy that are increasing
their existing lot coverage. Lots exceeding seven thousand (7,000) square feet may use seventy percent (70%) of the lot in excess of seven thousand
(7,000) square feet for buildable area, provided that the total lot coverage does not exceed forty five percent (45%) where such additional lot coverage
will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely affect the aesthetics of the local area. (Ord. 2002-18, 11-18-2002)
11-3-8: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
See section 11-20-8 of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-3-9: LOT AREA:
(A) The minimum area of a lot shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet, except in cases of lots of record on November 7, 1949, and except as
otherwise provided for in subsection (B) of this section.
(B) Minimum lot areas allowed by conditional use permit:
1. Upon recommendation of the planning commission, the city council may grant an application for a conditional use permit which allows
development of subdivisions within the R-1 one-family zone, with a lot or lots having less than the minimum lot area of seven thousand (7,000)
square feet prescribed by subsection (A) of this section. In any R-1 residential subdivision, no more than thirty percent (30%) of the lots may
have areas less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
2. The application for a conditional use permit allowing development of subdivisions with a lot or lots within the R-1 one-family zone, having an area
or areas of less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet shall be made, considered, and acted upon by the planning commission in accordance
with the procedures and provisions of chapter 16 of this title (commencing with section 11-16-1 of this title) except that no action of the planning
commission on a conditional use permit relating to the minimum area of a lot or lots within the R-1 one-family zone, shall be final or effective
without the concurrence of a majority of the city council and the action taken by the planning commission on such a conditional use permit
application, shall consist only of a recommendation to the city council to grant or deny, conditionally or unconditionally, the conditional use permit.
3. On issuance of a recommendation by the planning commission to grant the conditional use permit, the application shall be automatically
reviewed and approved or disapproved, by the city council, with or without conditions at the next available regular meeting of the city council at
which the matter may be heard following the giving of notice as required by this code.
4. In considering the application for the conditional use permit, and the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall only
grant the conditional use permit based upon a finding or findings that the project includes the following design elements and amenities:
(a) Landscaped entryways with center street median landscaping.
(b) Bicycle and pedestrian walkways and trails.
(c) Decorative streetlights installed to city standards.
(d) Landscaped parkways along all collector streets.
(e) Dedicated parcels for public facilities such as fire station or community building.
(f) A fully developed neighborhood park with a minimum of two (2) acres.
(g) Landscaped roundabouts for traffic control and traffic calming. (Ord. 2007-11, 10-1-2007)
11-3-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 293/436
See chapter 17 of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-3-11: LOT WIDTH:
(A) Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60') excepting that a corner lot shall have a minimum lot width of seventy feet (70').
(B) Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum lot width of seventy five feet (75').
(C) Cul-de-sac or loop out lots shall have a minimum width of forty feet (40'), with a minimum lot width at building setback line of sixty feet (60'). (Ord.
684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3-12: LOT DEPTH:
Every lot shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
Chapter 3.1
R-1-9 ONE-FAMILY ZONE
11-3.1-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the R-1-9 one-family zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971,
eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-2: USES:
In an R-1-9 zone the following uses only are permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in an R-1 zone. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-3: HEIGHT:
(A) Building height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see section 11-20-4 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-4: FRONT YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of twenty five feet (25').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-5: SIDE YARD:
(A) Every interior lot shall have side yards with a minimum width of seven feet (7') on each side of the main building.
(B) Corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this code, shall have side yards abutting the street not less than fifteen feet (15') in width, excepting
garages and carports fronting on a street side yard shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20').
(C) Reversed corner lots shall have side yards as follows:
1. Same requirements as R-1 zone.
(D) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-6: REAR YARD:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 294/436
(A) Every lot shall have a rear yard depth with a minimum depth of ten feet (10').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-7: BUILDABLE AREA:
The buildable area or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, shall not exceed forty percent (40%), except a minor variance of
five percent (5%) of the buildable area or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, may be approved at the discretion of the
community development director where such additional lot coverage will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely affect
the aesthetics of the local area. Such variances may be applied only to structures already possessing a certificate of occupancy that are increasing
their existing lot coverage. Lots exceeding nine thousand (9,000) square feet may use seventy percent (70%) of the lot in excess of nine thousand
(9,000) square feet for buildable area, provided that the total lot coverage does not exceed forty five percent (45%) where such additional lot coverage
will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely affect the aesthetics of the local area. (Ord. 2002-18, 11-18-2002)
11-3.1-8: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
See section 11-20-8, "Accessory Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-9: LOT AREA:
(A) The minimum area of a lot shall be nine thousand (9,000) square feet, except in cases of lots of record on November 7, 1949.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 17, "Off Street Parking", of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-11: LOT WIDTH:
(A) Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of seventy feet (70'), excepting that a corner lot shall have a minimum lot width of eighty feet (80').
(B) Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum lot width of eighty five feet (85').
(C) Cul-de-sac or loop out lots shall have a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50'), with a minimum lot width at building setback line of seventy feet (70').
(Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.1-12: LOT DEPTH:
(A) Every lot shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred ten feet (110'). (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
Chapter 3.2
R-1-12 ONE-FAMILY ZONE
11-3.2-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the R-1-12 one-family zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971,
eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-2: USES:
In an R-1-12 zone the following uses only are permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in an R-1 zone. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-3: HEIGHT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 295/436
(A) Building height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see section 11-20-4 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-4: FRONT YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of thirty five feet (35').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-5: SIDE YARD:
(A) Every interior lot shall have side yards with a minimum width of ten feet (10') on each side of the main building.
(B) Corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this code, shall have side yards abutting the street not less than fifteen feet (15') in width, excepting
garages and carports fronting on a street side yard shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20').
(C) Reversed corner lots shall have side yards as follows:
1. Same requirements as R-1 zone.
(D) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-6: REAR YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a rear yard depth with a minimum depth of ten feet (10').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-7: BUILDABLE AREA:
The buildable area or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, shall not exceed forty percent (40%), except a minor variance of
five percent (5%) of the buildable area or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, may be approved at the discretion of the
community development director where such additional lot coverage will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely affect
the aesthetics of the local area. Such variances may be applied only to structures already possessing a certificate of occupancy that are increasing
their existing lot coverage. Lots exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) square feet may use seventy percent (70%) of the lot in excess of twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet for buildable area, provided that the total lot coverage does not exceed forty five percent (45%) where such additional
lot coverage will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely affect the aesthetics of the local area. (Ord. 2002-18, 11-18-
2002)
11-3.2-8: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
See section 11-20-8, "Accessory Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-9: LOT AREA:
(A) The minimum area of a lot shall be twelve thousand (12,000) square feet, except in cases of lots of record on November 7, 1949.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 17, "Off Street Parking", of this title. (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-11: LOT WIDTH:
(A) Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of eighty feet (80'), excepting that a corner lot shall have a minimum lot width of ninety feet (90').
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 296/436
(B) Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum lot width of ninety five feet (95').
(C) Cul-de-sac or loop out lots shall have a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60'), with a minimum lot width at building setback line of eighty feet (80').
(Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
11-3.2-12: LOT DEPTH:
(A) Every lot shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty feet (120'). (Ord. 684, 5-3-1971, eff. 6-2-1971)
Chapter 4.0
R-2-A MULTIPLE-FAMILY ZONE
11-4.0-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the R-2-A multiple-family zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 773, 7-5-
1977)
11-4.0-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-2 of this title, without first securing a conditional use permit shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-3: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO FIRST SECURING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Uses permitted in the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-3 of this title, subject to first securing a conditional use permit shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-4: HEIGHT:
(A) No main building or structure shall have a height greater than one story not to exceed twenty feet (20').
(B) No accessory building shall have a height greater than one story not to exceed twelve feet (12') to plate height.
(C) For general provisions and exceptions see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-5: LOT WIDTH:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-5 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-6: LOT DEPTH:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-6 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-7: FRONT YARD:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-7 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-8: SIDE YARD:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-8 of this title shall apply; except, as pertains to any building more than one story in height. (Ord. 92-2, 3-
16-1992)
11-4.0-9: REAR YARD:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-9 of this title shall apply; except, as pertains to any building more than one story in height. (Ord. 92-2, 3-
16-1992)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 297/436
11-4.0-10: BUILDABLE AREA:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-10 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-11: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-11 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-12: LOT AREA:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-12 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-13: POPULATION DENSITY:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-13 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-4.0-14: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-14 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-4.0-15: RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS _ PRIVATE OPEN SPACE:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-15 of this title shall apply; except, as pertains to any floor above one story. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-4.0-16: RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS _ COMMON OPEN SPACE:
The provisions of the R-2 zone, section 11-4.1-16 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
Chapter 4.1
R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY ZONE
11-4.1-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations set forth in this Chapter shall apply in the R-2 Multiple-Family Zone unless otherwise provided in this Title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-
92)
11-4.1-2: PERMITTED USES:
(A) Any use permitted in the R-1 Zone;
(B) Two- and three-family dwellings consisting of one main building.
(C) Uses customarily incident to any of the foregoing uses.
(D) Accessory buildings and structures. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-92)
(E) (Rep. by Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
(F) For general provisions and exceptions see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-92)
11-4.1-3: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO FIRST SECURING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
(A) Dwelling groups consisting of two (2) or more separate one-family dwelling units on a single site subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.1, Site
Plan Review.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 298/436
(B) Multiple-family dwellings or groups thereof subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.1, Site Plan Review.
(C) For general provisions and exceptions see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-92)
11-4.1-4: HEIGHT:
(A) Main buildings: No main building or structure shall have a height greater than two (2) stories, not to exceed thirty five feet (35').
(B) No accessory building shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed twelve feet (12'), to plate height.
(C) For general provisions and exceptions see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-92)
11-4.1-5: LOT WIDTH:
(A) All lots created after July 5, 1977, shall comply with the following lot width standards and lots existing as of July 5, 1977, may not be reduced below
these standards.
(B) Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60'), excepting that a corner lot shall have a minimum lot width of seventy feet (70').
(C) Reverse corner lots shall have a minimum width of seventy five feet (75').
(D) Cul-de-sac or loop-out lots shall have a minimum width of forty feet (40'), with a minimum lot width at building setback line of sixty feet (60').
(E) Lots siding on freeways and railroads shall have a minimum width of eighty feet (80').
11-4.1-6: LOT DEPTH:
(A) All lots created after July 5, 1977, shall comply with the following lot depth standards and lots existing as of July 5, 1977, may not be reduced
below these standards:
(B) Every lot shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred feet (100').
(C) Lots backing on freeways and railroads shall have a minimum depth of one hundred thirty feet (130').
11-4.1-7: FRONT YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of twenty feet (20'), extending across the full width of the lot, or twenty five percent (25%) of
the depth of the lot, whichever is less, except that when a lot is adjacent to or abuts a lot fronting on the same street zoned R-A, R-1, R-1-9, or R-1-
12, the required front yard setback of the adjacent or abutting lot shall apply for a minimum distance of the first fifty feet (50') extending across the
front of the lot.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions see Chapter 20 of this Title.
11-4.1-8: SIDE YARD:
(A) Every interior lot shall have side yards with a minimum of five feet (5') on each side of the main building, except if an existing lot is less than fifty
feet (50') in width, each side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot or three feet (3'), whichever is more.
(B) For two (2) story multiple family buildings, a minimum setback of ten feet (10') shall be provided, except when adjoining adjacent properties zoned
for single-family, the second story portion of any building shall have a minimum setback of twenty feet (20').
(C) Corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall have side yards abutting the street not less than fifteen feet (15') in width, excepting
garages and carports fronting on a street side yard shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20'). For reverse corner lots, the street side yard setback
shall be the same as the minimum front yard setback of the adjacent or abutting lot and shall apply for a minimum distance of the first fifty feet (50')
extending across the street side yard of the lot.
(D) For lots siding freeways and railroads, the side yard setback adjacent to the freeway, for habitable portions of residential structures shall be a
minimum of twenty five feet (25').
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 299/436
(E) Dwelling units oriented to side yards: In addition to the regulations specified in subsections 11-4.1-8(A), (B), (C), and (D), the following regulations
shall apply when dwelling units front or rear upon side yards:
1. When dwelling units rear upon a side yard with direct access by door to the dwelling unit, the required side yard shall be ten feet (10'). Porches
and steps mentioned in Section 11-20-11 shall be permitted, provided, not less than five feet (5') of the width of the required side yard shall be
completely free of structures. Said side yard shall not be used for parking.
2. When dwelling units front upon a side yard, the required width of the side yard shall not be less than fifteen feet (15'). Porches and steps
mentioned in Section 11-20-11 shall be permitted. Said side yard shall not be used for parking.
(F) For general provisions and exceptions see Chapter 20 of this Title.
11-4.1-9: REAR YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a rear yard with a minimum depth of ten feet (10') for single story.
(B) The second story portion of any multiple family building shall be set back twenty feet (20') when adjoining adjacent properties zoned for singlefamily.
(C) For lots rearing freeways and railroads, the rear yard setback adjacent to the freeway, for habitable portions of residential structures shall be a
minimum of forty feet (40').
(D) For general provisions and exceptions see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-4.1-10: BUILDABLE AREA:
The buildable area, or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, shall not exceed a total amount of forty five percent (45%) except
a minor variance of five percent (5%) of the buildable area or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, may be approved at the
discretion of the community development director where such additional lot coverage will not, in the opinion of the community development director,
adversely affect the aesthetics of the local area. Such variances may be applied only to structures already possessing a certificate of occupancy that
are increasing their existing lot coverage. Lots exceeding the minimum required area as stated in section 11-4.1-12 of this chapter may be allowed to
use seventy percent (70%) of the excess lot for buildable area, provided that the total lot coverage does not exceed forty five percent (45%) where
such additional lot coverage will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely affect the aesthetics of the local area. (Ord.
2002-2, 3-4-2002)
11-4.1-11: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
(A) The space side to side and between separate dwellings in dwelling groups or buildings in groups of multiple-family buildings shall not be less than
fifteen feet (15') except when said dwellings shall be situated front to rear, front to front, or rear to rear with entry(ies) or exit(s) into said space, the
minimum space shall be twenty feet (20').
(B) The distances between parking areas or circulation driveways and the front entrance side of a building shall be not less than fifteen feet (15').
(C) See section 11-20-8, "Accessory Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-4.1-12: LOT AREA:
(A) All lots created after July 5, 1977, shall comply with the following lot area standards and lots existing as of July 5, 1977, may not be reduced below
these standards.
(B) The minimum area of a lot shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet, except that corner lots shall contain seven thousand (7,000) square feet of
area and reversed corner lots shall contain seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of area.
(C) The minimum lot size for more than one dwelling shall be nine thousand (9,000) square feet except for secondary (granny flats) as provided in
subsection 11-3-2(M) of this title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-4.1-13: POPULATION DENSITY:
Four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of lot area shall be required for each dwelling unit when two (2) or more units are located on a single
lot. The density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each additional five thousand seven hundred (5,700) square feet of lot area, plus one dwelling
unit for any remaining area of less than five thousand seven hundred (5,700) square feet and more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 300/436
11-4.1-14: OFF STREET PARKING:
(A) Off street parking shall be provided at a ratio as specified in chapter 17 of this title.
(B) All parking spaces shall be accessible from a driveway connecting with a public way. Off street parking facilities for five (5) or more spaces shall be
designed so that vehicles do not have to back into a street or into a public way.
(C) Parking spaces shall be provided with continuous concrete curbing, acting as wheel stops at the ends of spaces when abutting buildings or
landscape areas, or other parking spaces. Vehicles shall be permitted to overhang a maximum of two feet (2') when adjacent to a minimum
landscaped area or sidewalk of six feet (6') or more in width.
(D) The parking of inoperable vehicles, towable trailers and boats and vehicles with a rating in excess of one ton in open or carport spaces shall not be
permitted.
(E) There shall be adequate on site turning areas, with all weather surfaces, on lots facing on and having access to major and secondary highways to
permit motor vehicles to head into the street. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-4.1-15: RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS _ PRIVATE OPEN SPACE:
(A) Usable private open space provided for individual dwelling units shall be a minimum of one hundred seventy five (175) square feet for first floor
units as ground floor private open space or eighty (80) square feet minimum for second floor units as balconies.
(B) Of the required private open space, each patio or balcony shall contain a minimum dimension of six feet (6') by nine feet (9') and be so located that
it is suitable for general use by the occupant(s) of the premises. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-4.1-16: RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS _ COMMON OPEN SPACE:
(A) On each site developed with multiple-family buildings, there shall be provided landscaped and usable common open space for recreational and
leisure activities equaling at least three hundred (300) square feet per dwelling unit, with a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the lot
coverage of the total development site. Such area(s) shall be conveniently located and readily accessible to each dwelling unit.
(B) The following areas only shall contribute to required recreational and leisure areas:
1. Roofed areas designed to accommodate recreational and leisure activities;
2. Any space between buildings in excess of that which is required, and fifty percent (50%) of the required spaces between buildings when unified
with other recreational and leisure areas;
3. Side yard areas having a minimum dimension of ten feet (10') when unified with other recreational and leisure areas, exclusive of spaces
designated for private open space.
4. Common open space should be a minimum of twelve feet (12') in its smallest horizontal dimension and should not be less than one hundred
seventy five (175) square feet in total area. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
Chapter 5.0
R-3-A MULTIPLE-FAMILY ZONE
11-5.0-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.0-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-2 of this title, without first securing a conditional use permit shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.0-3: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO FIRST SECURING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Uses permitted in the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-3 of this title, subject to first securing a conditional use permit shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.0-4: HEIGHT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 301/436
(A) No main building or structure shall have a height greater than one story not to exceed twenty feet (20').
(B) No accessory building shall have a height greater than one story not to exceed twelve feet (12') to plate height.
(C) For general provisions and exceptions see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-5.0-5: LOT WIDTH:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-5 of this title, shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-5.0-6: LOT DEPTH:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-6 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-5.0-7: FRONT YARD:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-7 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-5.0-8: SIDE YARD:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-8 of this title shall apply; except, as pertains to any building more than one story in height. (Ord. 92-2, 3-
16-1992)
11-5.0-9: REAR YARD:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-9 of this title shall apply, except, as pertains to any building more than one story in height. (Ord. 92-2, 3-
16-1992)
11-5.0-10: BUILDABLE AREA:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-10 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-5.0-11: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-11 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-5.0-12: LOT AREA:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-12 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-5.0-13: POPULATION DENSITY:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-13 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 773, 7-5-1977)
11-5.0-14: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-14 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.0-15: RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS _ PRIVATE OPEN SPACE:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-15 of this title shall apply; except, as pertains to any floor above one story. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.0-16: RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS _ COMMON OPEN SPACE:
The provisions of the R-3 zone, section 11-5.1-16 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 302/436
Chapter 5.1
R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
11-5.1-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations set forth in this Chapter shall apply in the R-3 Multiple-Family Zone unless otherwise provided in this Title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-
92)
11-5.1-2: PERMITTED USES:
(A) Any uses permitted in the R-2 Zone without first securing a conditional use permit.
(B) Multiple dwellings subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.1, Site Plan Review.
(C) Accessory buildings and structures. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-92)
(D) (Rep. by Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
(E) For general provisions and exceptions see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-92)
11-5.1-3: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO FIRST SECURING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
(A) Dwelling groups consisting of two (2) or more separate one-family dwelling units on a single site, subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.1, Site
Plan Review.
(B) Offices and clinics for the practice of medicine, dentistry and other healing arts, medical and dental laboratories; but excluding veterinarians,
subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.1, Site Plan Review. Pharmacies are permitted, related to and in conjunction with said offices, subject to
sign requirements under the R-3 Zone classification. The site plan submitted for pharmacies must show the relationship of any pharmacy to
surrounding residential uses, if any, and the appearance of commercial development shall be avoided.
(C) Boarding houses, lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.1, Site Plan Review.
(D) For general provisions and exceptions see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-92)
11-5.1-4: HEIGHT:
(A) No main building or structure shall have a height greater than two (2) stories not to exceed thirty five feet (35').
(B) No accessory building shall have a height greater than one story not to exceed twelve feet (12') to plate height.
(C) For general provisions and exceptions see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-92)
11-5.1-5: LOT WIDTH:
(A) All lots created after July 5, 1977, shall comply with the following lot width standards and lots existing as of July 5, 1977, may not be reduced below
these standards.
(B) Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60') excepting that a corner lot shall have a minimum lot width of seventy feet (70').
(C) Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum lot width of seventy five feet (75').
(D) Cul-de-sac or loop out lots shall have a minimum width of forty feet (40') with a minimum lot width at building setback line of sixty feet (60').
(E) Lots siding on freeways and railroads shall have a minimum width of eighty feet (80'). (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-6: LOT DEPTH:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 303/436
(A) All lots created after July 5, 1977, shall comply with the following lot depth standards and lots existing as of July 5, 1977, may not be reduced
below these standards.
(B) Every lot shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred feet (100').
(C) Lots backing on freeways and railroads shall have a minimum depth of one hundred thirty feet (130'). (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-7: FRONT YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of fifteen feet (15'), extending across the full width of the lot, or twenty five percent (25%) of
the depth of the lot, whichever is less, except that when a lot is adjacent to or abuts a lot fronting on the same street zoned R-A, R-1, R-1-9, or R-1-
12, the required front yard setback of the adjacent or abutting lot shall apply for a minimum distance of the first fifty feet (50') extending across the
front of the lot.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-8: SIDE YARD:
(A) Every interior lot shall have side yards with a minimum of five feet (5') on each side of the main building, except if an existing lot is less than fifty
feet (50') in width, each side yard shall be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, or three feet (3'), whichever is more.
(B) For two (2) story multiple-family buildings, a minimum setback of ten feet (10') shall be provided, except when adjoining adjacent properties zoned
for single-family, the second story portion of any building shall have a minimum setback of twenty feet (20').
(C) Corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this code, shall have side yards abutting the street not less than fifteen feet (15') in width, excepting
garages and carports fronting on a street side yard shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20'). For reverse corner lots, the street side yard setback
shall be the same as the minimum front yard setback of the adjacent or abutting lot and shall apply for a minimum distance of the first fifty feet (50')
extending across the street side yard of the lot.
(D) For lots siding on freeways and railroads, the side yard setback adjacent to the freeway for residential structures shall be a minimum of twenty five
feet (25').
(E) For dwelling units oriented to side yards, the minimum requirements of the R-2 zone (subsection 11-4.1-8(E) of this title) shall apply.
(F) For general provisions and exceptions see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-9: REAR YARD:
(A) The minimum requirements of the R-2 zone (section 11-4.1-9 of this title) shall apply.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-10: BUILDABLE AREA:
The buildable area, or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any and all buildings, shall not exceed fifty five percent (55%) except a minor
variance of five percent (5%) of the buildable area or percentage of a lot, which may be occupied by any buildings, may be approved at the discretion
of the community development director where such additional lot coverage will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely
affect the aesthetics of the local area. Such variances may be applied only to structures already possessing a certificate of occupancy that are
increasing their existing lot coverage. Lots exceeding the minimum required area as stated in section 11-5.1-12 of this chapter may be allowed to use
seventy percent (70%) of the excess lot for buildable area, provided that the total lot coverage does not exceed fifty five percent (55%) where such
additional lot coverage will not, in the opinion of the community development director, adversely affect the aesthetics of the local area. (Ord. 2002-2, 3-
4-2002)
11-5.1-11: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
(A) The minimum requirements of the R-2 zone (section 11-4.1-11 of this title) shall apply.
(B) See section 11-20-8 of this title, accessory buildings. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 304/436
11-1.5-12: LOT AREA:
The minimum lot area requirements of the R-2 zone (section 11-4.1-12 of this title) shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-13: POPULATION DENSITY:
Four thousand (4,000) square feet of lot area shall be required for each dwelling unit when two (2) units are located on a single lot. The density shall
not exceed one dwelling unit for each additional three thousand five hundred fifty (3,550) square feet of lot area, plus one dwelling unit for any
remaining area of less than three thousand five hundred fifty (3,550) square feet and more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. (Ord.
92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-14: OFF STREET PARKING:
(A) For residential uses, the provisions of the R-2 zone (section 11-4.1-14 of this title) shall apply.
(B) For nonresidential uses, the off street parking provisions set forth in chapter 17 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-15: RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS _ PRIVATE OPEN SPACE:
(A) Usable private open space provided for individual dwelling units shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet for first floor units as
ground floor private open space or sixty (60) square feet minimum for second floor units as balconies.
(B) The minimum requirements of the R-2 zone (subsection 11-4.1-15(B) of this title) shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
11-5.1-16: RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS _ COMMON OPEN SPACE:
The minimum requirements of the R-2 zone (section 11-4.1-16 of this title) shall apply. (Ord. 92-2, 3-16-1992)
Chapter 5.2
R-2-M MULTIPLE-FAMILY MOBILE HOME PARK ZONE
11-5.2-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The R-2-M multiple-family mobile home park zone, is intended to provide for accommodation of residential mobile homes in unified parks of not less
than twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet in area and in locations considered appropriate for multiple-family residential land use. (Ord. 693, 7-3-
1972; amd. Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-5.2-2: USES:
In the R-2-M zone, the following uses are permitted, subject to conditional use permit: (Ord. 693, 7-3-1972; amd. Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
(A) Mobile home parks provided that every such park shall be developed in accordance with the property development standards hereinafter
prescribed.
(B) Accessory uses and buildings incidental to the operation of an approved mobile home park including parking, recreation or utility facilities,
management offices, and signs. (Ord. 693, 7-3-1972)
(C) Sale or resale of fully installed mobile homes, excluding retail commercial sales for off site use.
(D) Display of fully installed model mobile homes for promotion of on site sales and use.
(E) Display of uninstalled model mobile homes for off site sales and for on site sales and use may be permitted by conditional use permit; said permit
shall be terminated after one year unless granted an annual extension by the planning commission. (Ord. 711, 12-3-1973)
(F) Rental of spaces for short term use by travel trailers or recreational vehicles may be permitted in a separate, designated section of a mobile home
park when specifically authorized by a condition of approval of a conditional use permit for a mobile home park. Short term use shall mean an
individual or cumulative period of occupancy within the mobile home park of not more than thirty (30) days during any twelve (12) month period.
(Ord. 751, 8-16-1976)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 305/436
11-5.2-3: HEIGHT:
Building height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 693, 7-3-1972)
11-5.2-4: MOBILE HOME PARK FRONT YARD:
Every mobile home park shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 751, 8-16-1976)
11-5.2-5: MOBILE HOME PARK SIDE YARD:
Same requirements as R-1 zone (see section 11-3-5 of this title), provided that for structures in excess of one story in height (or 15 feet) the side yards
shall be increased by five feet (5') for each additional story (or for each 10 feet over 15 foot height). (Ord. 751, 8-16-1976)
11-5.2-6: MOBILE HOME PARK REAR YARD:
Same requirements as R-1 zone (see section 11-3-6 of this title), provided that for structures in excess of one story in height (or 15 feet) the rear yard
shall be increased by five feet (5') for each additional story (or for each 10 feet over 15 foot height). (Ord. 751, 8-16-1976)
11-5.2-7: BUILDABLE AREA:
The occupied area of a mobile home lot shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the lot area. (Ord. 756, 9-20-76)
11-5.2-8: DISTANCE BETWEEN MOBILE HOME UNITS OR OTHER PERMITTED BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
(A) The minimum distance between separate buildings shall be ten feet (10'). For accessory buildings, see Section 11-20-8; Section 11-20-8 shall not
be considered applicable to mobile home accessory buildings or structures.
(B) The minimum distance between a mobile home and a building shall be ten feet (10').
(C) The minimum distance required for the separation of a mobile home from any other mobile home shall be: ten feet (10') from side to side, eight feet
(8') from side to rear, and six feet (6') from rear to rear. (Ord. 756, 9-20-76)
11-5.2-9: MOBILE HOME PARK AREA AND DIMENSIONS:
(A) The minimum mobile home park area per mobile home shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet. The minimum area per travel trailer or
recreational vehicle shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. (Ord. 751, 8-16-76)
(B) The minimum mobile home park area shall be twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet.
(C) Every mobile home park shall have a minimum frontage and width of one hundred twenty feet (120').
(D) Every mobile home park shall have a minimum depth of one hundred twenty feet (120'). (Ord. 693, 7-3-72)
11-5.2-10: OFF-STREET PARKING:
(A) At minimum, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each mobile home lot and travel trailer or recreational vehicle space.
(B) In addition to (A) above, for guest and supplementary resident parking, one space shall be provided for each two (2) mobile home lots and such
additional space shall be developed in accordance with the standards of Chapter 17. This requirement shall not apply to travel trailers or
recreational vehicles. (Ord. 751, 8-16-76)
11-5.2-11: SIGNS:
(Rep. by Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
11-5.2-12: OTHER PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 306/436
Except as otherwise required by law or as approved by conditional use permit, the following property development standards shall regulate the design
and improvement of mobile home parks:
(A) Each mobile home shall be located on a separate lot with a minimum width of thirty feet (30') and a minimum lot area of two thousand (2,000)
square feet.
(B) Each travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall be parked on a separate, designated space with a minimum width of twenty five feet (25') and a
minimum aggregate area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.
(C) An aggregate area of not less than three hundred (300) square feet per mobile home lot shall be improved for recreational use of the occupants of
the park, including usable open space and recreation facilities only. This requirement shall not apply to travel trailers or recreational vehicles.
(D) Each mobile home park shall include facilities or areas for bulk storage, laundry, and similar common purposes, unless provided on every
individual lot.
(E) Each mobile home lot shall be designed to accommodate a specific sized mobile home.
(F) No mobile home shall be located closer than three feet (3') from a side or rear lot line.
(G) No mobile home accessory building or structure shall be located closer than three feet (3') from any lot line which does not border on a driveway,
except as follows:
1. A mobile home lot may accommodate either an awning or a carport on a lot line, provided the awning or carport is constructed of material which
does not support combustion and is not less than three feet (3') from a mobile home, a mobile home accessory building or structure on an
adjacent lot, or any other building or structure. No part of an awning or carport shall project over or beyond a lot line.
2. No mobile home accessory structure shall be installed so as to block emergency exit windows in the bedrooms of mobile homes.
3. A free-standing carport, or a common free-standing carport for the use of the occupants of the adjacent mobile home lots, may be erected on a
mobile home lot line, provided that such a carport is constructed of material which does not support combustion, and provided that there is a
minimum of three feet (3') clearance from a mobile home or any other structure on the adjacent lots. Such free-standing carports may be
connected to a mobile home or other accessory building or structure by an open covered walkway not exceeding six feet (6') un width.
(H) Travel trailer or recreational vehicle spaces shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total number of mobile home lots in the mobile home park.
(Ord. 756, 9-20-76)
Chapter 5.3
C-O COMMERCIAL OFFICE ZONE
11-5.3-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the C-O commercial office zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978; amd. Ord. 2003-2,
2-18-2003)
11-5.3-2: PERMITTED USES:
(A) Two- And Three-Family Dwellings: The provisions of chapter 20.1, "Site Plan Review", of this title shall apply when more than one main building is
located on a lot.
(B) Multiple Dwellings: Multiple dwellings, subject to the provisions of chapter 20.1, "Site Plan Review", of this title.
(C) Professional Offices: Administrative, business, general, medical, dental and professional offices other than veterinarian, subject to the provisions of
chapter 20.1, "Site Plan Review", of this title. There shall be no retail sales, storage of stock in trade and storage of equipment not used exclusively
in said offices.
(D) Nurseries: Day nurseries, subject to the provisions of chapter 20.1, "Site Plan Review" of this title.
(E) Accessory: Accessory buildings and structures. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978)
(F) (Rep. by Ord. 95-9, 8-7-1995)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 307/436
(G) General Provisions; Exceptions: For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978)
11-5.3-3: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO FIRST SECURING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
(A) Buildings over one story in height when permitted in subsection 11-5.3-4(A) of this chapter.
(B) Home occupations, subject to conforming with the standards specified in subsection 11-3-2(F) of this title, and provided that the subject lot is
occupied by only one nonconforming dwelling unit. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978)
(C) Administrative, business, general, medical, dental, professional offices and pharmacies, and excluding veterinarians, subject to the provisions of
chapter 20.1, "Site Plan Review", of this title. There shall be no retail sales, storage of stock in trade and storage of equipment not used exclusively
in said offices. (Ord. 819, 10-6-1980)
(D) Banks and savings and loan associations, subject to the provisions of chapter 20.1, "Site Plan Review", of this title. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978)
(E) Pharmacies, subject to the provisions of chapter 20.1, "Site Plan Review", of this title. (Ord. 819, 10-6-1980)
11-5.3-4: HEIGHT:
(A) No main building or structure shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed twenty feet (20'). In the event the building height of an
existing building in an abutting residential or commercial zone exceeds these provisions, this height restriction may be waived subject to first
securing a conditional use permit, such waiver not to exceed the height of the existing abutting building or the maximum building height permitted
in the abutting zone, whichever is lower.
(B) No accessory building shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed twelve feet (12') to plate height.
(C) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20. (Ord. 788, 6-5-78)
11-5.3-5: LOT WIDTH:
(A) All lots created after the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with the following lot width standards and lots existing as of said date may not
be reduced below these standards.
(B) Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60') excepting that a corner lot shall have a minimum lot width of seventy feet (70').
(C) Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum lot width of seventy five feet (75').
(D) Cul-de-sac or loop-out lots shall have a minimum width of forty feet (40'), with a minimum lot width at building setback line of sixty feet (60'). (Ord.
788, 6-5-78)
11-5.3-6: LOT DEPTH:
(A) All lots created after the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with the following lot depth standard and lots existing as of said date may not be
reduced below this standard.
(B) Every lot shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 788, 6-5-78)
11-5.3-7: FRONT YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of fifteen feet (15'). This yard shall be landscaped and maintained.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20. (Ord. 788, 6-5-78)
11-5.3-8: SIDE YARD:
(A) Every interior lot shall have side yards with a minimum of five feet (5') on each side of the main building.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 308/436
(B) Corner lots, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall have side yards abutting the street not less than fifteen feet (15') in width, excepting
garages and carports fronting on a street side yard shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20'). The first fifteen feet (15') of a required side
yard abutting a street shall be landscaped and maintained.
(C) Dwelling units oriented to side yards. In addition to the regulations specified in 11-5.3-8(A) and (B), the following regulations shall apply when
dwelling units face or back upon side yards:
1. When dwelling units back upon a side yard with direct access by door to the dwelling unit, the required side yard shall be ten feet (10'). Porches
and steps mentioned in Section 11-20-11 shall be permitted, provided not less than five feet (5') of the width of the required side yard shall be
completely free of structures. Said side yard shall not be used for parking.
2. When dwelling units face upon a side yard, the required width of the side yard shall not be less than fifteen feet (15'). Porches and steps
mentioned in Section 11-20-11 shall be permitted. Said side yard may not be used for parking.
(D) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20. (Ord. 788, 6-5-78)
11-5.3-9: REAR YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a rear yard with a minimum depth of ten feet (10').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20. (Ord. 788, 6-5-78)
11-5.3-10: BUILDABLE AREA:
The buildable area, or percentage of a lot which may be occupied by any and all buildings, shall not exceed fifty five percent (55%). (Ord. 788, 6-5-
1978)
11-5.3-11: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
(A) No requirements for nonresidential buildings.
(B) The space between separate dwellings in dwelling groups or buildings in groups of multiple-family buildings shall not be less than ten feet (10'),
except when said dwellings shall be situated front to rear, front to front, or rear to rear with entry(ies) or exit(s) into said space, the minimum space
shall be fifteen feet (15').
(C) See section 11-20-8, "Accessory Buildings", of this title. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978)
11-5.3-12: LOT AREA:
(A) All lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall comply with the following lot area standards and lots existing as of said date may not be
reduced below these standards.
(B) The minimum area of a lot shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet, except that corner lots shall contain seven thousand (7,000) square feet of
area, and reversed corner lots shall contain seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of area. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978)
11-5.3-13: POPULATION DENSITY:
(A) When two (2) or more dwelling units are located on a single lot, a minimum lot area of four thousand (4,000) square feet shall be required for the
first unit and one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area shall be required for each additional second through sixth units. Each additional unit over
six (6) shall require one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of lot area. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978)
11-5.3-14: FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS:
(A) Where a C-O lot sides or rears on residential zones, a solid masonry wall not less than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6') in height shall be
erected along said property line, except as provided in subsection (B) of this section.
(B) No fence, wall or hedge over three feet (3') in height shall be permitted in any required front yard or in the required side yard on the street side of a
corner or a reversed corner lot. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978; amd. Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-5.3-15: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 309/436
(A) See chapter 17, "Off Street Parking", of this title.
(B) See chapter 18, "Required Loading Space", of this title. (Ord. 788, 6-5-1978)
Chapter 5.4
P-M-D PLANNED MEDICAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE
11-5.4-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the Planned Medical Development Zone, unless otherwise provided in the Title. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.1, Site Plan Review:
(A) Hospitals.
(B) Medical offices.
(C) Medical clinics.
(D) Pharmacies.
(E) Health care facilities.
(F) Medical laboratories.
(G) Surgery and treatment facilities.
(H) Medical care housing facilities.
(I) Accessory buildings and structures. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
(J) (Rep. by Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
(K) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-3: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO FIRST SECURING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
(A) Medical administrative offices.
(B) Appurtenant medical retail.
(C) Appurtenant medical services.
(D) Expansion of existing churches for church use.
(E) Psychiatric hospitals.
(F) Chemical dependence hospitals.
(G) Twenty four (24) hour outpatient clinics. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-4: HEIGHT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 310/436
(A) No main building or structure shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed twenty feet (20'). In the event the building height of an
existing building in an abutting residential or commercial zone exceeds these provisions, this height restriction may be waived subject to first
securing a conditional use permit, such waiver not to exceed the height of the existing abutting building or the maximum building height permitted
in the abutting zone, whichever is lower.
(B) No accessory building shall have a height greater than one story, not to exceed twelve feet (12') to plate height. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-5: LOT WIDTH:
(A) All lots created after the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with the following lot width standards and lots existing as of said date may not
be reduced below these standards.
(B) Every lot shall have a minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100').
(C) Cul-de-sac or loop-out lots shall have a minimum width of sixty feet (60') with a minimum lot width at building setback line of eighty feet (80'). (Ord.
902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-6: LOT DEPTH:
(A) All lots created after the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with the following lot depth standard and lots existing as of said date may not be
reduced below this standard.
(B) Every lot shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-7: FRONT YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of twenty five feet (25') from the curb line. This yard area shall include sidewalk and
landscaping. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-8: SIDE YARD:
(A) Every interior lot shall have side yards with a minimum of five feet (5') on each side of the main building.
(B) Corner lots shall have side yards abutting the street not less than fifteen feet (15').
(C) Dwelling units oriented to side yards:
1. When dwelling units back upon a side yard with direct access by door to the dwelling unit, the required side yard shall be ten feet (10'). Porches
and steps mentioned in Section 11-20-11 shall be permitted, provided not less than five feet (5') of the width of the required side yard shall be
completely free of structures. Said side yard shall not be used for parking.
2. When dwelling units face upon a side yard, the required width of the side yard shall not be less than fifteen feet (15'). Porches and steps,
mentioned in Section 11-20-11, shall be permitted. Said side yard may not be used for parking. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-9: REAR YARD:
(A) Every lot shall have a rear yard with a minimum depth of ten feet (10'). A minimum five feet (5') rear yard setback for parking only shall be required.
(Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-10: BUILDABLE AREA:
The buildable area, or percentage of a lot which may be occupied by any and all buildings, shall not exceed fifty five percent (55%). (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-11: SPACE BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
(A) No requirements for nonresidential buildings.
(B) The space between separate dwellings in dwelling groups or buildings or groups of multiple-family buildings shall not be less than ten feet (10'),
except when said dwellings shall be situated front to rear, front to front, or rear to rear with entry(ies) or exit(s) into said space, the minimum space
shall be fifteen feet (15').
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 311/436
(C) See Section 11-20-8, Accessory Buildings. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-12: LOT AREA:
(A) All lots created after the effective date of this Chapter shall comply with the following lot area standards and lots existing as of said date may not be
reduced below these standards.
(B) The minimum area of a lot shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-13: POPULATION DENSITY:
(A) The maximum dwelling unit density shall be one unit per one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of lot area. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-14: FENCES, HEDGES AND WALLS:
(A) Where a "PMD" lot sides or rears on residential zones or future residential property, a solid masonry wall, seven feet (7') in height, shall be erected
along said property line, except as provided in subsection (B) below.
(B) No fence, wall or hedge over three feet (3') in height shall be permitted in any required front yard or in the required side yard on the street side of a
corner or a reversed corner lot. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
11-5.4-15: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) There shall be a minimum of one parking space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area for medical offices, medical clinics
and pharmacies.
(B) See Chapter 17, Off-Street Parking, for other parking requirements.
(C) See Chapter 18, Required Loading Space. (Ord. 902, 7-5-88)
Chapter 6
R-A SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONE
(Rep. by Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
Chapter 7
C-R REGIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
11-7-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the C-R regional commercial zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-7-2: USES:
(A) In a C-R zone, the following uses only are permitted:
1. Any use permitted in the C-2 zone, except one-family, multiple-family dwellings, and mobile home parks.
2. Boat sales and service.
3. Building material sales, excepting bulk storage sand, gravel, or cement.
4. Catering shop.
5. Dry cleaner.
6. Feed and seed store.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 312/436
7. Furniture warehouse and van services.
8. Glass shop.
9. Ice storage and sale.
10. Kennels, subject to limitations under "veterinarian offices" below.
11. Laundry.
12. Lumberyards, not including planing mills, bulk sand, gravel or cement.
13. Machine sales and rentals.
14. Motorcycles sales and service.
15. Photographic and blueprint processing and printing, wholesale.
16. Railroad rights of way and freight and passenger stations.
17. Rug and carpet cleaning and dyeing.
18. Sign painting shop.
19. Stone and monument yard, retail.
20. Tire sales and recapping.
21. Veterinarian offices, small animal boarding and hospitals, kennels; provided, that the noise level at the property line be below sixty five (65)
dBA as measured on the day/night equivalent scale for noise measurement; uses shall be completely enclosed in a building of soundproof
construction.
22. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the foregoing uses, when located on the same lot.
23. Retail facilities that sell packaged alcoholic beverages subject to the regulations as set forth in section 11-8-10 of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-
2003)
24. New and used auto sales with related services. (Ord. 2005-7, 6-6-2005)
11-7-3: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
(A) See chapter 17, "Off Street Parking", of this title.
(B) See chapter 18, "Required Loading Space", of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-7-4: FRONT YARD:
(A) Where a lot in a C-R zone is located in the same block as, and has a common frontage with, a lot or lots in any residential zone, the minimum front
yard depth of such lot in such portion of the C-R zone shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') or ten percent (10%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
is less. Such space may be used for off street parking.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-7-5: SIDE YARD:
(A) There shall be no side yard requirement except as follows:
1. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot in any residential zone, there shall be a side yard of a minimum width of five feet (5').
2. Where the rear of a corner lot abuts upon the rear of a lot in any residential zone, the side yard on the street side shall have a minimum of fifteen
feet (15').
3. Where the rear of a reversed corner lot abuts upon a lot in any residential zone, the side yard on the street side of the reversed corner lot shall
be a minimum of fifteen feet (15'), or the required front yard requirements of the lot in the rear (key lot), whichever is less.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-7-6: REAR YARD:
(A) Rear yard depth shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'). Where a lot backs upon a dedicated alley, no rear yard shall be required.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 313/436
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-7-7: HEIGHT:
(A) No building shall exceed a height of seventy five feet (75').
(B) For exceptions and general provisions, see section 11-20-4 of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-7-8: OTHER LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Landscape and irrigation plans and required fees for all development plans for review and approval by the community development department
prior to issuance of building permits. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape designer, a licensed landscape architect or other qualified
person. Landscaping and irrigation shall be in accordance with the approval plan. Applications for development plans shall include plans and
written material showing how any applicable site landscaping or planting area requirements are to be met. Irrigation plans shall contain all
construction details for an automatic system, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Location, type and size of lines;
2. Location, type and gallonage output of heads;
3. Location and sizes of valves;
4. Location and type of controller;
5. Installation details;
6. Location and type of backflow prevention device;
7. Available water pressure and water meter outlet size;
8. Irrigation application schedule and flow rates.
(B) All landscaping and irrigation shall be maintained in accordance with International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) pruning guidelines and/or the
American National Scientific Institute (ANSI, A300) pruning standards. Maintenance shall be permanent, and maintenance providers shall be
certified as to these provisions. As used in this section, "maintenance" includes, but is not limited to, watering, weeding, pruning, insect control, and
replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. Failure to properly
maintain plant materials to generally accepted standards shall obligate the property owner to replacement of the damaged plant materials.
(C) A minimum of one tree for every six (6) parking spaces shall be distributed throughout the parking lot. Plant materials shall be sized and spaced to
achieve minimum fifty percent (50%) surface area shading in a period not to exceed five (5) years and shall not be less than a fifteen (15) gallon
container for trees, five (5) gallon container for specimen shrubs, and a one gallon container for mass planting. Where shrubs or low level
vegetation are used, vegetative matter at maturity shall cover at least seventy five percent (75%) of actual planted area.
(D) Evidence of completion of required landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be reviewed and approved by the community development
department and the engineering division prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for new construction. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
Chapter 8
C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE
11-8-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the C-1 neighborhood commercial zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-8-2: USES:
In a C-1 zone the following uses only are permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in the R-3 zone; provided, that any building used for any of the R-3 uses mentioned in subsections (A)1 through (A)5 inclusive,
and (A)9 of this section shall comply with all of the minimum requirements, conditions and regulations which apply to R-3 zones.
1. Bakery (employing not more than 5 persons on premises).
2. Barbershop or beauty parlor.
3. Book, magazine or stationery store. (Ord. 2000-5, 5-15-2000)
4. Confectionery, candy, or ice cream store. (Ord. 2013-11, 12-2-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 314/436
5. Dressmaking or millinery shop.
6. Drugstore.
7. Dry goods, apparel, notions, or variety store.
8. Florist or gift shop.
9. Auto service station, subject to a conditional use permit.
(a) Secondary auto repair services after fueling services discontinued, subject to a conditional use permit (see section 11-16-14 of this title).
10. Grocery or fruit and vegetable store.
11. Hotel or apartment hotel.
12. Jewelry store.
13. Laundry agency or clothes cleaning agency, laundromat. (Ord. 2000-5, 5-15-2000)
14. Retail facilities that sell packaged alcoholic beverages subject to the regulations as set forth in section 11-8-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-
18-2003)
15. Meat market or delicatessen store (not employing more than 5 persons on the premises).
16. Office, business or professional.
17. Photographic studio.
18. Restaurant (excluding dancing or entertainment and also excluding drive-in or open air restaurant). Serving of alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant is subject to a conditional use permit and site plan review.
19. Shoe store or repair shop.
20. Supermarket or department store, limited to the uses and subject to the limitations mentioned in this section.
21. Tailor, clothing or wearing apparel shop.
22. Public or private parking areas for exclusive use of occupants, employees and patrons of the uses, buildings, stores and businesses located in
the C-1 Zone; provided:
(a) Prior to the issuance of a use permit therefor, the plans for such parking area shall be submitted and approved in accordance with Section 11-
17-7 of this Title.
(b) Said area shall be designed, improved and maintained in accordance with Sections 11-17-6 and 11-17-7 of this Title.
(c) The foregoing provisions are subject to the exceptions mentioned in subsection 11-17-6(F) of this Title.
23. Radio and television store and repair service, electrical appliance store and incidental repairs music store.
24. Nonprofit thrift store, subject to a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2000-5, 5-15-2000)
11-8-3: LIMITATIONS ON USES:
(A) No businesses dealing in wholesale or used goods or commodities shall be permitted, except in the case of articles taken in trade or sale of new
merchandise on same premises. Nonprofit thrift stores shall be an exception to this subsection. (Ord. 743, 4-5-1976)
(B) All businesses, stores, shops and offices shall be conducted entirely within a building, enclosed on all sides.
(C) No products shall be made unless incident to a permitted use and sold at retail on the same premises.
(D) When any exterior wall of a building faces a street or property classified in any R zone, all exterior walls thereof shall be treated and finished in a
similar manner.
(E) When an exterior wall of a building faces abutting property in an R zone, no advertising sign shall be placed on such wall or on any portion of the
lot between the wall and the R zone. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
(F) In areas within this Zone, which are immediately adjacent to residences located in R zones, there shall be no loading to or unloading from vehicles
or conveyances between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., excepting perishable goods and items related thereto in
the sale or processing thereof. (Ord. 662, 6-16-1969)
11-8-4: HEIGHT:
(A) No building shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35').
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 315/436
(B) For exceptions and general provisions, see Section 11-20-4 of this Title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-8-5: FRONT YARD:
(A) Where a lot in a C-1 Zone is located in the same block as, and has a common frontage with, a lot or lots in an R zone, the minimum front yard
depth of such lot in such portions of the C-1 Zone shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') or ten percent (10%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is
less. Such space may be used for off-street parking.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20 of this Title.
(C) In case of certain R-3 uses, see subsection 11-8-2(A) of this Chapter. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-8-6: SIDE YARD:
(A) There shall be no side yard requirement except as follows:
1. Where a lot abuts the side of a lot in any R zone, there shall be a side yard of a minimum width of five feet (5').
2. Where the rear of a corner lot abuts upon the rear of a lot in any R Zone, the side yard on the street side shall have a minimum width the same
as the required side yard of the abutting lot in the R Zone.
3. Where the rear of a reversed corner lot abuts upon a lot in any R Zone, the side yard on the street side of the reversed corner lot shall be a
minimum of twelve feet (12') in case of R uses, and fifteen feet (15') in case of C-1 uses or the required front yard requirement of the lot in the
rear (key lot), whichever is less.
4. In case of certain R-3 uses, see subsection 11-8-2(A).
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-8-7: REAR YARD:
(A) Rear yard depth shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'). Where a lot backs upon a dedicated alley, no rear yard shall be required.
(B) In case of certain R-3 uses, see subsection 11-8-2(B).
(C) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-8-8: LOT AREA:
There shall be no minimum lot area requirement, except as follows: in case of certain R-3 uses, see subsection 11-8-2(A). (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-8-9: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) See Chapter 17 of this Title, "Off-Street Parking".
(B) See Chapter 18 of this Title, "Required Loading Space". (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-8-10: PACKAGED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES:
(A) Applicability: This Section shall apply to all retail facilities that sell packaged alcoholic beverages, except for retail facilities which are equal to or
greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area and where the display and storage areas for alcoholic beverages constitute less than ten
percent (10%) of the floor area of the establishment.
(B) Conditional Use Permit Required: All facilities as specified in Section 11-8-10(A), shall require a conditional use permit.
(C) Development Standards: The following development standards shall apply to all applicable uses as specified in Section 11-8-10(A):
1. Store Security: The following measures shall be incorporated into all new facilities:
(a) Operational Security: A minimum of one of the following operational security measures shall be used:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 316/436
(1) Timed access safe.
(2) Silent alarm.
(3) Video cameras.
(4) California POST certified security guards.
(b) Store Interior Visibility:
(1) The cashier area shall be easily observable from the street and parking areas.
(2) All parking areas shall be visible from inside the store.
(3) A maximum of thirty percent (30%) visual obstruction of all window areas will be permitted, including but not limited to signs, shelves,
freezers and similar visual obstructions.
(c) Parking Lot Lighting: A minimum of one foot-candle maintained shall be provided in all parking areas and areas of pedestrian travel,
including, but not limited to: parking lots, sidewalks, entrances, service entrances, trash enclosure areas and similar areas where pedestrians
commonly travel.
2. Consumption and Loitering on Premises: No consumption of alcohol or loitering on premises shall be permitted at any time.
(a) Property Posting: The property shall be clearly posted in English and Spanish:
No Loitering. Possession of Opened Alcoholic Beverages on these Premises and Adjacent Public Areas is Prohibited pursuant to Selma
Municipal Code Title 6, Chapter 20.
The owner or his authorized representative shall report all loitering and illegal activities on and adjacent to the subject property to the Police
Department.
(b) Public Phones: No exterior public phones shall be permitted. Interior public phones shall be visible from the cashier area. Only one interior
public phone shall be permitted.
(c) Video Games Prohibited: No video games, pool tables or similar electronic or mechanical devices shall be permitted on the premises.
3. Store Appearance: The property shall be kept free of trash and debris and maintained in good repair at all times.
(a) Trash and Litter Control: A minimum of one trash receptacle shall be provided for every ten (10) required parking spaces or fraction thereof.
The receptacles shall be located where they are easily accessed and do not block pedestrian or vehicular access or create a safety hazard. All
trash receptacles shall be regularly emptied and emptied when they become full.
(b) Temporary Signs: No temporary signage shall be placed on any wall, sign or structure on the property without first obtaining a sign permit.
(D) Density: The following criteria shall be used to determine the density of facilities under this Section in the City:
1. All facilities shall be a minimum of three hundred feet (300') from any public park and any public or private school.
2. All facilities shall be a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from any existing nonexempt facility which conducts retail sales of packaged alcoholic
beverages.
(E) Existing Uses: All existing uses to which these regulations are applicable shall be considered legal nonconforming uses in regards to the
Conditional Use Permit requirement until such time as the use is expanded or modified, or the use is discontinued for a period of three (3) months
or longer, or the use changes in character or mode. All existing uses shall immediately comply with Municipal Code subsections 11-8-10(C)1(b),
(C)2(a), and (C)3. All existing uses are encouraged to comply with all provisions of this Municipal Code Section. (Ord. 94-9, 8-1-94)
Chapter 9
C-2 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
11-9-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the C-2 central commercial zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-9-2: USES:
In a C-2 zone, the following uses only are permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in the C-1 zone, except dwellings (see section 11-1-1 of this title), subject to the limitation on certain R-3 uses mentioned in
subsection 11-8-2(A) of this title.
1. Auto supply store.
2. Bakery, retail.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 317/436
3. Bank, finance or lending agency.
4. "Lounge", "bar" or "nightclub", as those terms are defined in section 11-9-8 of this chapter, and subject to a conditional use permit and site plan
review.
5. Bicycle shop.
6. Billiard and pool hall, bowling alley, subject to a conditional use permit and site plan review if it includes a lounge or similar use.
7. Bird or pet shop.
8. Blueprinting and photocopying.
9. Bus depot, no repair or storage on site.
10. Christmas tree sales.
11. Church, including temporary revival.
12. Department store.
13. Drive-in restaurant. Serving alcoholic beverages in a drive-in restaurant is subject to a conditional use permit and site plan review.
14. Electrical appliance store and incidental repairs.
15. Communications equipment building.
16. Fire or police station.
17. Florist.
18. Furniture or household appliance store.
19. Gymnasium.
20. Interior decorating shop.
21. Laundromat. (Ord. 2000-5, 5-15-2000)
22. Retail facilities that sell packaged alcoholic beverages subject to the regulations as set forth in section 11-8-10 of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-
2003)
23. Meat, retail store.
24. Motel.
25. Music, vocal or dancing instruction.
26. Music store.
27. Newsstand.
28. Nursery, flower or plant; provided that fertilizer and soil conditioners shall be stored and sold in packaged form only.
29. Printing shop, including newspaper publishing.
30. Public or private parking, subject to the provisions of subsection 11-17-2(B) of this title.
31. Radio and television store and repair service.
32. Radio or television studio.
33. Restaurant or cafe. Serving of alcoholic beverages in a restaurant or cafe is subject to a conditional use permit and site plan review.
34. Secretarial services and letter shop.
35. Skating rink (enclosed in building).
36. Stationery store.
37. Supermarket.
38. Super service station, subject to a conditional use permit.
(a) Secondary auto repair services after fueling services discontinued, subject to a conditional use permit (see section 11-16-14 of this title).
39. Telephone and telegraph services.
40. Theater or auditorium. (Ord. 2000-5, 5-15-2000)
41. Tobacconist. Requires administrative conditional use permit. (Ord. 2013-11, 12-2-2013)
42. Toy store.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 318/436
43. Mobile home parks, subject to the prescribed standards of chapter 5.2 of this title and subject to a conditional use permit.
44. Wedding chapel.
45. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land.
46. Coin operated car wash, providing no steam cleaning or blowers or drying automobiles are used.
47. Overnighter or travel trailer accommodations. (Ord. 2000-5, 5-15-2000)
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-9-3: LIMITATIONS ON USES:
(A) No manufacturing or processing of any article or commodity shall be permitted, except as follows:
1. Only where incidental to a permitted use.
2. Only where sold at retail on the premises.
3. Only where not more than five (5) persons are engaged in such manufacturing or processing.
4. Only where all such manufacturing or processing conducted on the premises is not obnoxious or offensive by reason of noise, odor, refuse, heat,
glare, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes.
(B) All uses shall be conducted wholly within a building, enclosed on all sides, excepting:
1. Advertising signboards or structures.
2. Christmas tree sales.
3. Super service stations.
4. Nurseries.
5. Drive-in restaurants.
6. Public and private parking.
7. Other similar uses customarily conducted in the open.
(C) Wholesale sales and services shall not be conducted.
(D) No use shall be permitted in the C-2 Zone which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of noise, dust, smoke, vibrations, heat, glare or refuse
or other similar causes.
(E) Good standard practices generally observed with respect to the operation of the corresponding permitted use specifically enumerated in Section
11-9-2, shall be referred to as a general standard in the interpretation of this Section. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
(F) In areas within this Zone which are immediately adjacent to residences located in R Zones, there shall be no loading to or unloading from vehicles
or conveyances between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., excepting perishable goods and items related thereto in
the sale or processing thereof. (Ord. 662, 6-16-69)
11-9-4: HEIGHT:
(A) No building shall exceed a height of seventy five feet (75').
(B) For exceptions and general provisions, see Section 11-20-4. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-9-5: REAR YARD:
Same requirements as C-1 Zone, Section 11-8-7. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-9-6: LOT AREA:
(A) There shall be no minimum lot area requirement, subject to the following exceptions:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 319/436
1. In the case of buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered for purposes of residence or human habitation (such as hotels and apartment
hotels), there shall be a lot area of not less than six hundred (600) square feet per family; provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply
to hotels or apartment hotels where no cooking is done in any individual room, suite or apartment. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
2. (Rep. by Ord. 693, 7-3-72)
(B) For other exceptions and general provisions, see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-9-7: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) See Chapter 17, Off-Street Parking Requirements.
(B) See Chapter 18, Required Loading Space. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-9-8: LOUNGES, BARS AND NIGHTCLUBS:
(A) Definitions: The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Chapter:
BAR: Any property which has been granted a license by the appropriate State agency which allows the sale thereon of either beer and wine or of
distilled spirits by the glass for consumption on the premises.
LOUNGE: A bar at which live entertainment is provided but at which public dancing by patrons is neither encouraged nor allowed.
NIGHTCLUB: A bar at which dancing by patrons is allowed or encouraged. Such definition shall apply whether or not the patrons are dancing to
live or prerecorded music.
(B) Interpretation Of Conditional Use Permit: If a conditional use permit has been issued for use as either a lounge, bar or nightclub, the following rules
of construction shall be applied in interpreting the scope of activities allowed by the permit:
1. Unless the conditional use permit issued by the city specifically authorizes either live entertainment or public dancing by patrons, it is intended to
be a permit for a bar only.
2. If the conditional use permit issued specifically allows for live entertainment but makes no mention of public dancing, it shall be construed to be a
conditional use permit for a lounge only. A public dance permit which is otherwise required by the provisions of title VI, chapter 10 of this code, in
order to provide live entertainment, shall not be required if the property has been designated as a "lounge" under a conditional use permit issued
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. However, a public dance permit shall be required to hold a public dance on property which has
in effect a conditional use permit which allows its use as a "lounge" but does not specifically authorize use as a nightclub.
3. If the conditional use permit issued specifically allows for public dancing, whether or not it allows for live entertainment, it shall be presumed to
be a conditional use permit for a nightclub. A public dance permit, which is otherwise required by the provisions of title VI, chapter 10 of this
code, in order to hold a public dance or other live entertainment, shall not be required if the property has been designated as a "nightclub" under
a conditional use permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(C) Clarification: The foregoing is a clarification of existing law. In adopting this section the city council declares the foregoing to be an accurate
statement of the city's intent under existing law. The content of this section, therefore, may be relied upon in the interpretation of conditional use
permits issued by the city prior to the date of the ordinance which added this section to this code. (Ord. 93-2, 3-1-1993)
11-9-9: OVERNIGHTER OR TRAVEL TRAILER ACCOMMODATIONS:
(A) Each overnighter or travel trailer accommodation space shall have an aggregate area of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet and shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') in width.
(B) Recreation areas shall not be required for overnighter or travel trailer accommodations. (Ord. 682, 3-15-1971, eff. 4-15-1971)
Chapter 10
C-3 COMMERCIAL SERVICE ZONE
11-10-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the C-3 Commercial Zone unless otherwise provided in this Title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-10-2: USES:
(A) In a C-3 Zone the following uses only are permitted:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 320/436
1. Any use permitted in the C-2 Zone (subject to the limitation on certain R-3 uses mentioned in subsection 11-8-2(A) of this Title).
2. Auto body and fender repair.
3. Auto repair, rebuilding and repainting. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
4. Auto and tractor sales, parts and equipment store. (Ord. 769, 5-16-77)
5. Auto upholstery and top shop.
6. Auto washing and steam cleaning.
7. Bakery, retail and wholesale.
8. Boat sales and service.
9. Bottling works.
10. Bus depot, including repair or storage.
11. Building material sales; excepting bulk storage sand, gravel, or cement.
12. Cabinet or carpenter shop.
13. Catering shop.
14. Cleaning and pressing establishment using nonflammable and nonexplosive cleaning fluid.
15. Contractor's storage yard.
16. Dairy products processing.
17. Electrical distribution substation.
18. Electrical shop.
19. Exterminators.
20. Feed and seed store.
21. Food lockers and services.
22. Furniture warehouse and van services.
23. Garage, public or private.
24. Glass shop.
25. Heating or air conditioning shop, including incidental sheet metal.
26. Ice storage or sale.
27. Kennels; subject to limitations under "veterinarian offices" below.
28. Laundry.
29. Lumberyards; not including planing mills, bulk sand, gravel or cement.
30. Machine sales and rentals.
31. Mattress repair.
32. Motorcycle sales and service.
33. Mortuary.
34. Photographic and blueprint processing and printing, wholesale.
35. Plumbing and sheet metal shops.
36. Poultry and rabbit butcher shop for retail sale on the premises (including temporary live storage); provided that such use shall not be
established closer than five hundred feet (500') to any then existing R zone. (See section 11-19-5 of this title.)
37. Railroad rights of way and freight and passenger stations.
38. Refrigeration equipment sales and services.
39. Rug and carpet cleaning and dyeing.
40. Sign painting shop.
41. Stone and monument yard, retail.
42. Storage garages.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 321/436
43. Tire sales and recapping
44. Trailer sales.
45. Trucking terminals.
46. Upholstering shop.
47. Used car sales. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
48. Veterinarian offices, small animal boarding and hospitals, kennels; provided, that the noise level at the property line be below sixty five (65) dbA
as measured on the day/night equivalent scale for noise measurement; uses shall be completely enclosed in a building of soundproof
construction. (Ord. 829, 8-3-1981)
49. Warehouse; excluding storage of flammable liquids and explosives.
50. Welding shop and blacksmithing (excepting drop hammer).
51. Wholesale establishments.
52. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the foregoing uses, when located on the same lot. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
53. Garment manufacturing, provided the size of an individual plant site does not exceed twenty nine thousand (29,000) square feet. (Ord. 763, 1-
3-1977)
54. (Rep. by Ord. 95-9, 8-7-1995)
55. Retail facilities that sell packaged alcoholic beverages subject to the regulations as set forth in section 11-8-10 of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-
2003)
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-10-3: LIMITATIONS ON USES:
(A) No uses shall be permitted in a C-3 zone which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, gas, smoke, noise, vibration, heat, glare,
hazard or other similar causes.
Good standard practices generally observed with respect to the operation of corresponding permitted uses specifically listed in section 11-10-2 of
this chapter shall be referred to as a general standard in interpretation of this provision.
(B) No uses shall be permitted in a C-3 zone which are listed or described in section 11-12-2 of this title, except as specifically provided in section 11-
10-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
(C) In areas within this zone which are immediately adjacent to residences located in "R zones", there shall be no loading to or unloading from
vehicles or conveyances between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., excepting perishable goods and items related
thereto in the sale or processing thereof. (Ord. 662, 6-16-1969)
11-10-4: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) See Chapter 17 of this Title, Off-Street Parking.
(B) See Chapter 18 of this Title, Required Loading Space. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-10-5: OTHER LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
Limitations and requirements respecting height of buildings, rear yards, dwelling (to extent permitted), and trailer courts shall be the same as set forth
in Chapter 9 of this Title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
Chapter 11
C-H HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE
11-11-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the C-H Highway Commercial Zone, unless otherwise provided in this Title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-11-2: USES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 322/436
In a C-H Zone, the following uses only are permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in the R-3 Zone, except dwellings (see Section 11-1-1 of this Title), subject to the limitation on certain R-3 uses mentioned in
subsection 11-8-2(A) of this Title.
1. Bowling alleys, subject to a conditional use permit and site plan review if the bowling alley includes a lounge.
2. Bus depot.
3. Hotel.
4. Ice cream and confectionery store.
5. Motel.
6. Restaurant, including drive-in and open-air. Serving of alcoholic beverages in a restaurant is subject to a conditional use permit and site plan
review.
7. Lounge, bar or nightclub, subject to a conditional use permit and site plan review.
8. Super service station, subject to a conditional use permit.
(a) Secondary auto repair services after fueling services discontinued, subject to a conditional use permit (see Section 11-16-14 of this Title).
9. Mobile home parks, subject to the prescribed standards of Chapter 5.2 of this Title and subject to a conditional use permit.
10. Fruit stores and accessory sales thereto.
11. Overnighter or travel trailer accommodations.
12. Convenience stores. (Ord. 2000-5, 5-15-2000)
11-11-3: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
(A) See Chapter 17 of this Title, Off-Street Parking.
(B) See Chapter 18 of this Title, Required Loading Space. (Ord. 682, 3-15-1971)
11-11-4: OTHER LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
Limitations and requirements respecting height of buildings, rear yards, dwellings (to extent permitted), and mobile home parks and overnighters or
travel trailer accommodations, shall be the same as set forth in Chapter 9 of this Title. (Ord. 682, 3-15-1971)
11-11-5: FRONT YARD:
(A) Where a lot in a C-H Zone is located in the same block as, and has a common frontage with, or lot or lots in an R zone, the minimum front yard
depth of such lot in such portion of the C-H Zone shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') or ten percent (10%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is
less. Such space may be used for off-street parking.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20 of this Title.
(C) In case of certain R-3 uses, see subsection 11-8-2(A) of this Title. (Ord. 664, 7-7-1969)
11-11-6: SIDE YARD:
(A) There shall be no side yard requirement except as follows:
1. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot in any R zone, there shall be a side yard of minimum width of five feet (5').
2. Where the rear of a corner lot abuts upon the rear of a lot in any R zone, the side yard on the street side shall have a minimum width the same
as the required side yard of the abutting lot in the R zone.
3. Where the rear of a reversed corner lot abuts upon a lot in any R zone, the side yard on the street side of the reversed corner lot shall be a
minimum of twelve feet (12') in case of R uses and fifteen feet (15') in case of C-H uses, or the required front yard requirements of the lot in the
rear (key lot), whichever is less.
4. In case of certain R-3 uses, see subsection 11-8-2(A) of this Title.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 323/436
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 664, 7-7-1969)
11-11-7: REAR YARD:
(A) Rear yard depth shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'). Where a lot backs upon a dedicated alley, no rear yard shall be required.
(B) In case of certain R-3 uses, see subsection 11-8-2(A) of this Title.
(C) For general provisions and exceptions, see Chapter 20 of this Title. (Ord. 664, 7-7-1969)
Chapter 12
M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE
11-12-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the M-1 light manufacturing zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-12-2: USES:
(A) In an M-1 zone, the following uses only are permitted:
1. Any use permitted in the C-3 zone.
2. Any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of materials; provided, that such uses (and other uses mentioned in this section) shall be
subject to the provisions of section 11-12-3, "Limitations On Uses", of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-7-2015)
3. (Rep. by Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
4. Aircraft factory.
5. Animal hospitals, kennels and veterinarians. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-7-2015)
6. (Rep. by Ord. 642, 2-19-1968)
7. Blacksmith.
8. Boat building works.
9. Brewery.
10. Building materials, sales and storage.
11. Carpet cleaning plant.
11.1. Concrete batch plants, not to exceed one and one-half (11/2) cubic yards in capacity.
12. Electrical and electronic instruments, devices and appliances, manufacture and assembly.
13. "Emergency shelter" as defined in section 11-1-1 of this title.
14. Food products manufacture.
15. Frozen food processing and storage.
16. Fruit and vegetable canning, packing and processing.
17. Fuel storage; provided, that gasoline, kerosene, and similar highly inflammable products shall be stored underground.
18. Furniture manufacture.
19. Garment manufacture.
20. Hatcheries.
21. Ice and cold storage plant.
22. Laboratory, experimental and testing.
23. Machine shop.
24. Petroleum products storage; provided, that gasoline, kerosene, and similar highly inflammable products shall be stored underground.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 324/436
25. Pharmaceuticals and drugs manufacture.
26. Planing mill, excluding refuse burning.
27. Plastic and rubber products manufacturing and assembly.
28. Poultry and rabbit processing.
29. Prefabrication of buildings.
30. Public utility service yards, electrical and gas transmission stations.
31. Stable and riding academy.
32. Stone monument works.
33. Textile manufacturing.
34. Tire rebuilding, recapping and retreading.
35. Transit and transportation equipment, storage space and yards, except freight classification yards.
36. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the foregoing uses.
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-7-2015)
11-12-3: LIMITATIONS ON USES:
(A) No uses shall be permitted in an M-1 zone which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, gas, smoke, noise, vibration, heat, glare,
hazard or other similar causes.
Good standard practices generally observed with respect to the operation of the corresponding permitted use specifically listed in section 11-12-2
of this chapter, shall be referred to as a general standard in interpretation of this provision.
(B) No uses shall be permitted in an M-1 zone which are listed or described in section 11-14-2, "Uses", or 11-14-3, "Extra Heavy M-2 Uses Requiring
Conditional Use Permit", of this title, except as specifically provided in section 11-12-2 of this chapter.
(C) Retail facilities that sell packaged alcoholic beverages are prohibited in the M-1 zone.
(D) Emergency shelters shall conform to all of the following regulations:
1. The maximum number of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly by the facility shall be forty (40).
2. On and off street parking shall be determined pursuant to a site plan review or other review as dictated by the requirements of the zone in which
the emergency shelter is to be located.
3. Client intake and waiting areas should be located, whenever possible, on the interior of the emergency shelter subject to a site plan review or
other review based on the proposed operational statement of the applicant.
4. All emergency shelters located within any zone of the city shall have on site management twenty four (24) hours a day. The number of on site
managers shall be determined pursuant to a site plan or other review of the project based on the applicant's operational statement.
5. Emergency shelters shall be located at least three hundred feet (300') apart unless a waiver is granted by the community development director
or his or her designee.
6. The length of stay should be limited to the amount of time necessary to transition a client from emergency housing to transitional or supportive
housing, with a goal of less than thirty (30) days per one hundred eighty (180) day period.
7. Lighting and security requirements shall be determined as part of a site plan or other review using the applicable development standards in the
zone where the emergency shelter is to be located. (Ord. 2015-10, 12-7-2015)
11-12-4: HEIGHT:
(A) No building shall exceed a height of forty five feet (45').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1951)
11-12-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) See chapter 17, "Off Street Parking", of this title.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 325/436
(B) See chapter 18, "Required Loading Space", of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1951)
11-12-6: OTHER LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Any building erected or structurally altered and used exclusively as a dwelling shall comply with the front yard, side yard, rear yard, buildable area,
space between buildings, lot area, and off street parking regulations which apply in the R-3 zone. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
(B) Mobile home parks shall not be permitted in this district, except that one mobile home may be permitted as a caretaker residence on any site in
this district. (Ord. 791, 7-3-1978)
Chapter 13
M-1-X EXCLUSIVE LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE
(Rep. by Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
Chapter 14
M-2 HEAVY MANUFACTURING ZONE
11-14-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the M-2 heavy manufacturing zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-14-2: USES:
In an M-2 zone, the following uses only are permitted: (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
(A) Any use permitted in the M-1 zone. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
(B) Any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of materials, except as mentioned in section 11-14-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
(C) (Rep. by Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
(D) Alcohol manufacture.
(E) Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture.
(F) Boiler works.
(G) Brick, tile, or terra cotta manufacture.
(H) Building materials manufacture.
(I) Cotton compressing.
(J) Concrete products manufacture.
(K) Detergent manufacture.
(L) Feed mill, not including alfalfa dehydration and grinding.
(M) Freight classification yard.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 326/436
(N) Linoleum or oilcloth manufacture.
(O) Metals fabrication and foundry.
(P) Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture.
(Q) Paper and pulp manufacture.
(R) Petroleum products, storage.
(S) Plastic materials manufacture.
(T) Railroad repair shops.
(U) Rock, sand or gravel storage and distribution.
(V) Soda and compound manufacture.
(W) Wool pulling or scouring.
(X) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the foregoing uses. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-14-3: EXTRA HEAVY M-2 USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
(A) The establishment or operation of any of the following uses in the M-2 zone shall not be permitted unless an extra heavy M-2 conditional use
permit has been granted and the use is conducted pursuant to such permit (see chapter 23 of this title):
1. Alfalfa dehydration or grinding.
2. Asphalt manufacturing, or refining, and asphalt mixing.
3. Auto wrecking and parts storage.
4. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris and manufacture.
5. Blast furnaces or coke ovens.
6. Chemical manufacturing, not mentioned in preceding section.
7. Cotton gin and cotton oil mill.
8. Dairy.
9. Dead animal or offal reduction, or dumping.
10. Distillation of bones.
11. Drop forge industries.
12. Explosives, manufacture or storage.
13. Fish products processing.
14. Fat rendering.
15. Fertilizer manufacture.
16. Garbage, and refuse disposal.
17. Gas manufacture and storage.
18. Glue manufacture.
19. Hog ranching.
20. Junkyard.
21. Oil extraction plants.
22. Ore reduction.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 327/436
23. Pet food manufacture.
24. Petroleum refining.
25. Rock crusher.
26. Roofing manufacture.
27. Rubber, reclaiming and manufacture of synthetic rubber or its constituents.
28. Sawmill.
29. Smelting of metals.
30. Soap manufacture.
31. Stockyards or slaughter of animals.
32. Tannery.
33. Tar distillation.
34. Stock feeding pens.
35. Wineries.
36. Any use similar in nature to those extra heavy uses listed herein which may be obnoxious or offensive or hazardous by reason of odor, dust,
gas, smoke, fumes, noise, vibration, or other hazards to health and safety of persons and property.
(B) The procedure for application for such permits, and the review and issuance thereof shall be provided in chapter 23, unless otherwise mentioned
herein.
(C) The purpose of the review shall be to establish that the extra-heavy M-2 use will be compatible with the uses permitted in the surrounding area and
not unreasonably hazardous to the public health and safety, to specify conditions for design, installation and subsequent operation, as may be
reasonably required to make and keep said use thus compatible and free of such hazards, and to carry out the purposes of this title in general.
(D) Factors to be considered in said review shall be the effect of the extra-heavy M-2 use upon other uses in the general vicinity, from the standpoint of
public safety, health and welfare, including:
1. Damage or nuisance from smoke, odor, gas, dust, fumes, vibration, noise or other similar causes.
2. Hazard from explosion, contamination or fire.
(E) Such permits may be revoked or modified in the manner and under the conditions set forth in chapter 24 of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-14-4: HEIGHT:
(A) No building shall exceed a height of one hundred feet (100').
(B) For general provisions and exceptions, see section 11-20-4 of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-14-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) See chapter 17, "Off Street Parking", of this title.
(B) See chapter 18, "Loading Space Requirements", of this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-14-6: OTHER LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
To the extent that dwellings and trailer courts are specifically permitted in this chapter, the limitations and requirements applying thereto shall be as set
forth in chapter 5.1 (R-3 Zone) in case of dwellings, and as set forth in chapter 9 (C-2 Zone) in case of trailer courts. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
Chapter 15
PRECISE PLANNED ZONE
11-15-1: PRECISE PLANNED ZONE; REGULATIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 328/436
The following regulations shall apply in a precise planned zone. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-15-2: FINDINGS NECESSARY FOR ESTABLISHMENT:
A precise planned zone may be established after the commission and the council, respectively, have by resolution found as follows:
(A) That the area proposed to be so zoned is generally suitable for the uses permitted in the particular zone classification proposed to be applied to
the area, being one of the zone classifications elsewhere established in this title; but for reasons affecting the public health, safety, comfort and
general welfare, orderly physical growth and development of the city, or any of such reasons, it would not otherwise be appropriate to so zone or
classify said area, unless the land uses permitted in the said area are subject to a precise plan as herein mentioned, or that the proposed precise
plan is particularly suitable to the orderly physical growth and development of a particular area of the city, subject to the general zone classification
presently in effect in such area.
(B) That the proposed precise plan will provide benefits and safeguards equal to or greater than those that would be provided by the regulations
applicable to the proposed or existing zone classification, as the case may be, with respect to the public health, safety, comfort and general
welfare, orderly physical growth and development of the city.
(C) That all of the owners of the property within the proposed Precise Planned Zone have consented to adoption of the precise plan, in writing, on file
with the Planning Commission.
11-15-3: CONTENT AND SCOPE OF PRECISE PLAN:
(A) A precise plan for a particular Precise Planned Zone may contain regulations and plans relating to the location, height and bulk of buildings and
other improvements; buildable area and open spaces about buildings; traffic control within the Zone; arrangement, design and dimensions of
streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and parking and loading areas; screening of uses from visibility from adjacent areas or public ways, either within or
without the Zone, by fencing or landscaping; and such other matters as in the determination of the Commission and Council may be necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this Chapter.
(B) The precise plan shall be embodied in a map or a written statement, or a combination of same, which shall constitute a part of the Zoning Map of
the City and this Title.
(C) The Zone shall be designated on the Zoning Map by use of the symbol which is otherwise used to designate the general zone classification for
such zone, followed by the letter "P" to indicate that such is a Precise Planned Zone. The precise plan shall be designated by an identifying serial
number, which shall appear on the Zoning Map following the aforementioned symbols designating the zone, and which serial number shall appear
on any map, plan or written statement in which the precise plan is embodied. The provisions of this subsection shall be deemed to be directory
rather than mandatory.
11-15-4: ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT:
(A) The Zone and the approved precise plan therefor and any amendments thereto shall be established by ordinance, upon making the findings
mentioned in Section 11-15-2, and after the same proceedings as in the case of other zones mentioned in this Title.
(B) The Precise Planned Zone may be established at any time, either concurrently with and as a part of the same proceedings for the establishment or
change of a zone classification, or with respect to any established zone.
11-15-5: EFFECT OF PRECISE PLAN:
(A) The use of land and the erection, reconstruction or structural alteration and use of buildings and structures located in a Precise Planned Zone shall
be in conformity with the precise plan, and shall also be in conformity with and subject to all other regulations and provisions which apply, or
thereafter apply, to the general zone classification of the Precise Planned Zone to the extent that they are not contrary to the express provisions or
general intent of the precise plan.
(B) The provisions of a precise plan shall in any case be subject to the provisions of Chapter 19 relating to nonconforming buildings and uses. (Ord.
533, 6-5-61)
11-15-6: R-2-P MULTIPLE FAMILY PRECISE PLAN ZONE NO. 171:
(A) The property set forth in Zone Change No. 171 shall be zoned R-2-P.
(B) The precise plan requirements shall be as follows:
1. The property development standards of the R-2 Zone shall govern the development of the subject parcel except as specified herein.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 329/436
2. The design of the townhouse complex and the location of all buildings shall be in general conformance with the plan attached to Change of Zone
Application No. 171 as Exhibit A-1. Said plan shall, by reference, be incorporated as part of this Precise Plan.
3. Side yards shall not be required on interior lot lines except as shown on Exhibit A-1.
4. Side yards conforming to the standards of the R-2 Zone shall be required at the east and west ends of the town house development as shown
on Exhibit A-1.
5. Front walls not exceeding five feet (5') in height and side walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height may be developed within required front yard
spaces of the town house lots as shown on Exhibit A-1.
6. Carports may be developed within the required rear yard spaces of the townhouse lots as shown on Exhibit A-1.
7. The location, design (including depth and width) and area of all lots within the subject R-2-P Zone shall be as shown on Exhibit A-1.
8. The adjoining but separate walls of the townhouse units shall be required to have a fire rating that provides adequate safeguards for the
proposed type of construction. The safeguards shall be subject to review and approval by the City Building Inspector and Fire Chief prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
9. The developer, prior to recordation of a final map for Tract #2888, Country Club Terrace, shall provide and institute a legally enforceable
mechanism through which the City and individual property owners within the townhouse development can be assured that the individual
townhouses and their landscaping will be continuously maintained in a complementary and acceptable manner. The developer shall be
responsible for proposing the type of mechanism to be utilized and shall be expected to bear any cost involved in establishing said mechanism.
The mechanism shall be subject to review and approval by the City Attorney.
10. All development requiring the issuance of a building permit on the subject property shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 20.1, Site
Plan Review. (Ord. 780, 11-14-77)
***scan figure here***
11-15-7: R-2-P MULTIPLE FAMILY PRECISE PLAN ZONE NO. 182:
(A) The property set forth in Change of Zone Application No. 79-182 shall be zoned R-2-P,
(B) The Precise Plan requirements for Zone Change No. 79-182 shall be as follows:
1. The property development standards of the R-2 Zone shall govern the development of the subject parcel except as specified herein.
2. The design of the complex and the location of all buildings shall be in conformance with the plan for Change Zone Application No. 79-182
marked as Exhibit A in this Section. Said plan is by reference, incorporated as part of this Precise Plan as if fully set forth herein.
3. The location, design (including depth and width) and area of all lots within the subject R-2-P Zone shall be shown on Exhibit A within this
Section.
4. Landscape design and improvements shall be provided in conformance with the plan Change Zone Application No. 79-182 and marked as
Exhibit A in this Section. and incorporated herein as part of this Precise Plan as if fully set forth herein.
5. All development requiring the issuance of a building permit on the subject property shall be subject to the requirements of Title 11, Chapter 20.1
of the Selma City Code. (Ord. 801, 8-4-79) *** insert figure here *** 11-15-8: R-2-P MULTIPLE FAMILY PRECISE PLAN NO. 247:
(A) The property shown on the map (Exhibit "1") contained in this Section shall be zoned R-2-P (Multiple Family Residential) Precise Plan district;
(B) The property development standards shall be governed as specified in Tentative Tract Map 4536 as approved by City Council Resolution No. 92-
110R. (Ord. 92-07, 11-16-92)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 330/436
11-15-9: R-3-P MULTIPLE FAMILY PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(A) The property set forth in Change of Zone Application No. 81-191 shall be zoned R-3-P.
(B) The precise plan requirements for Zone Change Application No. 81-191 shall be as follows:
1. The property development standards of the R-3 Zone shall govern the development of the subject parcel except as specified herein.
2. The design of the complex and the location of all buildings shall be in conformance with the plan attached to Change of Zone Application No. 81-
191 and marked as Exhibit A within this Section. Said plan is by reference, incorporated herein as part of this precise plan as if fully set forth
herein.
3. The location, design (including depth and width) and area of all lots within the subject R-3-P Zone shall be as shown on Exhibit A within this
Section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 331/436
4. Landscape design and improvements shall be provided in conformance with the plan attached to change of Zone Application No. 81-191 and
marked as Exhibit A and incorporated herein as a part of this precise plan as if fully set forth herein.
5. All development requiring the issuance of a building permit on the subject property shall be subject to the requirements of Title 11, Chapter 20.1
of the Selma City Code. (Ord. 823, 5-4-81)
***insert figure here*** 11-15-10: C-2-P CENTRAL COMMERCIAL PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(A) The property set forth in Change of Zone Application Number 80-190 shall be zoned C-2-P.
(B) The precise plan requirements for Zone Change Application Number 80-190 shall be as follows:
1. The property development standards of the C-2 zone and any applicable specific plan shall govern the development of the subject property
except as specified herein.
2. The design of the complex and the location of all buildings shall be in conformance with the preliminary site plan attached to Change of Zone
Application Number 80-190 and marked as Exhibit A along with all conditions of approval contained in planning commission Resolution Number
81-434. Said plan and conditions of approval are by reference, incorporated herein as part of this precise plan as if fully set forth herein.
3. The location, design, size (including depth and width) and area of all buildings and streets within the subject C-2-P zone shall be substantially as
shown on the preliminary site plan.
4. Landscape design and improvements shall be provided in conformance with the conditions of approval which are incorporated herein as part of
this precise plan as if fully set forth herein.
5. All development requiring the issuance of a building permit on the subject property shall be subject to the requirements of chapter 20.1 of this
title.
6. Final site plan(s) may be approved by the planning director, and minor deviations from the preliminary site plan may be approved by the director
as long as the parking ration, building and landscaping ration remain essentially as approved in the preliminary site plans.
7. Property north of the Stillman Street alignment shall be designated as parking site B. Upon ultimate development, each parking site shall meet
all requirements of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 832, 12-7-1981)
11-15-11: R-3-P MULTIPLE-FAMILY PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(A) The property set forth in Zone Change Application Number 93-250 shall be zoned R-3-P as designated in said application.
(B) The precise plan requirements for Zone Change Application Number 93-250 shall remain unchanged excepting subsection (B)5(b) of this section
which shall be amended as follows: (Ord. 2000-6, 10-2-2000)
1. The property development standards of the R-3 zone shall govern the development of the subject property except as specified herein. A site
plan review application shall be filed for the subject property in accordance with chapter 20.1 of this title.
2. The placement of all buildings, structures, parking areas, drive aisles and recreation facilities shall be in conformance with plan marked as
Exhibit A of this section. No unit shall be granted occupancy permits until the pool and barbecue areas are constructed. All buildings, structures,
parking areas, drive aisles and recreational facilities shall be maintained as approved by this precise plan.
3. A maximum of fifty one (51) 2-bedroom units shall be permitted on the site. The floor plans of the units shall conform with the floor plans marked
as Exhibit C of this section. Minor dimension and facility adjustments may be approved by the building inspector to comply with handicapped
accessibility requirements for the three (3) handicapped units.
4. A minimum of one hundred two (102) parking spaces shall be provided. A minimum of fifty one (51) parking spaces shall be covered spaces.
Handicapped spaces shall be provided in accordance with applicable local, state and federal laws. (Ord. 94-1, 3-7-1994)
5. All building elevations shall conform with the elevations marked as Exhibit D of this section. The elevations shall also conform with the following
standards: (Ord. 2000-6, 10-2-2000)
(a) Three (3) complete elevations for all buildings or building types which indicate color and materials shall be submitted to the community
development department. A separate color and material sample board shall be submitted with the elevations for review and approval by the
planning department prior to the issuance of building permits. (Ord. 94-1, 3-7-1994)
(b) The parking structures shall have revised elevations submitted for review and approval by the community development department. No
parking structure shall be constructed before approval of elevations by the community development department. Metal parking structures are
allowed. The parking structures shown on Exhibit E of this section are not approved as part of this precise plan. The structures shall be
constructed with "single supports", and shall be completely painted. (Ord. 2000-6, 10-2-2000)
(c) The applicant or successor in interest shall submit revised plans for the trash enclosures which provide a pedestrian access way which does
not require the opening of the trash enclosure gates, for review and approval by the community development department. The trash
enclosures shall have the same architectural features as the main buildings. All trash enclosures shall be a minimum of six feet (6') high and
have solid metal gates. The trash enclosures shown on Exhibit E of this section are not approved as part of this precise plan.
(d) The attached private open space area shall be enclosed by a matching concrete block or stucco finished wall. Exposed wood fencing shall
not be permitted anywhere in the project area except for the gates of the private patio areas. The private open space areas shall be a
minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable area. The private patio areas of buildings 5 and 6 shall be extended to prevent eastwest
pedestrian traffic between those buildings. The private patio areas of buildings 13, 14 and 15 shall also be extended to prevent northsouth
pedestrian traffic between those buildings.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 332/436
(e) The pergola shall be constructed in accordance with applicable uniform building codes and as shown on Exhibit E of this section.
6. A six foot (6') high decorative concrete block wall shall be required along the southern and western property lines. Wood fencing shall not be
permitted.
7. Wrought iron security gates shall be required at the project entrance points. The applicant or successor in interest shall coordinate with the
police and fire departments to ensure that there is adequate emergency vehicle access to the project.
8. The applicant or successor in interest shall submit three (3) revised copies of the lighting plan included as Exhibit F of this section. The
photometric lighting plan shall be prepared by a licensed electrical engineer for review and approval by the community development and police
departments. The revised plan shall meet the following minimum standards:
(a) No light standards shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20') in the interior of the project and no light standard shall exceed a height of twelve
feet (12') within fifteen feet (15') of any property line. All light standards shall be clearly shown and labeled as to type and height on the lighting
plan.
(b) Lighting under the carport areas shall be shown on the lighting plan.
(c) A minimum of one foot-candle, maintained, shall be required for all parking areas, sidewalks and drive aisles within the project area. A
maximum of a ten to one (10:1) lighting ration shall be permitted. The expected foot-candle ratings shall be shown on a site plan with readings
shown on a ten foot (10') grid and shall extend ten feet (10') outside of the property lines.
(d) All lighting fixtures shall have sharp cut off features near the property line. Excessive light and glare outside of the project shall not be
permitted.
(e) All lighting shall be maintained so as to meet the minimum standards set forth by this section.
9. Landscaping for the project shall conform with the landscaping plan included as Exhibit G of this section with the following changes:
(a) Twenty five percent (25%) of the trees on the project site shall be a minimum of two inch (2") caliper size when measured four and one-half
feet (41/2') above the ground. The remainder of the trees shall be a minimum of a one inch (1") caliper size when measured four and one-half
feet (41/2') above the ground.
(b) The locations and types of trees shown on the plan view of Exhibit G of this section shall take precedence over those shown in the table.
(c) All landscaping shall be installed and growing prior to the final inspection of the project site. All landscaping shall be maintained as approved
by this precise plan.
10. Irrigation plans shall be submitted for review and approval by the community development department prior to installation of any irrigation
system. Low flow and drip irrigation systems shall be utilized except in lawn areas. The applicant or successor in interest shall be responsible for
all fees and materials required for that review.
11. Project signage shall conform with the signage shown on Exhibit E of this section. Additional directional signage and signage identifying the
office and other project facilities may be applied for under a sign permit. No additional project identification signage shall be permitted. No off-site
signage shall be permitted at any time. Address and building identification signage shall be provided prior to the final inspection of the buildings.
Address and building identification signage shall be submitted to the community development department for review and approval by the
community development, fire and police departments prior to installation.
12. A master address plan for the development shall be developed by the building official and fire chief prior to the issuance of the first building
permit.
13. The following fire protection measures shall be incorporated into the project:
(a) All portions of the main drive aisle not designated for parking on Exhibit A of this section shall be designated as a fire lane. The fire lane shall
be painted and signed as required by applicable local, state and federal policies and laws.
(b) Fire hydrants shall be located as directed by the fire chief.
14. An on-site manager shall be required for any apartment use of the property. (Ord. 94-1, 3-7-1994)
15. (Rep. by Ord. 97-3, 7-7-1997)
16. The "tot lot", as shown on Exhibit A of this section, shall be developed as a senior citizen oriented picnic area. The swimming pool area shown
on Exhibit A of this section shall be senior citizen oriented, with steps in the shallow end and a ladder in the deep end.
17. The development of the property shall include a community/recreation center for use by the senior citizens who occupy the residences located
on the property.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 333/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 334/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 335/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 336/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 337/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 338/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 339/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 340/436
(Ord. 94-1, 3-7-94) 11-15-12: R-2-P MULTIPLE FAMILY PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(A) The property set forth in Change of Zone Application No. 84-202 shall be zoned R-2-P.
(B) The precise plan requirements for Zone Change Application No. 84-202 shall be as follows:
1. The property development standards of the R-2 Zone shall govern the development of the subject parcel except as specified herein.
2. The design of the project, and the location of all buildings shall be in conformance with the plan for Zone Change Application No. 84-202 marked
as Exhibit A in this Section. Said plan is by reference, incorporated as part of the Precise Plan as if fully set forth herein.
3. The location, design (including depth and width) and area of all lots within the subject R-2-P Zone shall be shown on Exhibit A within this
Section.
4. Landscape design and improvement shall be provided in conformance with the plan for Zone Change Application No. 84-202 and marked as
Exhibit A in this Section and incorporated herein as part of this Precise Plan as if fully set forth herein.
5. Building height shall be limited to two (2) stories.
6. The project shall be limited to a total of twenty (20) two bedroom, one thousand three hundred seventy seven (1,377) square foot residential
units on five (5) lots with a maximum of four (4) units per lot.
7. All development requiring the issuance of a building permit on the subject property shall be subject to the requirements of Title XI, Chapter 20.1,
Site Plan Review, of the City Code.
8. A maintenance agreement that "runs with the land" shall be presented to and approved by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 865, 5-7-84)
(C) The precise plan requirements for Lots 17, 18, 19 and 20 of Tract Number 3637 shall be as follows:
1. The design of the project, and the location of all buildings shall be in conformance with the plan for Zone Change Application No. 94-254.
Notwithstanding City Code subsection 11-15-12(B)6, Lots 17, 18, 19 and 20 shall be permitted to have three (3) bedrooms for each unit. Each
three (3) bedroom unit shall not exceed fifteen hundred twenty eight (1528) square feet.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 341/436
2. Landscape design and improvements shall be provided in conformance with Zone Change Application No. 84-202. All landscape plans of that
application are hereby incorporated as part of the precise plan by reference. (Ord. 94-3, 4-4-94)
***insert figure here - 11-15-12 exhibit a *** 11-15-13: R-3-P MULTIPLE FAMILY PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(A) The property set forth in Zone Change Application No. 83-199 shall be zoned R-3-P as designated in the application. All zone boundaries shall be
as designated in the Tentative Subdivision Map of Tract No. 3657.
(B) The precise plan requirements for Zone Change Application No. 83-199 shall be as follows:
1. The property development standards of the R-3 zone shall govern the development of the subject property except as specified herein.
2. The project design and the location of all buildings shall be in conformance with the plan for Zone Change Application No. 83-199 marked as
Exhibit "A" in said application. Said plan is by reference, incorporated as part of this precise plan as if fully set forth herein.
3. The development shall be in compliance with conditions of approval as stated in Site Plan Review No. 84-220 and Tentative Tract Map No. 3657.
4. The development shall comply with all applicable codes, statutes, rules and regulations of the State of California and City of Selma which govern
the development of condominium projects. (Ord. 872, 8-20-84)
11-15-14: R-2-P MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(A) The property set forth in Zone Change Application No. 85-206 shall be zoned R-2-P, Medium Density Residential Precise Plan for senior citizen
housing.
(B) The precise plan requirements for zone Change No. 85-206 shall be as follows:
1. The property development standards of the R-2 Zone and applicable McCall Avenue Specific Plan requirements shall govern the development of
the subject property except as specified herein.
2. The design of the senior citizens' residential complex shall be in conformance with the plan identified as Concept Plan 3 and marked Exhibit "A"
along with all conditions of approval contained in Planning Commission Resolution No. 85-555 on file in the Planning Department. Said plan and
conditions of approval are, by reference, incorporated herein as part of the precise plan as if fully set forth herein.
3. The location, design, size and area of all buildings and vehicular circulation shall be substantially as shown on approved plan Exhibit "A" on file
in the Planning Department and identified in paragraph 2 of this subsection.
4. Landscape design and improvements shall be provided in conformance with the final approved site plan for the senior citizens' project.
5. The subject site shall be developed for senior citizen housing only.
6. The conditions of approval contained in City Council Resolution 2259 for this project shall also apply and are incorporated herein by reference as
if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 880, 9-16-1985)
11-15-15: C-1-P NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
The following uses are permitted on the westerly eighty feet (80') of lot 2 of Tract 2948:
(A) Barbershop or beauty parlor;
(B) Book, magazine or stationery store;
(C) Cigar, confectionery, candy or ice cream store;
(D) Florist or gift shop;
(E) Jewelry store;
(F) Office, business or professional;
(G) Photographic studio;
(H) Tailor, clothing or wearing apparel shop;
(I) Radio and television store and repair service; electrical appliance store and incidental repairs music store;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 342/436
(J) Drugstore with pharmacy to include related retail trade;
(K) Shoe store. (Ord. 881, 9-16-1985)
11-15-16: C-3-P COMMERCIAL SERVICE AND R-2-AP MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PRECISE PLAN DISTRICTS:
(A) The property set forth in Zone Change Application Number 91-240 and as subsequently modified by Zone Change Application Numbers 93-253,
94-256, 94-257 and 99-1687 shall be zoned C-3-P and R-2-AP. The property set forth in Zone Change Application Number 99-1687 shall be zoned
C-3-P as shown on Exhibit A of this Section. (Ord. 2000-3, 4-3-2000)
(B) The precise plan requirements shall be as follows:
1. Prior to the development of any portion of the C-3-P or R-2-AP zoned properties, a detailed development map shall be prepared and filed with
the City for consideration as the precise plan of development pursuant to this Chapter.
2. The uses to be considered appropriate on the property zoned C-3-P shall be regional commercial uses that might be listed in the C-3
Commercial Service District of this Code and which shall be first reviewed and approved by the City Council for consistency with the General
Plan.
3. The area designated R-2-AP is so classified to permit the development of affordable single-family residential houses on smaller lot sizes
authorized by the R-2 Zone District. The precise plan of development for the area zoned R-2-AP shall specify the development of single-family
residential housing either as a conventional subdivision or by planned unit development.
(C) The precise plan requirements for lots 15, 16 and 17 of Tract 4468 shall be as follows:
1. The subject property shall only be used for motor vehicle storage. No buildings shall be permitted within the area of lots 15, 16 and 17 of Tract
4468.
2. The applicant or successor in interest shall submit a revised photometric lighting plan to the City for review and approval prior to the installation
of any lighting standards within the subject property.
3. A six foot (6') decorative solid masonry wall shall be constructed adjacent to the residential uses and public right of way. Security treatment for
the wall adjacent to the right of way shall be wrought iron or similar materials, barbed wire shall not be permitted. No barbed wire or similar
measures, whatsoever, shall be used on common property line with residential zoning.
4. A minimum of a fifteen foot (15') setback from the public right of way shall be provided. No walls or other structures shall be permitted in the
setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped and constructed as a park-like feature by the applicant or successor in interest. The setback
area shall be annexed into a landscaping and lighting assessment district for maintenance at the applicant's expense.
5. The applicant or successor in interest shall record an easement for public use over the land in the setback area.
6. No structures, drive aisles or parking shall be permitted within ten feet (10') of a residential zone. (Ord. 94-2, 3-7-1994)
(D) The precise plan requirements for lots 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 of the Palmetto Tract shall be as follows:
1. Lots 7 and 8 of the Palmetto Tract shall only be used for display and circulation related to the sales of motor vehicles.
2. Lots 9, 10 and 11 shall only be used as a caretaker's residence for the adjacent "Selma Auto Mall" development. No commercial or office uses
will be permitted at the residence.
3. An entrance shall be permitted from Snyder Street for emergency vehicles only. No commercial traffic or deliveries shall be permitted through the
Snyder Street entrance any time. The Selma Fire Chief and Police Chief shall review and approve the security provision of the entrance prior to
installation.
4. That portion of Snyder Street adjacent to the development shall be improved by the applicant or successor in interest in accordance with City
standards for residential streets.
5. Any wall adjacent to Snyder Street shall be constructed of decorative masonry block. If security treatment is desired adjacent to Snyder Street, it
shall be constructed of wrought iron or similar materials, barbed wire shall not be permitted.
6. A six foot (6') masonry wall shall be constructed on the southern lot line of lot 11 of the Palmetto Tract.
7. The small structure located west of the caretaker's residence shall be removed.
8. No vehicular access shall be permitted between the caretaker's residence and the adjacent commercial use. A pedestrian access gate, not to
exceed six feet (6') in width, shall be permitted.
9. A minimum of two (2) covered parking spaces shall be provided for the caretaker's residence in accordance with City standards. (Ord. 94-10, 8-
1-1994)
(E) The precise plan requirements for APN 388-061-05 (lots 12, 13, 14, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39) and APN 388-061-11 (lots 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31) of the Palmetto Tract (to become a part of a single new parcel), shall be as follows:
1. The property set forth in Zone Change Number 99-1687 shall be zoned C-3-P as specified.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 343/436
2. The property set forth as C-3-P shall be developed exclusively as a parking lot (motor vehicle storage) for overflow vehicles. No buildings shall
be permitted within the area.
3. The parking lot shall not provide through access to Rose Avenue for delivery or removal of vehicles or other products of operation, public
access, or employee access. The access on Rose Avenue shall be for the sole access of emergency fire and police services.
4. The parking lot shall not be improved with sound systems of any type, nor shall the lighting provide any other illumination than for security
purposes. The applicant shall provide a photometric lighting plan to the City for review and approval prior to the installation of any lighting
standards within the subject property.
5. Security treatment for the walls adjacent to the right of ways shall be wrought iron or similar materials, barbed wire shall not be permitted. No
barbed wire or similar measures, whatsoever, shall be used on common property lines with residential zoning.
6. Prior to occupancy, the applicant shall complete and submit either a Hazardous Materials Business Plan or a Business Plan Exemption form to
the Fresno County Department of Community Health, Environmental Health System. Contact the Hazardous Materials Disclosure/Registration
Program at (559) 445-3271.
7. Fire protection are as follows:
(a) Wooden post and rail fence along railroad tracks protrude into the fire lane. This fence needs to be relocated.
(b) One new fire hydrant south of the new building as per the site plan. Minimum flow of two thousand (2,000) gpm at twenty (20) psi. Fire
hydrant to meet California Water Service specifications.
(c) Fire Department Connection (FDC) to be located within twenty five feet (25') of a fire hydrant.
(d) North driveway in front of new building to be designated fire lane as this maintains continuity with general fire access plan.
(e) Fire Department access through both front and back gates (Rose Avenue) shall be maintained. Either provide Department with a key to the
current lock or install "Knox Locks".
(f) Fire lane designation shall be made in all areas of the required fire lanes either by signage or painting of curbs. Fire lane designation shall
meet the standards of the Selma Fire Department.
(g) No overhangs to protrude into required fire lanes.
8. A grading and drainage plan must be submitted to the City Engineer. On-site storm water shall be directed and deposited as determined
acceptable by the City Engineer.
9. All grade differentials greater than one foot (1') require the use of a retaining wall. The block wall recently constructed along the entire perimeter
of the project site is doubling as a retaining wall between lots 14 and 15. The applicant shall provide calculations showing that the recently
constructed footing qualifies as a retaining wall.
10. A five foot (5') sidewalk shall be constructed along the Rose Avenue project area frontage per City standards.
11. Provide an engineer's cost estimate for all improvements excluding the building.
12. Right-of-way dedication along Rose Avenue shall be provided to the City by separate instrument.
13. The abandonment of Snyder Street right of way adjacent to State Route 99 shall include an irrevocable offer to dedicate approximately nine
feet (9') for the ultimate transportation corridor of a six (6) lane freeway with two (2) auxiliary lanes two hundred eighteen feet (218').
14. An encroachment permit must be obtained from the Department of Transportation for any work within the State right of way. Engineering
drawings of all work are to be submitted with the application and must be prepared in metric. Work planned within the State right of way will be
performed to State standards and specifications at no cost to the State. Plans for said work needs to be reviewed and approved by the Permit
Department before a permit can be issued.
15. The applicant shall comply with all rules, regulations and upgrades as required by California Water and Selma-Kingsburg-Fowler Sanitation
District.
16. All necessary plans shall be provided to the Chief Building Inspector for review and approval. All required permits and inspections shall be
obtained prior to commencement of operation.
17. A security gate located at the Rose Avenue location is for the sole purpose of emergency fire and police access. No loading or unloading of
vehicles will be permitted at this access point. In addition, this drive access may not be used for public or employee access, nor will there be a
pedestrian gate. Employees will not be permitted to park on either Snyder Street or Rose Avenue. All employee parking must be within the
confines of the Auto Mall. No additional traffic will be added to Snyder Street or Rose Avenue.
18. The applicant shall submit a landscaping and irrigation plan describing the vegetation and tree types planted along the Rose Avenue and
Snyder Street public rights of way as well as the irrigation system already in place. The City shall conduct periodic reviews of the site to monitor
the maintenance of the irrigation system and that the landscaping remains viable. The use on Parcel 4, as shown on the previously approved
Parcel Map and/or the newly formed parcel (subject of Tentative Parcel Map No. 00-0013) shall maintain the irrigation system and the
landscaping. The maintenance shall be ongoing regardless of ownership of the parcel. EXHIBIT A
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 344/436
(Ord. 2000-3, 4-3-2000)
11-15-17: C-2-P CENTRAL COMMERCIAL PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-10, 10-1-2007)
11-15-18: C-2-P CENTRAL COMMERCIAL PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-10, 10-1-2007)
11-15-19: C-R ZONE:
The property described as assessor's parcel numbers (APN) 385-230-35 and 385-230-51, 52, 53, 59, 60, 61 and 62 is hereby zoned C-R regional
commercial zone. (Ord. 2007-10, 10-1-2007)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 345/436
11-15-20: R-3-P MULTIPLE-FAMILY PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(A) The property set forth in zone change application number 97-269 shall be zoned R-3-P (multiple-family residential) precise plan district as
designated in said application.
(B) The precise plan requirements for zone change application number 97-269 shall be as follows:
1. The property development standards of the R-3 zone shall govern the development of the subject property except as specified herein.
2. The placement of all buildings, structures, parking areas, drive aisles and recreation facilities shall be in conformance with the plan attached as
exhibit A to this section. All buildings, structures, parking areas and drive aisles shall be maintained as approved by this precise plan. Minor
changes that do not affect the intent and integrity of the precise plan may be made with the approval of the community development director of
the city.
3. A maximum of eighty nine (89) units shall be permitted on the site and shall be limited to sixty four (64) 1-bedroom units and twenty five (25) 2-
bedroom units. One unit shall be reserved for the residential project manager who shall reside on site. The floor plans of the residential units
shall conform with the floor plans attached as exhibit B to this section. The floor plans of the community building shall conform with the floor plan
attached as exhibit C to this section. Minor dimension and facility adjustments may be approved by the building inspector to comply with
handicapped accessibility requirements for the handicapped units.
4. A minimum of ninety (90) on site parking spaces shall be provided for the complex. Covered parking shall be provided for a minimum sixty one
(61) vehicles. Covered parking shall be provided by carports or enclosed garage buildings. The architectural design of covered vehicular parking
shall be of similar architectural materials as incorporated and used in the housing unit construction. Handicapped spaces shall be provided in
accordance with applicable local, state and federal laws.
5. All building elevations shall conform with the elevations attached as exhibits D and D-1 to this section as approved except for fence height
details of the wrought iron fence and except as pertains to the proposed carport. Carports shall be constructed with stucco support columns
matching other buildings in materials and color. Carport roofs shall incorporate mansard construction design with tile, metal clad roofing or other
architectural treatment that match materials and colors of the main building designs of the project. The proposed architectural treatments shall be
approved by the Community Development Director prior to issuance of building permits. Architectural features for all buildings with front or side
orientation to Evergreen Street shall include shutters consistent with treatment on other building elevations.
6. The fences enclosing or screening patio or private open space area shall be constructed of wood frame materials with a stucco finish that
matches the exterior of the building in material and color. Exposed wood fencing shall not be permitted anywhere in the project area except for
the gates of the private patio areas. Any wooden gate provided shall be painted with colors matching the stucco finish or building trim. The
private open space areas shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable area.
7. A seven foot (7') high decorative concrete block wall shall be required along the northerly, westerly and easterly property lines or along
development lines that are common with properties zoned P-M-D (Planned Medical Development) District. Within the front yard area the
masonry wall shall not exceed forty two inches (42"). The masonry block wall shall comply with City standards as to construction. Prior to
construction, plans demonstrating proposed heights, location, and materials shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for
review and approval. Within the area of fifty feet (50') from the front property line, the masonry wall shall incorporate pilasters, at twenty foot (20')
centers, constructed with split faced or other approved decorative concrete block materials and shall be capped appropriately. The colors of the
block fence shall coordinate with building materials.
8. Wrought or ornamental iron fencing and security gates may be provided along the front of the property. Such fencing shall incorporate brick,
decorative masonry block or framed stucco pilasters erected on a maximum of twenty foot (20') centers. Any security gates maintained at the
project entry points shall be designed and equipped in a manner approved by the Selma Police and Fire Chiefs to allow twenty four (24) hour
accessibility for emergency service vehicles.
9. Prior to the issuance of building permits, three (3) copies of a photometric lighting plan shall be submitted and approved by the Community
Development Department. The photometric lighting plan shall be prepared by a licensed electrical engineer. The plan shall meet the following
minimum standards:
(a) No light standards shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20') in the interior of the project and no light standard shall exceed a height of twelve
feet (12') within fifteen feet (15') of any property line. All light standards shall be clearly shown and labeled as to type and height on the lighting
plan.
(b) Lighting under the carport areas shall be shown on the lighting plan.
(c) A minimum of one-half (1/2) foot-candle, maintained, shall be required for all parking areas, sidewalks, and drive aisles within the project area.
A maximum of a ten to one (10:1) lighting ratio shall be permitted. The expected foot-candle ratings shall be shown on a site plan with
readings shown on a ten foot (10') grid and shall extend ten feet (10') outside of the property lines.
(d) All lighting fixtures shall have sharp cut-off features near the property line. Excessive light and glare outside of the project shall not be
permitted.
(e) All lighting shall be maintained so as to meet the minimum standards set forth by this Section.
10. The site shall be developed in accordance with a landscape plan reviewed and approved by the Community Development Department. The
landscape plan shall identify the size, location and the type of plant materials. The landscape plan shall be approved prior to the issuance of
building permits and shall provide for the following:
(a) Twenty five percent (25%) of the trees on the project site shall be a minimum of two inch (2") caliper size when measured four and one-half
feet (41/2') above the ground. The remainder of the trees shall be a minimum of a one inch (1") caliper size when measured four and one-half
feet (41/2') above the ground.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 346/436
(b) Fifty percent (50%) of the shrubs on the project shall be a minimum five (5) gallon size. All other shrubs shall be of a minimum one gallon
size.
(c) All landscaping shall be installed and growing prior to the final inspection of the project site. All landscaping shall be continually maintained in
accordance with the approved plan.
11. Irrigation plans shall be submitted for review and approval by the Community Development Department prior to installation of any irrigation
system. Low flow and drip irrigation systems shall be utilized except in lawn areas. The applicant or successor in interest shall be responsible for
all fees and materials required for that review.
12. Prior to the installation of any sign, a master plan of signage shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Department. All
signage shall conform to the approved sign plan. Additional directional signage and signage identifying the office and other project facilities may
be applied for under a sign permit. No additional project identification signage shall be permitted. Address and building identification signage
shall be provided prior to the final inspection of the buildings. Address and building identification signage shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department for review and approval by the Community Development, Fire and Police Departments prior to installation.
13. A master address plan for the development shall be developed by the Building Official and Selma Fire Chief prior to the issuance of the first
building permit.
14. The following fire protection measures shall be incorporated into the project:
(a) All portions of the main drive aisle not designated for parking on Exhibit A shall be designated as a fire lane. The fire lane shall be painted
and signed as required by applicable local, State and Federal policies and laws prior to occupancy of any building.
(b) Fire hydrants shall be located as directed by the Selma Fire Chief.
15. Evergreen Street shall be offered for dedication and shall be constructed to City standards from the easterly development line of the senior
citizen housing project to the nearest developed portion of Evergreen Street to the west. The minimum standard for improvement shall be two (2)
12-foot wide travel lanes, parking on the development side eight feet (8') in width and a sidewalk/parkway area ten feet (10') wide. Total minimum
street improvement width shall be forty two feet (42'). Construction shall include turnaround for emergency service vehicles approved by the
Selma Fire Chief and City Engineer. The right of way for turnaround shall be offered for dedication for temporary emergency use. The temporary
use dedication shall be relinquished to the property owner upon completion of additional streets providing adequate emergency vehicular
circulation.
16. Improvements to be constructed shall include street section, concrete curb and gutter, storm drainage, sewer, water and public utility facilities.
17. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant or successor in interest until the City has accepted submitted plans that illustrate an
appropriate cul-de-sac turnaround at the end of the frontage of the proposed senior housing project.
18. The developer/owner of the senior citizen complex shall enter into a development agreement with the City assuring the development and
maintenance of the residential development for senior citizen housing for a period of fifty five (55) years as proposed in the application for
rezoning. The development agreement shall also provide for developer/property owner to dedicate one hundred four foot (104') dedication along
the Del Rey Alignment prior to the issuance of permits.
19. The applicant or successor in interest shall be responsible for arranging a pre-design with the City Engineer and Selma-Kingsburg-Fowler,
County Sanitation District.
20. Guest parking shall be designated and made part of the final development plan.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 347/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 348/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 349/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 350/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 351/436
(Ord. 97-9, 12-1-1997) 11-15-21: C-3-P COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL PRECISE PLAN ZONE:
(A) The property set forth in Precise Plan Application No. 97-270, heretofore zoned C-3-P, shall be developed in accordance with the precise plan of
development conditionally approved by the City Council, except as is herein amended by the approval of Precise Plan Application No. 98-275 for
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 352/436
the area described as Phase 1. Exhibit A-1 to this Section shall be added to the established exhibits of Precise Plan 97-270 to show the changes in
building size and configuration approved by Ordinance 98-9. (Ord. 98-9, 9-8-1998)
(B) The requirements for Precise Plan Application No. 97-270 shall be as follows:
1. Vesting Tentative Parcel Map No. 97-95 and Conditional Use Permit No. 97-359, are concurrent applications submitted with Precise Plan
Application No. 97-270. Conditional approval or denials of said related applications which affect the development plan shall be incorporated into
the development plan by reference. (Ord. 98-1, 1-20-1998)
2. The design of the project, and the location of all buildings shall be in conformance with the plan considered and conditionally approved by the
Selma City Council and heretofore attached as Exhibit A to Precise Plan Application No. 97-270 with the exception of amendments authorized by
Precise Plan No. 98-275 and shown in Exhibit A-1 to this Section. The fourteen thousand (14,000) square foot building shown as Shell B-1 shall
be authorized for use as either a single tenant retail building or as a retail building occupied by multiple retail shops. Minor deviations, not
affecting the purpose and intent of the City Council may be made by the Community Development Director through the minor modification
application procedure. (Ord. 98-9, 9-8-1998)
3. The architectural design of all buildings and structures shall be in accordance with the elevation plans submitted to, considered and approved by
the Selma City Council, except as altered or amended by the decision of the Council and listed in these conditions of approval1.
4. The property owner/developer or successor in interest shall be responsible for the dedication of land required for purposes of street
improvements on Stillman Street deemed necessary to provide safe vehicular and pedestrian access to the subject property and development.
Required Stillman Street improvements for the proposed development shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) street section sufficient to provide
two-way traffic, on-street parking, curb and gutter and pedestrian parkway facilities, as well as paved transitions and additional intersection turn
lanes determined by the City Engineer and/or Caltrans to be necessary for safe channelization of traffic. Traffic improvements required shall
include signalization equipment and installation for the Highland Avenue and Stillman Street intersection and traffic-control signs and pavement
markings.
5. The site shall be developed with the provisions for access to Floral Avenue as authorized by the California Department of Transportation
(Caltrans) and the City Engineer. Plan inset drawing detailing option 3, featuring a right-turn only option for vehicles exiting the site, shall be the
approved access design concept. Floral access option 2 shall only be permitted upon approval by the City Engineer and Caltrans and the
relinquishment of Floral Avenue access control rights by the California Highway Commission and Department of Transportation.
6. The major driveways connecting Floral Avenue and Stillman Street through the project site shall be constructed with initiation of Phase I and
shall incorporate design features deemed appropriate, by Caltrans and the City Engineer, to discourage extraneous, through vehicular traffic
between those streets. The design features shall be approved prior to the issuance of building permits2.
7. The southbound Freeway 99 off-ramp to Floral Avenue shall be widened in accordance with the requirements of Caltrans. Any new or upgraded
signalization equipment, traffic-control signs or pavement markings required by Caltrans and/or the City Engineer shall be provided and installed
as required.
8. All public improvements for street, sewer, water and public utilities shall be constructed and provided in accordance with the Public Works
Standards of the City.
9. Water service, either on-site or off-site, shall be provided in accordance with the standards of the California Water Company. Public utility
easements shall be provided for on-site water facilities providing fire protection service and requiring maintenance service by the City or water
company. Water pressure supplied for fire protection shall comply to the standards required by the Selma Fire Department.
10. Prior to the issuance of building permits a fire services plan identifying fire hydrant locations and designating fire lanes for emergency access
shall be submitted to and approved by the Selma Fire Chief. The site shall be provided with a new fire lane located between buildings identified
as "Shops A" and "C" in the vicinity of the line between Phase I and Phase II; or additional Fire Department connections shall be added to each
fire sprinklered building or system so that there is a Fire Department connection at the front and back of the building(s) within twenty five feet
(25') of a fire hydrant. The minimum width of the new fire lane shall be twenty four feet (24'). All designated fire lanes shall be marked and posted
in accordance with the fire services plan. All buildings with the exception of "Fast Food/Pad A" shall be provided with fire sprinklers developed in
accordance with a fire sprinkler plan approved by the Building Official and/or Fire Chief.
11. Address numbers shall be installed at all building address locations with letters not less than eight inches (8") in height with a minimum one-half
inch (1/2") stroke and contrasting background visible during the day or night.
12. Any outstanding sewer facility pro rata reimbursement fee related to the existing twelve inch (12") sewer main constructed by the City to serve
the property shall be due and payable prior to the issuance of building permits. In addition, the project is subject to the payment of assessment
district fees for signalization, storm drainage and other improvements as established by assessment district formation.
13. A storm drainage and grading plan shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer prior to the issuance of building permits.
14. Prior to issuance of building permits, a nonexclusive reciprocal access and maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department. The agreement shall provide for the mutual use and maintenance of vehicular and pedestrian access, parking and
circulation, storm drainage and sewer and water facilities and shall be recorded with the Fresno County Recorder's office. The agreement shall
provide an irrevocable offer of access across and through the site for future development occurring on property immediately to the west at a
minimum of two (2) separate locations to be approved by the City.
15. Fencing of the subject property shall be in accordance with a master fence plan reviewed and approved by Caltrans and the City.
16. Three (3) copies of a photometric lighting plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review and approval prior to
issuance of building permits. The plan shall show the intensity of the proposed lighting in a ten foot (10') grid pattern in foot-candles. A maximum
ratio of ten to one (10:1) with a minimum intensity of 1.00 foot-candles maintained shall be provided for the project site. Light standards shall not
exceed forty feet (40') in height.
17. All rules and regulations of the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control District shall be complied with.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 353/436
18. The site shall be developed in accordance with a landscape plan reviewed and approved by the Community Development Department. The
landscape plan shall designate the size, location and type of plant materials to be incorporated into the landscaped areas. Landscaped areas
shall be provided with timed electronic irrigation systems and shall be continually maintained. No battery-powered irrigation timers shall be
permitted.
19. The site entry points at Floral Avenue and Stillman Street shall be landscaped in accordance with landscape plans detailing special treatment
of the entry points in a manner consistent with exhibits submitted to and reviewed by the City.
20. All on-site freestanding signage, including freeway signs, shall comply with the Master Sign Plan approved by the City Council as a part of
Precise Plan Application No. 97-270 or an amendment thereof. The Master Sign Plan shall identify the height, size and location of all
freestanding and freeway-oriented signs and shall contain a nonrevocable agreement of all property owners within the Precise Plan Area to
abide by the provisions of the Master Plan. The agreement shall provide for rights and responsibilities assigned to all properties under the
agreement for advertising and maintenance of signs.
21. Failure to comply with these conditions of approval shall be grounds for revocation of this approval. (Ord. 98-1, 1-20-1998)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 354/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 355/436
(Ord. 98-9, 9-8-1998)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 356/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 357/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 358/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 359/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 360/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 361/436
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 362/436
(Ord. 98-1, 1-20-1998)
Chapter 15.1
PV PIONEER VILLAGE ZONE
11-15.1-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The following regulations shall apply in the PV Pioneer Village Zone, unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 771, 6-20-1977)
11-15.1-2: USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO FIRST SECURING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The establishment or operation of any of the following uses in the PV Zone shall not be permitted unless a conditional use permit and a Master Plan
have been approved under the provisions of this section.
(A) All uses permitted in the residential, commercial and industrial zones.
(B) Indoor and outdoor displays of items commonly considered of historic interest. (Ord. 771, 6-20-1977)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 363/436
11-15.1-3: LIMITATIONS ON USES:
(A) No uses shall be permitted except those uses designed and operated primarily for the purpose of creating or supporting a functioning historic
display.
(B) No use shall be permitted except those which are consistent with the adopted Master Plan. (Ord. 771, 6-20-1977)
11-15.1-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
(A) Access shall be designed to insure safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian movement, to, from and within the development. The
development shall have access to a public street.
(B) Yards shall be adequate in size to provide for planned landscaping to insure adequate spacing for fire protection purposes and to insure safe sight
distance for movement within the development.
(C) Landscaping shall be provided and maintained. Plants and related materials shall be arranged in a manner which is consistent with and
complementary to the building design and materials.
(D) The number of parking spaces required shall be established by the Planning Commission at the time the conditional use permit is issued. (Ord.
771, 6-20-1977)
11-15.1-5: MASTER PLAN:
A Master Plan showing the extent and character of the entire proposed development shall be submitted. The Master Plan shall be submitted with the
conditional use permit application. The plan, or accompanying narrative, shall include sufficient information to determine that all requirements of this
section have been met, including but not limited to the following:
(A) Proposed uses;
(B) Development standards showing setbacks, yards and landscaping;
(C) Heights of buildings and structures, if known;
(D) Architectural design or theme;
(E) Development phasing;
(F) Services and facilities supporting proposed uses, including vehicular access and parking. (Ord. 771, 6-20-1977)
11-15.1-6: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
Before any building or structure is erected or parcel created under the provisions of this section, a site plan reflecting all conditions of approval shall
have been submitted to and approved by the City Engineer/Planner. Such site plan shall encompass all that area shown on the approved Master Plan.
(Ord. 771, 6-20-1977)
11-15.1-7: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, events at Pioneer Village shall not be subject to the requirements of title VI, chapter 17 of this
Code. Instead they shall be subject to duly approved policies of the Pioneer Village Commission. (Ord. 2017-4, 11-6-2017)
Chapter 15.2
S-P SPECIFIC PLAN ZONE
11-15.2-1: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The S-P (specific plan) zoning district is hereby established to provide a distinct zoning classification for areas of the city within the boundaries of a
specific plan area. The applicable specific plan is a regulatory document, and upon its adoption, the specific plan for an area covered by the specific
plan shall govern and control all allowable land uses, densities, lot coverage, minimum areas, building height limits, building separation, open space
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 364/436
requirements, signage, landscaping, street widths, architectural design, walls and fences, street lighting, park locations, and all other development and
design related elements within the applicable specific plan area. All approved specific plans will be on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-
4-2007)
11-15.2-2: DESIGNATED SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS:
The following specific plan area designations are hereby established:
(A) S-PA (Amberwood).
(B) S-PNE (northeast).
(C) S-PSS (south Selma).
(D) S-PR (Rockwell).
(E) S-PNW (northwest). (Ord. 2007-6, 6-4-2007)
11-15.2-3: SPECIFIC PLAN AREA BOUNDARIES AND ZONING MAP:
The specific plan area boundaries may be determined by reference to the applicable specific plan and shall be delineated on the official city of Selma
zoning map as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-4-2007)
11-15.2-4: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses shall be those uses as depicted on the land use map and zoning map of the applicable specific plan for the area or development, and
as outlined in the specific plan text under permitted uses. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-4-2007)
11-15.2-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses shall be those uses as outlined in the applicable specific plan text as conditional uses. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-4-2007)
11-15.2-6: CONTROLLING REGULATORY DOCUMENT:
The applicable specific plan shall be the controlling land use and zoning regulatory document for all land located within the designated boundaries of
the applicable specific plan area. The specific plan land use and development regulations supersede all inconsistent requirements of the city's zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-4-2007)
11-15.2-7: PREZONING FOR ANNEXATION:
All land located within the boundaries of a designated specific plan area shall be prezoned to the applicable specific plan area prior to annexation of
the subject property into the city. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-4-2007)
11-15.2-8: MINOR DEVIATIONS:
Minor deviations of up to but not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the development standards for the applicable specific plan area may be approved by
the community development director ("director") upon application by the property owner which application outlines and demonstrates the justifiable
need and reason for the deviation. No deviation which compromises public health and safety in any manner shall be approved. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-4-
2007)
Chapter 16
CONDITIONAL USES
11-16-1: PURPOSE:
Certain uses in all districts and designated uses in certain districts are permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. Because of their
unusual characteristics, or the special attributes of the area in which they are to be located, conditional uses require special consideration so that they
may be properly located with respect to the objectives of the zoning ordinance and their effect on surrounding properties. The planning commission is
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 365/436
empowered to grant and to deny applications for conditional use permits subject to the requirements of this section and to impose reasonable
conditions upon the granting of conditional use permits. (Ord. 766, 4-4-1977)
11-16-2: APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission on a form prescribed by the planning
commission, which shall include the following information:
(A) Name and address of the applicant.
(B) Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the authorized agent of the owner.
(C) Address and legal description or the assessor's parcel number of the property.
(D) The application shall include an accurate scale drawing of the site and improvements proposed. The drawing must be adequate to enable the
Planning Commission to determine the compliance of the proposal with the requirements of this Ordinance.
(E) Any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a conditional use permit that may be required by the City.
11-16-3: PLANNING COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING:
(A) A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission not less than ten (10) nor more than forty (40) days after the filing of a complete
application for a conditional use permit, notice of which shall be given in the manner prescribed in Section 11-21-2(C).
(B) At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and the statement and drawing submitted therewith and shall receive
pertinent evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with
respect to the findings prescribed in Section 11-16-4.
(C) The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and procedures specified in Section 11-21-3.
11-16-4: FINDINGS AND CONDITIONS:
The Planning Commission in granting a conditional use permit shall find as follows:
(A) That the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all yards, spaces, walls and fences, parking,
loading, landscaping and other features required by this Section to adjust said use with land and uses in the neighborhood.
(B) That the site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and kind of traffic
generated by the proposed use.
(C) That the proposed use will have no adverse effect on property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the permitted use thereof. In making this
determination, the Planning Commission shall consider the proposed location of improvements on the site; vehicular ingress, egress and internal
circulation, setbacks, height of buildings, walls and fences, landscaping, outdoor lighting, signs, such other characteristics as will affect surrounding
property.
(D) That the conditions stated in the resolution are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Conditions may include
the following:
1. Special yards, spaces and buffers.
2. Fences and walls.
3. Enclosure of storage areas and limitation on out of door display of merchandise.
4. Grading, surfacing, and drainage specifications.
5. Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress.
6. Regulation of signs.
7. Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof.
8. Requiring maintenance of the grounds.
9. Requiring fire prevention equipment and measures.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 366/436
10. Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, etc.
11. Regulation of time for certain activities.
12. Time period within which the proposed use shall be developed. (See Section 11-16-7)
13. Regulation of the time period for which the use permit will be valid and the use may be operated. (See Section 11-16-8)
14. Regulation of lighting.
15. A bond acceptable to the City or deposit of money to assure faithful compliance and performance on the part of the applicant for the completion
of street improvements and other facilities or the removal of such facilities.
16. Installation of site improvements including but not limited to curb, gutter, sidewalk and street paving between the edge of existing paving and
the proposed curb line.
17. And such other conditions as will make possible the development of the City in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the intent
and purposes set forth in this Section. (Ord. 766, 4-4-77)
(E) That the proposed use is consistent with the Selma General Plan and applicable land use component plans which may establish criteria for
approval and/or standards for development. (Ord. 935, 8-20-90)
11-16-5: PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION:
(A) The Planning Commission may approve, approve with stated conditions, or disapprove the conditional use permit application by resolution. The
resolution shall describe the basis for the decision and state the specific circumstances requiring the conditions to approval.
(B) The Planning Commission shall have forty (40) days after the conclusion of a public hearing to render its decision on the conditional use permit
application. Failure of the Planning Commission to adopt a resolution within the aforementioned forty (40) day period shall be deemed to constitute
a denial of the application.
(C) The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed to the Council in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 11-
16-6.
(D) The Planning Commission shall cause a copy of its resolution to be mailed to the applicant within ten (10) days from the date of adoption thereof.
(E) No building or zoning permit shall be issued where a conditional use permit has been approved or conditionally approved by the Planning
Commission until ten (10) days after such permit has been granted by the Planning Commission and then only in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the conditional use permit granted.
11-16-6: APPEAL TO THE CITY COUNCIL:
(A) In case the applicant is not satisfied with the action of the Planning Commission, the applicant may within ten (10) days after the date of mailing, as
shown by the postmark of the papers mentioned in subsection 11-16-5(D), or within ten (10) days after the expiration of the forty (40) day period
mentioned in subsection 11-16-5(B), file in writing with the City Clerk an appeal to the City Council. Said appeal shall state specifically wherein it is
claimed that there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Planning Commission or whereby its decision is not supported by the evidence in the
record.
(B) In case any party other than the applicant is not satisfied with the action of the Planning Commission, said party may within ten (10) days after the
date of adoption of the resolution of the Planning Commission, or within ten (10) days after the expiration of the forty (40) day period mentioned in
Section 11-16-5(B) file in writing with the City Clerk an appeal to the City Council. Said appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed that there
was an error or abuse of discretion by the Planning Commission or whereby its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record.
(C) The City Council shall set a date for a public hearing on the appeal and shall post notices as set forth in Section 11-21-2(C). The date for the public
hearing shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than forty (40) days from the date on which the appeal was filed.
(D) Notice shall also be given to the Planning Commission of such appeal, and the Planning Commission shall submit a report to the City Council
setting forth the reason for its action or shall be represented at the hearing.
(E) The City Council may affirm, reverse, or modify a decision of the Planning Commission, provided, however, that if a decision denying a conditional
use permit is reversed or a decision granting a use permit is modified, the City Council shall, on the basis of the record transmitted and such
additional evidence as may be submitted, make the findings prerequisite to the granting of a conditional use permit as prescribed in Section 11-16-
4.
(F) The City Council shall render its decision by resolution within forty (40) days after the conclusion of the public hearing held on the appeal. Failure of
the City Council to adopt a resolution within the aforementioned forty (40) day period shall be deemed to constitute a denial of the appeal.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 367/436
(G) The City Council shall cause a copy of its resolution to be mailed to the applicant within ten (10) days from the adoption thereof.
(H) The decision of the City Council shall be final and shall have immediate effect.
11-16-7: TIME LIMIT FOR DEVELOPMENT:
A conditional use permit shall lapse and shall become void one year following the date on which the conditional use permit became effective unless,
by conditions of the conditional use permit a lesser or greater time is prescribed or unless, prior to the expiration, a building permit is issued by the
building official and construction is commenced, and being diligently pursued in accordance with the conditional use permit. A conditional use permit
may be renewed for an additional period of one year or for a lesser or greater period as may be specified, provided that an application for renewal is
filed with the planning commission prior to the expiration of the time period granted. The commission may grant or deny an application for renewal.
(Ord. 766, 4-4-1977)
11-16-8: USE PERMIT TO RUN WITH THE LAND:
A conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of
ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the use permit application unless a specific time period in which the use permit will be valid
and the use may be operated has been set in accordance with subsection 11-16-4(D)13 of this chapter. (Ord. 766, 4-4-1977)
11-16-9: NEW APPLICATION:
Following the denial of a conditional use permit application or the revocation of a conditional use permit, no application for a conditional use permit for
the same or substantially the same conditional use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial or
revocation of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 766, 4-4-1977)
11-16-10: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit may be revoked or modified in the manner and under the conditions set forth in chapter 24 of this title. (Ord. 766, 4-4-1977)
11-16-11: UNCLASSIFIED CONDITIONAL USES:
Any use listed below may be permitted in any zone in the city specified in the permit unless otherwise provided in this chapter after the same has been
reviewed and a conditional use permit therefor has been issued in the manner provided hereinabove; and any use listed in this chapter shall not be
permitted in any zone in the city without such review and such permit except in a zone where such use is specifically permitted by this title:
(A) Airports.
(B) Cemeteries.
(C) Churches subject to the provisions of subsection 11-16-12(B) of this chapter.
(D) Columbariums, crematories, and mausoleums, provided that none of the foregoing shall be permitted in any R zone, unless within a cemetery.
(E) Fire and police station.
(F) Golf course or driving range.
(G) Public utility facilities, including water wells, substations, communication equipment buildings, and excluding pole lines and distribution mains.
(H) Radio or television transmitters and wireless and nonwireless telecommunications facilities. Wireless and nonwireless telecommunications facilities
are hereby required to comply with the provisions of subsection 11-16-12(C) of this chapter.
(I) Refuse dumps and disposal.
(J) Mental hospital; provided, such use shall not be permitted in any R zone.
(K) Railroads.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 368/436
(L) Amusement parks, circuses, carnivals or fairgrounds, open air theaters, racetracks and rodeo grounds. (None of the foregoing shall be permitted in
any R zone, except that open air theaters may be allowed in city parks, subject to the provisions of title IX, chapter 8 of this code.)
For purposes of this subsection the following definitions shall apply:
AMUSEMENT PARKS: A commercially operated park with various devices for entertainment and booths for the sale of food and drink.
CARNIVALS OR FAIRGROUNDS: A commercial amusement show having mechanical rides, amusements, games of skill, sideshows and food or
drink for sale. Generally is a traveling show.
CIRCUSES: An exhibition or entertainment at which feats of horsemanship, acrobatics and trained or wild animals are exhibited or displayed, to
which exhibition or entertainment an admission fee is charged.
OPEN AIR THEATERS: An area or place of enactment, natural or manmade, which may have a turf stage, curtains and dressing rooms at which
plays, pageants, concerts, drama activities and meetings are held.
RACETRACKS: A course on which races are run with animals or mechanical devices.
RODEO GROUNDS: A public performance featuring bronco riding, calf roping, steer wrestling and bull riding.
(M) Mortuaries.
(N) Full time elementary, junior high and high schools, public and private, subject to the provisions of subsection 11-16-12(B) of this chapter.
(O) Playgrounds and public parks, exclusive of amusement parks.
(P) Childcare nurseries subject to the provisions of subsection 11-16-12(A) of this chapter.
(Q) Institutional buildings subject to the provisions of subsection 11-16-12(B) of this chapter.
(R) Private clubs and lodges including private recreation clubs.
(S) Rest homes and nursing homes.
(T) Commercial coaches with a commercial seal issued by the state for all uses (office uses) permitted in the commercial and manufacturing zones,
except residential uses, for a period not to exceed one year in length. Mobile homes used as caretaker residences in manufacturing districts are
not considered to be commercial coaches.
(U) Arcades, video or electronic game establishments having six (6) or more amusement machines for use (except within any R zone).
(V) C-3 (commercial service) zoning district hereby establishes the following conditional uses: poolrooms, card rooms, massage establishments, tattoo
parlors, drug paraphernalia shops, or any combination thereof. (Ord. 766, 4-4-1977; amd. Ord. 791, 7-3-1978; Ord. 827, 7-6-1981; Ord. 846, 9-20-
1982; Ord. 96-4, 5-20-1996; Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999; Ord. 2002-3, 3-4-2002)
11-16-12: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS ON CERTAIN UNCLASSIFIED CONDITIONAL USES:
(A) Childcare Nurseries; Play Area Requirement:
1. There shall be provided on the lot or on adjacent premises a single play area of not less than seven hundred (700) square feet plus an additional
sixty (60) square feet for each child in excess of ten (10) as shown by the maximum number of children which may be cared for at any time,
pursuant to the license for the nursery.
2. The play area shall not be located in any required front or side yard.
(B) Institutional Buildings; Additional Yard Requirements: Any building erected, altered or used for school or church purposes, or as an institutional
building, shall be located at least fifteen feet (15') from every lot line or any property included in any R zone, notwithstanding any lesser
requirement in the zone where located; provided, such building shall not be required to be located more than five feet (5') from any lot line adjacent
to any alley. With respect to the accessory buildings, the commission shall have authority to waive the foregoing requirements for good cause.
(Ord. 766, 4-4-1977)
(C) Wireless And Nonwireless Telecommunications Facilities:
1. Wireless and nonwireless telecommunications facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the city of Selma wireless and
nonwireless telecommunications facilities standards and design manual, a copy of which is on file with the city clerk and in the community
development department.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 369/436
2. Wireless and nonwireless telecommunications facilities shall not be located inside residential zones, or within three hundred feet (300') of any
residential zone.
3. The requested placement and height of wireless and nonwireless telecommunications facilities shall be proven necessary by sound engineering
practices. Complete engineering reports for location and height requirements must be filed at the time of application for the conditional use
permit (CUP).
4. Wireless and nonwireless telecommunications facilities shall be "Collocated" with existing sites unless sound engineering analysis referenced in
subsection (C)3 of this section show this to create an unreasonable hardship for the applicant. The analysis will reference the location and height
requirements as well as the capacity of existing facilities.
5. The owner of any wireless and/or nonwireless telecommunications facility shall on July 1 of every year provide a statement of the operational
status of any facility they own within the city of Selma to the Selma community development department. Any facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months or a total of eighteen (18) months in any three (3) year period shall be considered abandoned.
Abandoned wireless and nonwireless telecommunications facilities shall be demolished within ninety (90) days of the owner's receipt of written
notification of the abandonment of the facility. (Ord. 2002-3, 3-4-2002)
(D) Conditional Uses: Conditions applied to unclassified conditional uses pursuant to this section and to subsection 11-16-4(D) of this chapter shall
take precedence over the standards of the zone district in which the use is located. Standards of the zone district in which the use is located shall
apply in all matters not governed by conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 766, 4-4-1977; amd. Ord. 2002-3, 3-4-2002)
11-16-13: EFFECT UPON COUNTY ISSUED CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS WHEN TERRITORY IS ANNEXED TO THE CITY:
County issued conditional use permits shall continue to run with the land when territory is annexed to the city and shall be automatically recognized as
being valid by the city. Following annexation, and upon receipt of conditions of approval from the county, the secretary to the planning commission
shall review the conditions and inform the commission of any violations of the conditions that may be evident after inspection of the property. If all
conditions are being met, the secretary shall so inform the commission. (Ord. 844, 9-7-1982)
11-16-14: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS ON SECONDARY AUTO REPAIR SERVICES AFTER FUELING SERVICES
DISCONTINUED:
(A) All underground storage facilities for fuel, oil and other petroleum products shall be removed from the site and all contaminants cleaned pursuant to
local, state and/or federal regulations.
1. The permitted secondary auto repair services are limited to the following activities:
(a) Engine tune up and related engine diagnostics.
(b) Battery sales and installation.
(c) Tire sales and repair services with related wheel balancing and alignment.
(d) Oil and lubricant sales with related lube and oil change services.
2. Storage of parts and equipment shall be within enclosed buildings.
3. Used parts and materials shall be stored within enclosed areas. These enclosed areas shall be built to city standards.
4. No overnight storage of inoperative vehicles, or vehicles awaiting, or under repair, except within an enclosed building.
5. Buildings shall be kept in good state of repair and maintained free of substandard conditions.
6. On site signage shall conform to current sign standards and shall be approved as a part of the conditional use permit hearing process.
7. Trash enclosures shall conform to current city standards and shall be maintained.
8. The site shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with a new landscape plan submitted and approved through the conditional use
permit hearing process.
9. All use areas of the site shall be paved to current city standards. Paved areas shall be striped and marked as required and shall be kept free of
oil and other petroleum contaminants.
10. A "waste and disposal of auto parts and materials plan" shall be submitted for review and approval as part of the conditional use permit hearing
process.
(B) No single retail or service component of the service station business shall be intensified to the point that the business becomes a specialty shop or
multiple specialty shops operated as independent businesses not otherwise permitted in the zoning district. Examples of commercial service
activities that are considered specialty shops are: tire shops, radiator shops, engine repair shops, automotive repair shops, muffler shops or towing
and vehicle storage businesses.
(C) Secondary auto repair services are those services accompanying the primary retail sale of automotive fuel. Code provisions allow the secondary
auto repair services of a permitted service station to continue in the event that the primary retail sale of fuel is discontinued due to the removal of
underground fuel tanks pursuant to state laws.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 370/436
(D) The service station shall have a verifiable history of operation as a bona fide service station with continued service to the present.
(E) This section shall apply to the C-1, C-2, C-H zone districts and any other districts where existing service stations are permitted, but not automotive
garages. It shall also apply to the regulations consistent with the formation of new districts. (Ord. 2000-5, 5-15-2000)
11-16-15: ADMINISTRATIVE CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The community development director, or his or her designee, may issue an administrative conditional use permit for all uses requiring such permit
pursuant to the following procedures:
(A) Application: Anyone seeking a conditional use permit must complete an application on a form approved by the community development director, or
his or her designee, and pay any fee required for the processing of the application as set or amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city
council. Said application shall not be deemed received unless it is complete and all fees paid.
(B) Review By The Community Development Director: The community development director, or his or her designee, shall review the application for an
administrative conditional use permit and approve, approve with conditions, or deny said application within thirty (30) days after the application is
received by the community development department. The community development director's decision shall be in writing and shall be deemed
delivered to the applicant upon the mailing of said determination by first class, United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address provided in the
application. Failure of the director to act within thirty (30) days shall not be deemed an approval.
(C) Appeal Of Determination Of The Community Development Director: If the applicant or any other person is aggrieved by the decision of the
community development director, or his or her designee, said aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the community development director, or
his or her designee, to the city council pursuant to section 11-16-6 of this chapter.
(D) Expiration: An administrative conditional use permit will expire one year after the date of issuance unless reissued by the director or his or her
designee. The director or his or her designee may require an applicant to apply for said reissuance on a form approved by the community
development director or his or her designee and pay any fee related to said issuance as set forth and amended by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 2013-11, 12-2-2013)
Chapter 17
OFF-STREET PARKING
11-17-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
(A) Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, shall be provided with the minimum parking space and facilities as required
by the provisions of this Chapter, which parking space shall be continuously available and maintained, with access suitable for vehicles to and from
a public street or alley. Subsequent changes of use of such buildings shall not excuse compliance with minimum parking requirements provided
herein.
(B) The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to require the provision of additional parking space or facilities in the case of reconstruction or
structural alteration of any of the following buildings; provided, such building was in existence at the time this Title was adopted, or during the one
(1) year period immediately prior thereto:
1. In a C or M Zone; provided, such reconstruction or alteration does not add more than five hundred square feet (500 sq. ft.) of usable floor space
to the building in the aggregate.
2. In cases of churches; provided, no addition is made to the auditorium seating capacity.
Any reconstruction permitted under this provision must be completed within one (1) year following the removal of such existing building, or within
six (6) months after the adoption of this Title, whichever is the later. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-17-2: NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED:
(A) The number of off-street parking spaces required for different uses shall be not less than as follows:
USE PARKING PLACES REQUIRED:
1. Banks and
offices, business
and
professional.
One for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area.
2. Bowling alley.
Five (5) for each alley.
3. Churches. One for each five (5) seats (in the auditorium only).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 371/436
4. Dance halls
and cabarets.
One for each four (4) seats, and in any case, not less than one for each fifty (50) square feet used for dancing. (Ord. 533, 6-
5-61)
5. Dwellings in
R-1 Zone.
Two (2) in garage or carport for each dwelling unit. (Ord. 819, 10-6-80)
5.1 Dwellings in
R-1-9 Zone
and R-1-12
Zone.
Two (2) in garage or carport for each dwelling unit. (Ord. 684, 5-3-71)
5.2 Duplexes,
triplexes and
multiple
dwellings.
One and one-half (1) for each one-bedroom dwelling unit; two (2) for each two (2) bedroom dwelling unit; two and one-half
(2) for each three (3) or more bedroom dwelling units. At least one space for each dwelling unit shall be in a garage or
carport. (Ord. 755, 9-20-76)
6. Furniture and
appliance
stores.
One for each six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area.
7. Hotels,
rooming and
lodging
houses, rest
homes.
One for each two (2) sleeping rooms. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
8. Hospital,
sanitarium and
rest
home. (Ord.
612, 1-17-66)
One for each two (2) beds.
9. Medical, or
dental clinics or
offices.
One for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
10.
Manufacturing,
warehouse,
wholesale uses
and
communications
equipment
building.
One for each three (3) employees
11. Motels. One for each sleeping or dwelling unit.
12. Restaurants,
bars and other
establishments
for consumption
on
the premises of
food or
beverages.
One for each four (4) seats.
13. Retail stores
and personal
service
establishments
not otherwise
provided
for herein.
One for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
14. Theaters,
stadiums,
auditoriums,
(including
school stadiums
and
auditoriums)
clubs, lodges,
funeral
chapels, and
other places of
assembly
not otherwise
provided for
herein.
One for each five (5) seats.
15. Schools and One for each classroom. (Space
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 372/436
colleges provided under the requirements of item 14 may be counted towards this requirement.) (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
(B) Whenever the requirements of Section 11-17-2 (A) result in the requirement of any fraction of a parking space, one additional space shall be
provided. (Ord. 755, 9-20-76)
11-17-3: USES NOT SPECIFIED:
The Commission may by resolution adopted in the manner provided in Section 11-20-1 determine the parking space requirements for any use not
mentioned herein, based upon the requirements for the most nearly comparable use mentioned.
11-17-4: SIZE:
Each required off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than one hundred and seventy (170) square feet and shall have a width of not
less than eight and one-half feet (8'), exclusive of drives or aisles. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-17-5: LOCATION:
Required off-street parking spaces shall be located as follows:
(A) Dwellings, including multiple family dwellings boarding and lodging houses, fraternities and sororities, shall have all required parking facilities on
the same lot or building site. The required parking spaces shall be located behind the front, rear and side yard building setbacks of applicable
residential zones and behind landscape setbacks of applicable commercial and industrial zones.
(B) For all other uses, the required parking spaces shall be not more than six hundred feet (600') from the building or use served thereby, unless on
the same lot or building site. The required parking spaces shall be located behind the front, rear and side yard setbacks of applicable residential
zones and behind landscape setbacks of applicable commercial and industrial zones.
(C) Distance as herein mentioned shall refer to the distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest access to the
building or use, along a pedestrian way available to the public or persons to be served by the facility. (Ord. 886, 5-5-86)
11-17-6: DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS:
(A) Access: Each parking lot or area shall be provided with safe exits and entrances to and from a public street or way through suitable drives or
aisles. Access to a parking space from aisles or drives shall be such as not to interfere with the use of other required parking spaces on the lot.
(Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
(B) Parking Lot Surfacing: All parking lots or areas shall be paved with asphaltic or portland cement concrete paving and maintained so as to be free
from the accumulation of dust and debris. (Ord. 820, 12-15-80)
(C) Fences: Where any parking lot or area abuts property in any R Zone, it shall be separated from such property by a screen fence or wall of not less
than six feet (6') high; provided, that such screen fence or wall shall be forty two inches (42") high from the front property line to a depth equal to
the required front yard on the abutting R Zone property.
(D) Barriers: At all points along streets or sidewalks, excepting points of access to the parking lot or area, a concrete curb or timber barrier not less
than six inches (6") high shall be installed and maintained.
(E) Lights: Where any parking lot or area abuts property in any R Zone, no lights or reflectors erected on the parking lot shall be permitted to shed light
onto the property in the R Zone.
(F) Exception: All of the requirements of this Section shall apply to any parking lot or area, excepting parking spaces or areas used exclusively by the
occupants of dwellings, their guests and employees, including multiple-family dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, fraternities and sororities,
where located on the same lot or building site. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
(G) Handicapped and Small Car Parking Stalls:
1. There shall be at least one parking space provided for physically handicapped persons for every fifty (50) parking spaces or fraction thereof, in
the first two hundred (200) parking spaces, beginning with a minimum of forty (40) stalls, except for medical equipment buildings. After the first
two hundred (200) spaces, one additional parking space shall be provided for every one hundred (100) spaces up to two thousand (2,000)
spaces, and one space shall be provided for every four hundred (400) parking spaces exceeding two thousand (2,000). Medical offices, medical
laboratories and medical equipment buildings shall provide at least one parking space for the physically handicapped.
2. Handicapped stalls may be offset with small car parking stalls at seven and one-half feet (7') in width, and sixteen feet (16') in length not to
exceed three (3) for each handicapped stall. Stalls for handicapped shall be designed to function at thirteen feet (13') in width. In no event shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 373/436
small car stalls exceed twenty percent (20%) of the parking area.
3. All parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located adjacent to the primary entrance of buildings or structures (or access ramps
as necessary) or in strategic areas.
4. There shall be a sign provided at the entrance to parking lots containing over two hundred (200) parking stalls, directing handicapped persons to
stall locations. The handicapped and "small car only" stalls shall be posted conspicuously on a pole measuring seven feet (7') in height from
adjacent grade to bottom of sign.
5. There shall be at least one access ramp provided for every two hundred feet (200') of building access walkways leading to the primary entrance
points, with the distance between ramps not to exceed two hundred feet (200') or portion thereof.
6. All access ramps shall be at least four feet (4') wide and not exceed a grade on one foot (1') in fifteen (15). All ramps shall have a nonslip
surface.
7. Requirements for handicapped parking shall be complied with in all new parking facilities. (Ord. 819, 10-6-80)
11-17-7: PLANS FOR PARKING AREA; SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL:
(A) The proposed plan of any required parking space or area shall be submitted to the official authorized to issue building and use permits at the time
of application for the permit for the building or use to be served by such parking area, which plan shall show the size, location, design and
improvements thereof, all of which shall comply with the minimum requirements of this Chapter.
(B) Unless the official shall find that such plan for the required parking space or area as submitted complies with the minimum requirements of this
Chapter, he shall not issue the building or use permit; provided, that if he finds that the plan thus complies, he shall endorse his approval thereon
and shall file the same with the copy of the building or use permit.
(C) In determining whether the plan so complies with the provisions of this Chapter, the official shall determine, in addition to other matters herein
required, whether the proposed points of exit and entrance to and from public ways are safe.
(D) The points of exit and entrance to and from public ways shall not thereafter be changed from those shown in the plan, unless with the written
approval of the official or his lawful successor.
(E) The parking lot or area shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plan as filed, and shall thereafter be permanently maintained so as to
comply with the minimum requirement of this Title as in effect at the time of approval of the plan. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
Chapter 18
REQUIRED LOADING SPACE
11-18-1: OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES:
(A) For every building hereafter erected or reconstructed or structurally altered which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, retail
store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by
vehicles of materials and merchandise, off-street loading areas shall be provided as follows:
1. Commercial Uses: The number of loading spaces shall be determined by the Planning Director, subject to appeal to the Planning Commission.
2. Industrial Uses:
10,000 to 24,999 square feet gross floor area 1 loading space
25,000 to 49,000 square feet gross floor area 2 loading spaces
For each additional 50,000 square feet of
gross floor area or major fraction thereof
1 loading space
(B) Each loading space shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width, forty feet (40') in length, and with an overhead clearance of fourteen feet (14').
(C) Such space may not be located in any part of any required front or side yard. (Ord. 871, 8-6-84)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 374/436
Chapter 19
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
11-19-1: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
(A) No nonconforming building or structure shall be structurally altered or enlarged, except as follows:
1. Where required by this Code or Statute, or in order to make the building or structure conform.
2. Any building or structure which is nonconforming solely by reason of yard or height requirements may be structurally altered or enlarged;
provided, that all alterations or additions shall comply with the yard and height requirements of the zone; and further provided, that the entire
building or structure so altered or enlarged complies with all other requirements of the Title other than yard and height.
(B) If a nonconforming building or structure is removed, every future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Title.
(C) A nonconforming building or structure in a C or M Zone may be continued, subject to the preceding provision.
(D) In all R Zones every nonconforming building, or structure, other than a residential building, designed or intended for use not permitted in such zone
shall be completely removed or altered to structurally conform to the uses permitted in such zone within a time determined by the Commission,
provided:
1. Such time for removal or alteration may not be fixed for a date before the expiration of the normal life of the building or structure as found by the
Commission.
2. In no event may the normal life of the building or structure be fixed at less than forty (40) years from its original construction.
3. No such order shall require the removal or alteration of the building or structure sooner than ten (10) years from the time such order is made.
4. Within ten (10) days after the making of such order, the Commission shall give notice thereof to the owner of record of the building or structure
by causing a copy of the order to be personally served on the owner or mailed to the owner by registered or certified mail addressed to his
residence, or if his residence is unknown, then to his address as shown by the records of the Tax Collector of the City, and by causing a copy of
the order to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
5. Not less than sixty (60) days and not more than ninety (90) days before the time fixed for removal or alteration, the officer in charge of issuance
of use permits shall give the owner of record of such building or structure written notice thereof in the manner above mentioned, and shall give
the occupants of such building notice thereof by leaving with any of the occupants of said building or posting on said building in a conspicuous
place, such notice.
6. Such notice may be given after the time so fixed, but in no case shall such a building or structure be required to be so removed or altered
without at least sixty (60) days' notice being given.
(E) Proceedings for determination of time for removal or alteration of such nonconforming buildings or structures in R Zones, as mentioned in
subsection (D) may be initiated and shall be set for hearing, noticed, heard and determined in substantially the same manner as provided in the
following named provisions relating to amendment; provided, that all references therein to amendments shall be deemed to refer to the
proceedings relating to such determination. The provisions are as follows:
Section 11-21-1; subsection 11-21-2(C); Section 11-21-3; subsections 11-21-4(A), (B), (C), (D) and (F).
(F) All decisions of the Commission in proceedings for such determination may be appealed and reviewed in substantially the same manner as
provided in the following named provisions relating to appeals from decisions of the Board of Zoning Adjustment; provided, that all references
therein to the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be deemed to refer to the Commission. The provisions are as follows:
Section 11-23-7; subsections 11-23-8(A) and (B). (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-19-2: NONCONFORMING USES OF BUILDINGS:
(A) The nonconforming use of a building existing at the time this Title became effective may be continued, provided:
1. The nonconforming use of a building may be expanded or extended throughout the building. A nonconforming use of a nonconforming building
may be changed to another use of the same or more restricted classification.
2. Conforming Buildings: A nonconforming use of a conforming building shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the conforming
building, and if such nonconforming use is discontinued, any future use of such building shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Title.
(B) A building which is nonconforming solely by reason that it does not conform with one or more height, yard or area regulations shall, for the
purposes of this Section be deemed to be a conforming building.
(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a use which is one which becomes nonconforming by virtue of an amendment of this Title,
change in the use or otherwise, for failure or lack of approval of a required permit or site plan review, shall be discontinued within two (2) years of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 375/436
the date the use becomes nonconforming or upon a date provided for by general law, whichever is earlier. The nonconforming use shall cease to
exist if the required permits and/or site plan reviews are not timely obtained. (Ord. 875, 3-1-85)
11-19-3: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES PARTIALLY DESTROYED BY CASUALTY:
(A) Subject to all other regulations of this Chapter, a nonconforming building or structure destroyed to the extent of not more than seventy five percent
(75%) of its reasonable value by fire, explosion or other casualty or by act of God, or the public enemy, may be restored and the occupancy or use
of the building or structure or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction may be continued. The time for removal or alteration
of the restored building or structure as mentioned in subsection 11-19-1(D) shall nevertheless be the same as if such building or structure had not
been thus restored.
(B) If a nonconforming building or structure is so destroyed to an extent of more than seventy five percent (75%) of its reasonable value, the same
may not be restored, and may not be occupied and used, except in conformity with this Title.
11-19-4: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
(A) The nonconforming use of land where no structure (excepting fences) thereon is employed in connection with such use, and nonconforming signs
or billboards, existing at the time this Title became effective, or which thereafter becomes subject to the provisions of this Title, may be continued
for a period of not more than three (3) years thereafter.
(B) If a structure is employed in connection with a nonconforming use of land, and is removed, or destroyed to the extent of more than seventy five
percent (75%) of its reasonable value by any cause, or the nonconforming use of the structure is discontinued, the nonconforming use of such land
may be continued for a period of not more than three (3) years after the date of such removal, destruction or discontinuance.
(C) No nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining property, or changed, except to a
conforming use. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
(D) If a nonconforming use of land, including, but not limited to, agricultural land use, which is permitted to be continued under any of the provisions of
this section, is discontinued for one year, any future use of such land shall conform to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2003-2, 2-18-2003)
11-19-5: EFFECT OF ZONE CHANGES:
(A) All of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to buildings, land and uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to any amendment of this
title.
(B) If a zone is established by this title or is hereafter changed, so as to cause any boundary thereof to be located closer than the specified minimum
distance to a use which under the provisions of this title may not be established within such minimum distance from the zone, then such use shall
be deemed to be a nonconforming use. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
Chapter 20
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
11-20-1: CLARIFICATION OF AMBIGUITY OR INTERPRETATION:
In the event of need for any clarification or interpretation, the commission shall ascertain all pertinent facts and by resolution shall set forth its findings.
The resolution shall be transmitted to the council, and if approved by the council, the clarification or interpretation shall govern until modified by
resolution adopted in like manner or by appropriate amendment of this title.
The foregoing shall apply to the following cases:
(A) If ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title.
(B) If ambiguity exists with reference to matters of height, yard, area, and other requirements.
(C) If uncertainty exists with reference to a zone boundary.
(D) If an unforeseen condition arises or technological changes have been introduced.
(E) If ambiguity or uncertainty arises as to the meaning of any word or provision contained in this title. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 376/436
11-20-2: POTENTIAL ZONE INDICATION:
The commission may by resolution designate the potential zone classification of any area or zone whenever the area or zone is found to be suitable
for a different zone classification but where it is impracticable to presently so classify the same or fix the exact boundaries thereof. Such designation of
potential use classification shall serve only as a guide to the Commission and the Council with respect to future action relating to the area or zone, and
shall have no other effect. The approximate area subject to such potential zone classification shall be shown upon the Zone Map enclosed within a
heavy dashed line with the appropriate zone symbol therein enclosed within a circle.
11-20-3: PUBLIC UTILITY LINES AND MAINS:
(A) The provisions of this Title shall not be construed to limit installation or maintenance of public utility pole lines, pipes, and mains, or require any use
permit therefor.
(B) The provisions of this Title shall not be construed to limit the installation or maintenance of any public utility transmission line or tower, excepting
that prior to the acquisition of rights-of-way therefor, the Planning Commission shall be informed in writing of the proposed route and location
thereof.
11-20-4: HEIGHT:
(A) Height of buildings shall be measured along the vertical distance from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot
covered by the building to the highest point of the roof.
(B) One-family dwellings in the R-1 Zone and R-2 Zone may be increased in height by not more than ten feet (10') when two (2) side yards of not less
than fifteen feet (15') each are provided.
(C) Churches and schools in the R-2 Zone may be erected to a height of not more than seventy-five feet (75'); provided, that such buildings shall in
any case comply with the provisions of Section 11-20-6.
(D) Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain
buildings, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, roof signs, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, television and radio masts, or similar structures
may be erected above the height limit but shall not be a allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space.
11-20-5: AREA:
(A) No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished or divided so that the yards, open space, buildable area or lot area shall be smaller than prescribed
by this Title; nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with this Title.
(B) No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Title shall be considered as
providing the required yard, open space or buildable area for any other building; provided further, that no yard or open space on any adjoining lot
shall be considered as providing a yard, open space or buildable area or lot area on any other lot.
(C) Two (2) or more abutting lots may be combined and used as though a single lot, in which case such combination of lots shall be deemed to be a
single lot for all purposes of this Title, so long as there shall exist on any part thereof any structure or improvement which depends for compliance
with the Title upon the same being so treated as a single lot.
(D) A lot may be divided into parts; provided, that each part is equal to or exceeds the minimum lot area requirements of this Title, and so long as such
parts are used as though separate lots, they shall be deemed to be lots under all provisions of this Title.
(E) Every required front, side or rear yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
11-20-6: INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS; ADDITIONAL YARD REQUIREMENTS:
Any building erected, altered or used for school or church purposes, or as an institutional building as mentioned in Section 11-5-2, shall be located at
least fifteen feet (15') from every lot line or any property included in any R Zone, notwithstanding any lesser requirement in the zone where located;
provided, such building shall not be required to be located more than five feet (5') from any lot line adjacent to any alley. With respect to the accessory
buildings, the Commission shall have authority to waive the foregoing requirements for good cause.
11-20-7: TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS; ORIENTED TO SIDE YARDS:
One (1) or more two-family or three-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, or group houses, not exceeding thirty-five feet (35') in height may be
oriented as to front or rear upon either side yard, in which case the following regulations shall apply:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 377/436
(A) When such dwellings rear upon a side yard, the required width of the side yard shall be increased by one foot (1') for each such dwelling unit, but
the increase need not exceed five feet (5'). Porches and steps mentioned in Section 11-20-11 shall be permitted; provided, not less than five feet
(5') of the width of the required side yard shall be completely free of structures.
(B) When the dwellings front upon a side yard, the required width of the side yard shall be not less than ten feet (10'). Porches and steps mentioned in
Section 11-20-11 shall be permitted.
(C) All other requirements of this Title, including front, side and rear yards, buildable area and lot area shall apply.
11-20-8: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
(A) Space Between Accessory Buildings and Dwellings: The space between a dwelling and any accessory building on the same lot, when not joined
by a common wall, shall be a minimum distance of twice the width of the required interior side yard, or eight feet (8'), whichever is greater.
(B) Accessory Buildings in Required Side Yards: A non-dwelling building may be located in a required side yard area on any part of the rear one-third
(1/3) of a lot, subject to the limitations of subsection (C) following.
(C) Accessory Buildings in Required Rear Yards: Accessory buildings may be located in a portion of the required rear yard area in R Zones, provided:
1. Such building may occupy not more than twenty percent (20%) of the length of the required rear yard, measured between side lot lines.
2. Such building may not be more than eighteen feet (18') in height.
3. No such building may occupy any part of the required rear yard of a reversed corner lot.
11-20-9: THROUGH LOTS:
On a through lot, a front yard shall be provided on each street frontage. Each such front yard shall have a minimum depth of not less than the required
front yard of the adjacent lot or the average of the required front yards of the lots adjoining on either side. The front yards shall be subject to all
provisions of this Title, including provisions for reduction of requirements mentioned in Section 11-20-15.
11-20-10: OUTSIDE STAIRWAYS AND BALCONIES; FIRE ESCAPES:
(A) Stairways, stair landings and balconies may extend into the required front yard not more than three feet (3'); provided, that all such structures shall
be open, unenclosed and without roofs, except for lattice type guard railings. Structural supports for stairways and landings may be enclosed.
(B) Fire escapes, required by law, ordinance or regulations of a public agency, may project into any front, side or rear yard not more than four feet (4').
(C) Depressed ramps or stairways and their supporting structures, designed to permit access to parts of buildings below average ground level, may
extend into any required yard not more than forty two inches (42").
11-20-11: PORCHES, PLATFORMS AND LANDINGS:
(A) Uncovered porches, platforms or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend into required
yards as follows:
1. Into front yards not more than six feet (6').
2. Into side yards and rear yards not more than five feet (5').
3. Lattice type guard railings or walls, of not more than thirty six inches (36") in height, may be installed or constructed on such structures. (Ord.
533, 6-5-61)
11-20-12: EAVES; SILLS:
Eaves, sills, cornices, beltcourses, buttresses or similar architectural features, fireplaces not exceeding eight feet (8') in width, and planting boxes, may
extend or project into a required side yard or rear yard not more than four inches (4") for each one foot (1') of the width of the required yard, and may
extend or project into the required front yard not more than thirty six inches (36"). (Ord. 612, 1-17-66)
11-20-13: TREES; PLANTS:
Trees, plants, shrubs or flowers may be maintained in any required front, side or rear yard, provided that hedges shall comply with Section 11-20-14.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 378/436
(Ord. 802, 5-7-79)
11-20-14: FENCES; WALLS; HEDGES:
(A) Six foot (6') high fences, walls and shrubs shall be permitted anywhere except within the required front yard and when a private driveway accesses
a public right of way through the side yard, then the provisions of subsections B and F of 11-20-14 shall apply. (Ord. 93-3, 6-21-93)
(B) Open fences and shrubs not exceeding forty eight inches (48") in height or solid walls and fences not exceeding forty two inches (42") in height
shall be permitted in the required front yard. (Ord. 93-3, 6-21-93)
(C) Open or lattice type fences, not exceeding six feet (6') in height, may be maintained on any part of elementary or high school sites.
(D) Height Requirements For Gates: Fence, wall or hedge, as used in this Section, shall be deemed to include gates, which shall be subject to the
height requirements. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
(E) Noise Abatement: A six foot (6') high solid masonry fence wall constructed in accordance with City Standard Drawing No. 0-19 shall be provided by
the developer at the time of construction, for the purpose of noise abatement, in the following locations:
1. At the interface between areas zoned C, M or R-O and any adjacent residential area.
2. At the interface between a residential subdivision and an adjacent major traffic artery which now has, or is estimated by the City Engineer to
have, within ten (10) years from the date of last review, an average daily traffic count of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) vehicles.
3. At the interface between the boundary of a residential subdivision and any portion of a buffer zone six hundred feet (600') in width on either side
of and parallel to the center line of the Freeway 99.
A developer may apply to the Planning Commission for a modification of the requirements of this Section on the grounds that an alternative
design would be more functional and aesthetically pleasing. In such cases the developer shall submit an application for exemption to the
Commission, and such application shall contain detailed drawings and specifications of the proposed construction as a part of the submittal. The
developer shall be required to supply data which would clearly show that the residential area would not be subjected to a noise level that would
be less acceptable than the resultant noise level if a solid masonry fence wall was constructed. (Ord. 802, 5-7-1979)
(F) Fences And Shrubs, Height Requirements: All fences and shrubs over forty two inches (42") in height shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10')
from the street side property line when a private driveway accesses a public right of way through the side yard. Fences and shrubs not exceeding
forty two inches (42") shall be permitted in the required setback area. (Ord. 93-3, 6-21-1993)
(G) Barbed Wire, Concertina Wire, Razor Wire And Similar Security Fencing: The following regulations shall govern the installation of all new security
fencing:
1. Barbed Wire: Up to four (4) single strands of barbed wire may be used at the top of any fence permitted in the commercial and industrial
districts.
(a) The addition of barbed wire shall not be included in the height of the fence.
(b) Barbed wire shall not be permitted in, or contiguous to, any property zoned or designated by the Selma General Plan for residential uses.
2. Concertina Or Razor Wire: Concertina or razor wire may be used in an area zoned for industrial use only.
(a) The conditions of subsection (G)1(b) of this Section shall also apply to razor wire with the further restriction that the term contiguous shall be
inclusive of areas where, except for an intervening street, the properties would be contiguous.
(b) Any security fencing incorporating concertina or razor wire, which was constructed, either within or contiguous to a residential area, with
permits or in accordance with the City's rules, regulations and policies in effect at the time of construction, shall be considered a legal
nonconforming installation. All legal nonconforming installations installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be removed not later
than two (2) years from such effective date.
3. Hold Harmless Agreement: Prior to issuance of any permit to install razor or concertina wire in an industrial district, the property owner must sign
a written hold harmless agreement, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney. The agreement shall release and indemnify the City in the event of
liability, loss, costs and damages, including, but not limited to, personal injury, death or property damage, arising directly or indirectly out of the
use of the special security topping. (Ord. 98-3, 6-1-1998)
11-20-15: REDUCTION OF FRONT YARD REQUIREMENTS; WHEN PERMITTED:
Where more than sixty percent (60%) of the portion of the lineal frontage of lots improved with buildings within any block is comprised of lots with less
than the minimum front yard requirement, then the minimum front yard requirement for such block shall be reduced to the average of the actual front
yards of all of the lots in the block improved with buildings, counting those which have front yards of greater depth than the minimum requirement as
having the minimum requirement. (Ord. 533, 6-5-1961)
11-20-16: OFF SITE SALES PROHIBITED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 379/436
In all zone districts, the off site sale of new and used autos and automobiles, and recreational vehicles, motorized or nonmotorized, retail or wholesale
is prohibited. Sales must be conducted only at the permanent property address in the city of Selma listed for the dealership on its department of motor
vehicles dealer license. (Ord. 2002-17, 10-21-2002)
11-20-17: LIMITATIONS ON USES:
The following regulations shall be limitations on, and be applicable to, all uses in zones R-1, R-1-9, R-1-12, R-2-A, R-2, R-3-A, R-3, R-TP, R-O, R-A,
and zones P-1 and C-1 where they are used for residential purposes.
(A) Vehicles:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to maintain attractive streets and neighborhoods in the city, to limit the use of residential neighborhoods
for healthful living purposes, and to allow for citations to be issued by the police department for zoning enforcement activity related to unlawful
repair, storage, assembly, and dismantling of vehicles, primarily within front yard setback areas of residential lots.
2. Repair, Dismantling Or Storage Of Vehicles Prohibited: No persons shall assemble, repair, dismantle or store any vehicle, (hereinafter referred to
as an inoperable vehicle), other than as herein provided, on any part of an "R" zoned lot, unless such inoperable vehicle is:
(a) Within an enclosed building; or
(b) In an open area which is completely enclosed by view obscuring walls or solid fences, not less than six feet (6') in height, or by the exterior
walls of a building or buildings.
(c) A vehicle, as defined in this section, may be temporarily stored in driveway areas and in residential areas of the city, provided that inoperable
or disabled vehicles may be parked for not more than seven (7) days in any one month, in the front yard for purposes of loading and
unloading, if such parking may be accomplished in a manner that does not encroach upon the public right of way or violate any other
provisions of this code relating to parking. No vehicle, while inoperable in a residential area, shall be used for sleeping or habitation.
3. Exception: Provided, that the prohibition of uses imposed by subsection (A)2 of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the occasional and
incidental assembly or repair of vehicles owned by the person in possession of the premises on which such takes place; provided that a disabled
vehicle which is being repaired or assembled, shall not be stored except as provided in subsection (A)2 of this section for a period not longer
than seven (7) consecutive days within any thirty (30) day period.
4. Vehicles Defined: "Vehicles", as defined in this section, shall be deemed to include any vehicle, as defined by the state, designed to be pulled or
driven upon a public street, except that recreation type vehicles are specifically excluded from this definition and are not deemed to be a public
nuisance. (Ord. 860, 9-19-1983)
Chapter 20.1
SITE PLAN REVIEW
11-20.1-1: PURPOSES; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The purposes of site plan review are to enable the planning official to make a finding that the proposed development is in conformity with the intent
and provisions of this Chapter and to guide the Building Department in the issuance of building permits. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to
the following uses:
(A) Any use listed within a particular zoning district as a permitted or conditional use subject to site plan review.
(B) Permitted and conditional uses within the P, C and M Districts.
(C) Conditional uses where site plan review is made a condition of approval.
11-20.1-2: SITE PLAN:
(A) Information. The applicant shall submit three (3) prints of the site plan to the planning official. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and shall
indicate clearly and with full dimensions the following information:
1. The lot dimensions;
2. All buildings and structures and their location, elevation, size, height, and proposed use;
3. The yards and spaces between buildings;
4. Walls and fences and their location, height and materials;
5. Off-street parking, including the location, number of spaces, dimensions of the parking area, and internal circulation patterns;
6. Access, pedestrian, vehicular, and service, points of ingress and egress, and internal circulation;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 380/436
7. Signs and their location, size and height;
8. Loading, including the location, dimensions, number of spaces, and internal circulation;
9. Lighting, including the location, general nature, and hooding devices, if any; (Ord. 766, 4-4-77)
10. Street dedications and improvements, as provided in Section 11-20.1-20(G); (Ord. 790, 6-19-78)
11. Drainage;
12. Landscaping, including the location and type;
13. Fire prevention equipment and measures, including type and location;
14. Such other data as may be required to permit the planning official to make the required findings.
(B) Findings. Within ten (10) working days after submission of a complete site plan, the planning official shall approve, approve with such conditions as
set forth in Section 11-20.1-2(B)5 of this Title or disapprove the site plan. In approving the site plan, the planning official shall find that:
1. All the applicable provisions of this Chapter are complied with;
2. The following are so arranged that traffic congestion is avoided and pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected and there will be
no adverse effect on surrounding property;
(a) Facilities, improvements, and utilities;
(b) Vehicular ingress, egress, and internal circulation;
(c) Setbacks;
(d) Height of buildings;
(e) Location of service use areas;
(f) Walls; and
(g) Landscaping.
3. The proposed lighting is so arranged as to deflect the light away from adjoining properties; and
4. The proposed signs will not by size, location or lighting interfere with traffic or limit visibility.
5. That any conditions of approval are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Conditions may include the following:
(a) Special yards, spaces and buffers.
(b) Fences and walls.
(c) Enclosure of storage areas and limitation on out of door display of merchandise.
(d) Grading, surfacing and drainage specifications.
(e) Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress.
(f) Regulation of signs.
(g) Requiring landscaping and maintenance thereof.
(h) Requiring maintenance of grounds.
(i) Requiring fire prevention equipment and measures.
(j) Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, electrical discharge or interference.
(k) Regulation of lighting. (Ord. 766, 4-4-77)
(l) Requiring street dedication and improvements subject to the provisions of Section 11-20.1-2(G). (Ord. 790, 6-19-78)
(m) And such other conditions as could make possible the development of the City in an orderly and efficient manner and in conformity with the
intent and purposes set forth in this Section.
In making such findings, the planning official shall consult with other City personnel as appropriate to assure that approvals will be consistent
with established legislative policies relating to traffic safety, street dedications, street improvements, and public safety.
(C) Appeal to the Planning Commission. The applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal, in writing, setting forth the reason for such appeal to the
Planning Commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the Planning Commission within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice of such
decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission's next regular meeting after the planning official's decision;
provided, however, if the planning official's decision occurs within ten (10) days of the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission, the appeal
shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission's second regular meeting following the decision of the planning official. The Planning
Commission shall review the site plan and shall by resolution approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove, based on the findings set forth in
subsection (B) of this Section. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed to the Council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 381/436
(D) Appeals to the Council. The applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal, in writing, setting forth the reason for such appeal to the Council. Such
appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the Planning Commission's decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of
the Council's next regular meeting after the appeal is filed; provided, however, that if the appeal is filed within ten (10) days of the next regular
meeting of the Council, the appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the Council's second regular meeting following the decision of the Planning
Commission. The Council shall review the site plan and shall by resolution approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove, based on the findings
set forth in subsection (B) of this Section. The decision of the Council shall be final.
(E) Formal approval. The approved site plan, with any conditions shown thereon or attached thereto, shall be dated and signed by the planning official.
One copy of the site plan and conditions shall be mailed to the applicant.
(F) Revisions. Revisions by the applicant to an approved site plan shall be made pursuant to the procedure set forth in this Section. (Ord. 766, 4-4-77)
(G) Required Street Dedications and Improvements: Because of changes that may occur in an area due to increases in vehicular traffic generated by
facilities requiring site plan review, and upon the principle that such developments should be required to provide street dedications and
improvements as near as practicable in proportion to such increased vehicular traffic, but should not be required to provide such street facilities for
nonrelated traffic, the dedications and improvements specified in subsections 1, 2, 3 and 4 below, may be deemed necessary by the City Engineer
and may be required as a condition to approval of any site plan. The City Engineer may require that a fee be paid in lieu of constructing the
improvements required in subsections 2, 3 and 4 below, if the City Engineer determines that it would be in the public interest to defer construction
of said improvements. The amount of the fee shall be determined by the City Engineer and shall be equal to the cost of the improvements that
would have otherwise been required.
1. The dedication of all land necessary to widen an existing street right of way or new street made necessary by a development to its ultimate
planned right of way as established by any adopted general, specific or precise plan or by the City's improvement standards may be required.
2. Where a development borders a new street, the dedication of which was required pursuant to subsection 1, above, or an existing street right of
way which is not developed in accordance with the City's improvement standards, the improvement of the right of way of said street to City
standards for a width of thirty feet (30') as measured from the ultimate right-of-way line of the street abutting the development may be required.
The required improvements may include, but are not limited to, curbs, gutters and sidewalks, drainage facilities, street trees, street signs, street
lights, required utilities, street grading and paving.
3. Where a development is traversed by a new street, the dedication of which was required pursuant to subsection 1, above, or an existing street
right of way which is not developed in accordance with the City's improvement standards, the improvement of the right of way of said street to
City standards for a width of sixty feet (60') may be required. If the right of way of the street exceeds sixty feet (60'), the City Engineer shall
determine the section(s) of the right of way to be improved. The required improvements may include, but are not limited to, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks, drainage facilities, street trees, street signs, street lights, required utilities, street grading and paving.
4. Where a development borders a new frontage road, the dedication of which was required pursuant to subsection 1, above, or an existing
frontage road right of way which is not developed in accordance with the City's improvement standards, the improvement of the entire right of
way of said street abutting the development may be required.
(H) Building Permits: Before a building permit shall be issued for any building or structure that is subject to site plan review, the City Building inspector
shall determine that:
1. The proposed building is in conformity with the site plan and conditions approved by the Planning Official, and
2. All required dedications have been recorded; and
3. A letter has been furnished by the applicant from all appropriate utilities, that all necessary utilities will be installed and that the utility companies
will conform to all City ordinances.
(I) Occupancy: Before any building or structure that is subject to site plan review shall be occupied, the City Building Inspector shall determine that all
required on-site (outside the City right of way) and the City Engineer shall determine that all required off-site (within the City right of way)
improvements shall have either been completed prior to occupancy of the premises or if not completed, the permittee shall have entered into an
agreement with the City to complete said work within six (6) months from the date of occupancy. The City Building Inspector in the case of on-site
improvements and the City Engineer in the case of off-site improvements may extend the completion date for one additional six (6) month period
upon written request of the permittee, upon a showing of good cause therefor. Such an agreement shall be secured either by cash deposited with
the City, cash deposited in irrevocable escrow approved by the City Attorney, or other financial security approved by the City Attorney as the
equivalent thereof. Such security shall be in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of completion as determined by the
City Building Inspector in the case of on-site improvements and the City Engineer in the case of off-site improvements. In the event such work is
not completed within the period provided, or any extension thereof, the City shall be authorized to take all necessary action to enforce the
agreement, including the use of said security to cause the completion of all required improvements. Monies deposited with the City or in escrow
may be partially released to the depositor by the City Building Inspector in the case of on-site improvements and the City Engineer in the case of
off-site improvements during the progress of the work, so long as the same ratio of security is maintained on the deposit to secure all uncompleted
work. (Ord. 790, 6-19-78)
Chapter 21
AMENDMENTS
11-21-1: INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS TO TITLE; HEARING:
(A) Amendment of this Title may be initiated in one (1) of the following manners:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 382/436
1. By verified application of any interested person.
2. By resolution of intention adopted by the Commission.
3. By resolution of intention adopted by the Council, which resolution shall be referred to the Commission for hearing.
(B) Upon filing with or adoption by the Commission of any such application or resolution, the Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, and such
additional public hearings as the Commission deems necessary.
(C) The Commission or its Secretary shall set the time and place for the hearing, which shall be held within forty (40) days following the filing with the
Commission of the application or resolution.
11-21-2: NOTICE OF HEARINGS:
(A) For the purpose of this Section, any amendment of this Title which is for the purpose of changing particular property from one (1) zone to another
or changing the boundary of any particular zone shall be referred to as a "zone change amendment," and all other amendments to this Title shall
be referred to as a "general amendment."
(B) Notice of General Amendment: Notice of the time and place of any public hearing on the matter of any general amendment to this Title shall be
given by the Commission or its Secretary by at least one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City, at least ten (10)
days before the hearing and by such other means as the Commission may deem necessary.
(C) Notice of Zone Change Amendment:
1. Notice of the time and place of any public hearing on the matter of a zone change amendment to this Title shall be given by the Commission or
its Secretary by mailing in the United States mail a written notice thereof, not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing, to every person whose
name and address appears on the latest available assessment roll as an owner of any property within the territory covered by such proposed
change and within three hundred feet (300') of the outer boundaries thereof.
2. The notice shall also be given by posting a written notice on the territory covered by the proposed change, at a point designated by the
Commission or its Secretary, not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing, and such additional notices as the Commission may determine;
provided, however, that failure to so post or maintain any such notice shall not be construed so as to invalidate or void any subsequent
proceedings.
3. The notice shall also be given by publication as provided in Subsection (B) of this Section.
11-21-3: HEARINGS BY PLANNING COMMISSION ON AMENDMENTS:
(A) The public hearing shall be held at the time and place for which set and noticed.
(B) Continuance: Any hearing may be continued by the majority of members present at any hearing, who may fix a time and place to which such
hearing may be continued, even in the absence of a quorum, in which case the presiding officer at such hearing shall publicly announce prior to the
conclusion of the hearing the time and place to which the hearing is to be continued, and no further notice shall be required.
(C) Quorum: A majority in number of the total voting membership of the Commission shall constitute a legal quorum for the purposes of conducting
such a hearing.
(D) Voting: The recommendation of any amendment of this Title shall be by resolution of the Commission, carried by the affirmative votes of not less
than a majority of its total voting membership.
(E) Rules of Procedure: The Commission shall have authority to establish any reasonable rules of procedure for the conduct of such hearings. The
Commission may require any person who is to testify before it to be placed under oath, in which case the member presiding at the hearing shall be
empowered to administer such oath.
(F) Investigations: The Commission may cause such investigations to be made as it deems necessary and in the public interest in any matter to be
heard by it. The investigation may be made by a committee of one (1) or more members of the investigation or by members of its staff or its agents
or employees. The facts established by such investigation shall be submitted to the Commission either in writing, to be filed with the records of the
matter, or in testimony before the Commission, and may be considered by the Commission in making its decision.
(G) Record of Hearing: The Commission shall cause a written summary of all pertinent testimony heard at the public hearing, together with a record of
the names and addresses of all persons testifying, to be prepared and filed with the papers relating to such matter.
11-21-4: DECISION OF PLANNING COMMISSION ON AMENDMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 383/436
(A) Within forty (40) days after conclusion of a public hearing, the Commission shall by resolution make its findings, decision and recommendations in
the matter.
(B) In matters initiated by application, failure of the Commission to adopt such a resolution within such forty (40) day period shall be deemed to
constitute a denial of the application.
(C) In matters initiated by resolution of the Council, failure of the Commission to adopt such a resolution within the forty (40) day period shall be
deemed to constitute approval of the proposed amendment.
(D) In matters initiated by application, the Commission shall cause a copy of its resolution to be mailed to the applicant within ten (10) days from the
date of adoption thereof.
(E) In all matters, if the recommendation of the Commission is to approve the proposed action, it shall cause to be forwarded to the Council within ten
(10) days from the date of its action a copy of the resolution, a copy of the written summary of the testimony, and a copy of any recommended
amendment.
(F) In matters initiated by resolution of the Council, if the recommendation of the Commission is to disapprove the proposed action, its resolution and
other papers shall be forwarded to the Council as provided in the preceding Subsection (E).
11-21-5: APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF PLANNING COMMISSION:
(A) In matters initiated by application, if the Commission denies the application, its denial may be appealed to the Council as follows:
1. The applicant, or any of the applicants, may within ten (10) days after the date of mailing, as shown by the postmark, or the papers mentioned in
Section 11-21-4 (D), or within ten (10) days after the expiration of the forty (40) day period mentioned in Section 11-21-4 (B), file in writing with
the Clerk an appeal from the decision of the Commission.
2. Any person interested, other than the applicant, may within ten (10) days after the date of adoption of the resolution containing the decision of
the Commission, or within ten (10) days after the expiration of the forty (40) day period mentioned in Section 11-21-4 (B), file in writing with the
Clerk an appeal from the decision of the Commission.
(B) If no appeal be filed within the time allowed in this Section, the denial by the Commission in a matter initiated by application shall be deemed final.
(C) On filing with the Clerk of an appeal, a public hearing shall be held thereon by the Council, which shall be set, noticed and decided substantially in
the same manner as provided in Section 11-21-6.
11-21-6: HEARINGS BY COUNCIL ON AMENDMENTS:
(A) Setting: Upon receipt of the resolution and other papers herein mentioned, the Council, or the Clerk, when so authorized by the Council, shall set a
time and place for a hearing on the matter, which shall be held within forty (40) days following such receipt; provided that in matters initiated by
resolution of the Council upon which the recommendation or report of the Commission has been unfavorable, the Council may determine to take
no further action.
(B) Notice: Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by at least one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, at
least ten (10) days before the hearing.
(C) Decision: Within forty (40) days after the conclusion of the public hearing thereon, the Council shall by resolution make its findings and
determination whether or not to adopt the amendment. In matters initiated by application, failure of the Council to adopt such a resolution within the
forty (40) day period shall be deemed to constitute a denial.
(D) Effect: The action of the Council on such matters shall be final; provided, that no change shall be made in any amendment proposed by the
Commission until the proposed change has been referred to the Commission for a report and a copy of the report has been filed with the Council;
provided, that failure of the Commission to report within forty (40) days shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change. (Ord. 533; 6-5-61)
Chapter 22
VARIANCES
11-22-1: AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCES:
(A) The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall have authority to grant variances, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and to specify terms and
conditions thereof. Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not
constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which subject property is
situated, and such other conditions as the Board deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Title.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 384/436
11-22-2: GROUNDS FOR VARIANCES:
(A) The applicant for a variance shall show, and before a variance may be granted the Board shall find, as follows:
1. That because of special circumstances applicable to subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surrounding, the strict
application of this Title deprives the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone
classification.
2. That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity
or zone in which the property is located.
3. That the granting of such variance will not adversely affect the general plan or the purposes of this Title.
11-22-3: PROCEDURE; REVOCATION; MODIFICATION:
(A) The procedure for application for variances and the review and issuance thereof, shall be as provided in Sections 11-23-5 through 11-23-8,
inclusive.
(B) Variances may be revoked or modified in the manner and under the conditions set forth in Chapter 24. (Ord. 533; 6-5-61)
Chapter 23
BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT
11-23-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
(A) There is hereby created a Board of Zoning Adjustment for the City hereafter referred to in this Title as the Board.
(B) The Board shall consist of three (3) members, who shall be appointed from the membership of the Commission by resolution of the Commission.
(C) Prior to the adoption of the resolution appointing the first members to the Board, the Commission as a whole shall constitute the Board, with all the
powers and duties thereof.
(D) The term of office of the members of the Board shall be one (1) year; provided, that the first members appointed shall serve as follows: One (1) for
six (6) months, one (1) for one (1) year, and one (1) for eighteen (18) months.
(E) In event of a permanent vacancy of the Board, such vacancy shall be filled by the Commission for the unexpired term.
11-23-2: MATTERS CONSIDERED BY BOARD:
The Board shall hear and decide the following matters:
(A) Applications for variances.
(B) Applications for conditional use permits.
(C) Applications for extra heavy M-2 use permits.
(D) Appeals from administrative acts, where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or determination
made by an administrative official in the administration or enforcement of this Title, in which matters the Board shall have the authority and shall be
subject to the conditions set forth in Sections 65855, 65856, and 65857 of the Government Code of the State, commonly known as the
Conservation and Planning Law.
11-23-3: RULES OF BOARD:
(A) The general rules and procedures necessary or convenient for the conduct of the business of the Board, including rules relating to the time for and
manner of appeals from administrative acts as mentioned in Section 11-23-2 (A), shall be adopted by the Planning Commission.
(B) The Board may adopt from time to time such rules and procedures necessary or convenient for the conduct of its business as are not in conflict
with the general rules adopted for that purpose by the Planning Commission.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 385/436
(C) The majority in number of the total voting membership of the Board shall constitute a legal quorum. The concurrence of at least a majority of
members present shall be necessary for action on any matter.
11-23-4: WHERE BOARD MEMBERS UNABLE TO ATTEND:
(A) In event any member of the Board is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the Chairman of the Commission may designate any other member
of the Commission to serve in his stead and with full voting rights at the meeting.
(B) All members of the Commission are hereby constituted as ex officio members of the Board for the foregoing purpose.
11-23-5: APPLICATION FOR AND INITIATION OF HEARINGS:
(A) Hearings on variances, conditional use permits and extra heavy M-2 use permits shall be initiated in any of the following manners:
1. By verified application of any interested person or persons.
2. By resolution of the Commission requesting the Board to hear the same.
(B) Upon filing with the Board of any such application or resolution, it shall hold a hearing thereon. The manner of setting, noticing, hearing and
determining such matter shall be substantially as provided in the following named provisions relating to amendments; provided, that all references
therein to the Commission shall be deemed to refer to the Board, and all references therein to the Council shall be deemed to refer to the
Commission and all references therein to amendments shall be deemed to refer to the matter to be considered by the Board.
The provisions are as follows:
Section 11-21-1 (B) and (C); Section 11-21-2 (C): Section 11-21-3 (A), (B), (F), and (G); Section 11-21-4 (A), (B), (C), (D), and (F).
11-23-6: TERM OF VARIANCE OR PERMIT; EXPIRATION:
(A) The Board may, in the granting of any variance, conditional use permit, or extra-heavy M-2 use permit, impose upon the permit a term of such
period of time as is found to be consistent with the purposes of the proposed use and necessary to safeguard the public safety, health and welfare.
(B) The Board may, in the granting of any variance, conditional use permit, or extra-heavy M-2 use permit, specify the time within which the proposed
use must be undertaken and actively and continuously pursued.
(C) Any permit or variance shall become null and void at the expiration of the term thereof, or if not undertaken and actively and continuously pursued
within the time specified in the permit or within one (1) year if no time be specified therein.
11-23-7: HEARING OF APPEALS FROM BOARD:
(A) All decisions of the Board shall be directly reviewable by the Council, which may affirm, reverse, or modify any such act or determination as it
deems just and equitable, after duly considering the purposes of the review, the grounds or factors to be considered, and making such findings, as
may be required by this Title in connection with the initial hearing of the particular matter; provided, that an appeal has been filed within the time
and in the manner provided in Subsection (B) of this Section.
(B) Appeals from decisions of the Board may be filed by the applicant or any person interested within the time and in the manner mentioned in Section
11-21-5 (A); provided, that all references therein to the Commission shall be deemed to refer to the Board.
(C) On filing with the Clerk of an appeal, a public hearing shall be held thereon by the Council, which shall be set, noticed and decided substantially in
the same manner provided in Section 11-21-6.
(D) The decision of the Council shall be final. The Clerk shall cause a copy of its resolution to be mailed to the appellant within ten (10) days from the
date of adoption thereof.
11-23-8: WHEN BOARD ACTION IS FINAL:
(A) Upon expiration of the time within which an appeal therefrom may be filed, and no appeal being filed within such time, the decision of the Board
shall be deemed final; but if an appeal is filed within such time, the decision of the Board shall be stayed pending determination of the appeal.
(B) Until the decision of the Board or Council has become final, as herein provided, no permit or license shall be issued for any use dependent upon
the granting of a variance, conditional use permit, or extra heavy M-2 use permit. (Ord. 533; 6-5-61)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 386/436
Chapter 24
PERMITS; REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION
11-24-1: AUTHORITY TO REVOKE OR MODIFY:
The Commission may revoke or modify any extra heavy M-2 use permit, any conditional use permit, or any variance on any one (1) or more of the
grounds hereinafter named, after a hearing held and conducted as provided in Section 11-24-4.
11-24-2: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
The grounds for such revocation shall be any of the following:
(A) That approval was obtained by means of fraud or misrepresentation of a material fact.
(B) That the permittee or holder of the variance has failed to undertake the use in question for an unreasonable period of time.
(C) That the use in question has ceased to exist, or has been suspended for one (1) year or more.
(D) That there is or has been a violation of or failure to observe the terms or conditions of the permit or variance, or the use has been conducted in
violation of the provisions of this Title, or any other provisions of this Code, or regulation.
(E) That the use to which the permit or variance applies has been conducted in a manner detrimental to the public safety, health and welfare, or so as
to be a nuisance.
11-24-3: GROUNDS FOR MODIFICATION:
The grounds for modification shall be any of the following:
(A) That the grounds which would otherwise justify a revocation of the permit or variance can be corrected or cured by a modification imposing new or
additional conditions.
(B) That improvement of methods or technological advances permit conduct of the use with adequate safeguards under the proposed modification.
(C) That one (1) or more of the original conditions of the permit or variance is unworkable, impractical, or otherwise fails to accomplish the original
aims.
11-24-4: INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS AND HEARINGS:
Proceedings for such revocation or modification may be initiated, and shall be set for hearing, noticed, heard, and determined in substantially the
same manner as provided in the following named provisions relating to amendments; provided, that all references therein to amendments shall be
deemed to refer to the proposed revocation or modification.
The provisions are as follows:
Section 11-21-1; Section 11-21-2 (C); Section 11-21-3; Section 11-21-4 (A), (B), (C), (D), and (F).
11-24-5: HEARING OF APPEALS:
All decisions of the Commission in proceedings for such revocation or modification may be appealed and reviewed in substantially the same manner
as provided in the following named provisions relating to appeals from decisions of the Commission.
The provisions are as follows:
Section 11-21-5; Section 11-21-6 (A), (B), and (C).
The action of the Council on such matters shall be final. (Ord. 533; 6-5-61)
Chapter 25
ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 387/436
11-25-1: APPLICATIONS:
(A) The Commission shall have authority to prescribe the form of all applications to be filed with the Commission or Board, and information to be
provided by applicants.
(B) The Commission may prepare and provide application forms for use of interested persons.
(C) The Commission and the Board shall have authority to refuse to receive for filing or consider matters where the form of application or the
information to be provided does not conform with the rules of the Commission and the Board, as the case may be; provided, however, that in
matters before the Commission or Board, respectively, minor defects or omissions may be waived or leave granted to correct the same, in the
discretion of the Commission or the Board, as the case may be. (Ord. 533, 6-5-61)
11-25-2: FILING FEES:
(A) A fee shall be paid to the City upon the filing of the applications for the following purposes or proceedings, in amounts to be established by
resolution of the City Council:
1. Amendment to the Zoning Code.
2. Variance.
3. Conditional use permit.
4. Revocation or modification of extra heavy, M-2, use permits or variance where the application is filed by a person other than a person owning or
leasing the property to which the permit or variance applies. (Ord. 932, 5-21-90)
11-25-3: USE PERMITS:
(A) The Council is empowered to designated, from time to time, an officer or employee of the City who shall have authority to issue use permits in
conformity with this Title.
(B) No use permit shall be issued for any use, building, occupancy or purpose which is in conflict with the provisions of this Title; and if such permit be
issued contrary to the provisions of this Title, it shall be null and void.
(C) A use permit shall be duly issued for such use or purpose prior to:
1. The initial occupancy or use of any new building or structure moved to a new site, or of new floor space or other addition to an existing building.
2. The change of type or class of use of an existing building.
3. A change of use of any unimproved premises, except to a use involving only the tilling of land or growing thereon of farm, garden or orchard
products.
11-25-4: INTERPRETATION:
(A) In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Title, the same shall be construed to be the minimum requirement for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
(B) This Title shall not be so construed as to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement.
(C) Where this Title imposes more stringent restrictions on the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces
around or different location of buildings than may be imposed or required by any other law, rule or regulation or by any easement, covenant or
agreement, then the provisions of this Title shall control.
11-25-5: VIOLATIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE; ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS:
(A) Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Title, and any
use of any land, building or premises established, conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Title, shall be and the same
is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
(B) Any act or condition in this Section declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance shall, upon order of the Council, by appropriate proceedings
begun by the Attorney, be abated, removed or enjoined in the manner prescribed by law; and such abatement shall be at the expense of the
persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it, and the expense shall be lien on the property on which the nuisance is maintained and a
personal obligation of the owner of the property, when so determined by resolution of the Council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 388/436
(C) The remedies mentioned in this Section shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
11-25-6: REPEAL:
Ordinance No. 410, and all ordinances amending Ordinance No. 410 shall, concurrently and with the effective date of this Title, be repealed, provided:
(A) Such repeal shall not be deemed to effect the adoption by reference of the Zoning Map of the City as mentioned in Section 11-2-2 of this Title.
(B) All presently existing and valid permits, variances, and other proceedings issued or taken under Ordinance No. 410 and amendments thereto, shall
continue in full force and effect, and shall be subject to such proceedings, modification, or revocation as though issued under the provisions of this
Title.
(C) All nonconforming uses or nonconforming buildings lawfully existing or maintained under the provisions of Ordinance No. 410 immediately prior to
the repeal thereof shall be deemed to be nonconforming uses or nonconforming buildings lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Title,
subject however, to all provisions herein mentioned relating to the same. (Ord. 533; 6-5-61)
Chapter 26
SETBACK REGULATIONS
11-26-1: ADOPTION OF PLAN AND GENERAL PURPOSE:
(A) There is hereby adopted a precise plan limiting the location of buildings and other improvements with respect to existing or planned rights-of-way,
under authority of Title 7, Chapter 3, Article 10, of the Government Code of the State, for the purpose of implementing the General Plan of the City,
and to furnish a guide for the orderly physical growth and development of the City, and to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare. Such precise plan may be developed progressively by the addition thereto from time to time, in the manner prescribed by law, of detailed
plans for certain streets or highways.
(B) One of the purposes of this chapter is to so regulate the future location of buildings and other improvements as to furnish sufficient visibility for the
safe operation of vehicles upon and entering into streets and highways and sufficient visibility and places of safety for pedestrians, as respects
present and future rights-of-way.
(C) An additional purpose of this ordinance is to so regulate the future location of buildings and other improvements that the same shall continue to
conform to the Zoning Regulations of the City, when street or highway rights-of-way are extended to the precise plan lines, with relation to the
distance from the lot line determined by the new right-of-way line.
11-26-2: TITLE OF ORDINANCE:
This chapter may be referred to as the "Setback Regulations".
11-26-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are herein defined as follows:
(A) "Building" shall mean any building, structure, or installation, whether located in, on, over or under the ground, and shall include (but shall not be
necessarily confined to) the following; walls; fences other than open fences; wells for water, oil, or other hydrocarbon products; tanks; off-street
parking spaces or facilities required by any provision of this Code; and swimming pools. The term "building" shall not include or apply to the
following: trees; shrubs; agricultural crops; open fences; public utilities installed under the provisions of law or franchise; walks, drive-ways;
irrigation pipes and related fixtures; off-street parking facilities or spaces not required by any provision of this Code: streets, curbs, and other
municipal facilities or installations.
(B) "City" shall mean this City.
(C) "Commission" shall mean the Planning Commission.
(D) "Council" shall mean the City Council.
(E) "Fence, open" shall mean a fence, fifty (50%) percent or more of the surface of which is open to the passage of light and vision on either any and
all horizontal planes, or any and all vertical planes, perpendicular to the vertical surface thereof.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 389/436
(F) "Improvement" shall mean the same as "building".
(G) "Precise plan line" shall mean a line shown on any map by which the precise plan of this Chapter is expressed, indicating the exterior boundary of
the proposed right-of-way of any street or highway.
(H) "Setback line" shall mean that line, measured from the precise plan line, beyond which no building or improvement would be permitted to be
erected or constructed under the provisions of the Zoning Regulations, if the lot line as defined by the Zoning Regulations were the same as the
precise plan line.
(I) "Zoning Regulations" shall mean the Zoning Regulations of this City as amended from time to time.
11-26-4: CONSTRUCTION:
The following rules of construction shall apply, unless inconsistent with the plain meaning of the context of this chapter.
(A) Tense: Words used in the present tense include the future.
(B) Number: Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular.
(C) Shall and may: The word "shall" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive.
(D) Gender: The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(E) Headings: In event that there is any conflict or inconsistency between the headings of an Article, Section, or Paragraph of this Chapter, and the
context thereof, the said heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning, or intent of such context.
(F) Oath: The word "oath" shall include affirmation.
(G) Verification: The word "verification"' shall include declaration under penalty of perjury.
11-26-5: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
(A) It shall be unlawful to erect or locate any building or other improvement
1. within the space between a setback line and the adjacent street right-of-way line, or
2. within the space between adjacent setback lines.
(B) Where this chapter imposes more stringent restrictions on the erection or location of buildings or improvements than may be imposed or required
by any other provision of this Code, rule or regulation, or by any easement, covenant or agreement, then the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(C) Subdivisions: Street and highway design and location of right of way lines in any subdivision falling under the provisions of the Subdivision Map
Act of the State, or under the provisions of any provision of this Code controlling subdivisions and/or divisions of land other than subdivisions, as
amended from time to time, shall be based on the precise plan lines established by this chapter.
(D) Nonconforming buildings and improvements: If any building or other improvement existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or
amendment hereto, the erection of which would be contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the same may continue with reasonable maintenance;
provided that such nonconforming building or improvement shall not be moved, enlarged or reconstructed except in a manner which shall cause it
to conform to this chapter, except to replace any portion destroyed by fire or other casualty which destroys not more than seventy-five percent
(75%) of its reasonable value.
11-26-6: SETBACK LINES, HOW ESTABLISHED:
(A) A precise plan establishing a setback line shall be adopted by means of a map or a written statement, or by a combination of the same, which
shows or describes such line; such statements shall be set forth in this chapter, and such maps shall be adopted by this chapter, and attached
hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
(B) Additional setback lines may be adopted by amendments to this Chapter, and changes in the lines established hereby or by such amendments
may be made by adding new maps, amendments of all or parts of maps, and written statements, or combinations of the same.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 390/436
(C) Any such map may be divided into parts and subparts, which may be separately shown or employed for purposes of amending the maps herein
mentioned.
(D) For sake of convenience and ready reference, in the adoption of this chapter and amendments thereof, said maps, the parts and subparts thereof
and such written statements, showing or describing such lines, may be designated as being a particular item or part of a section of this chapter.
(E) In amending or adding any designated subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, item or part of a section of this chapter, it shall not be necessary to
repeat the other subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, items or parts of such section. (Ord. 579; 12-2-63)
11-26-7: ADOPTION OF ITEMS OF PLAN:
There is hereby adopted by this Chapter, items of said precise plan as follows:
(A) VARIANCES: AUTHORITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
1. The Setback line or lines on Rose Avenue, within the City of Selma shall be in accordance with the map as follows:
*** insert figure here 11-26-7(A)1 ***
(Ord. 601; 3-1-65)
2. The Setback line or lines on Floral Avenue, within the City of Selma shall be in accordance with the map as follows:
*** insert figure here 11-26-7(A)2 ***
Authority of Commission: The Commission shall have authority to grant variances, and to specify the terms and conditions thereof, subject to
final approval by the Council. Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall
not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity in which the subject property is
situated, and such other conditions as the commission deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. Action by the Commission
and Council in such cases shall be by resolution. (Ord. 597, 12-2-63)
3. The setback line or lines on McCall Avenue between Flora and Arrants within the City of Selma shall be in accordance with the map below. The
remaining setback lines for McCall Avenue between High and Dinuba Avenues remain unchanged.
*** insert figure here 11-26-7(A)3 ***
(Ord. 824, 4-6-81)
4. The setback line or lines on Nebraska Avenue from Thompson Avenue to Second Street and on Second Street from Nebraska Avenue to Mill
Street, within the City shall be in accordance with the map as follows:
5. The setback line or lines on McCall Avenue from Valley View Street to West Front Street within the City shall be in accordance with the map as
follows:
*** insert figure here 11-26-7(A)5 ***
(Ord. 647; 5-20-68)
(B) GROUNDS FOR VARIANCES.
1. A variance shall be granted if the applicant shows and the Commission finds that any of the following are true:
(a) That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography or location, the strict application
of this Chapter would deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by a substantial number of other properties in the vicinity and fronting
on the same street or highway.
(b) That the nature of the property of the applicant is such that he will be substantially damaged unless the proposed building or improvement is
authorized.
(c) That the applicant's property will not earn a fair return on the applicant's investment unless the proposed building or improvement is
authorized.
(d) That, balancing the interests of the public in effecting the purposes of this Chapter against the interest of the applicant in using his property
with the proposed building or improvement thereon, the granting of the variances is required by consideration of justice and equity.
2. A variance shall not be granted if the Commission finds that any of the following are true:
(a) That the applicant will not be substantially damaged by locating the proposed building or other improvement at a point on his property behind
the setback line.
(b) That, balancing the interest of the public in effecting the purposes of this chapter against the interest of the applicant in using his property with
the proposed building or improvement thereon, the resulting disadvantage to the public would be unreasonably disproportionate to the
advantages to the applicant to be derived from so using his property.
11-26-8: PROCEDURES ON VARIANCES:
(A) Initiation: Variances shall be initiated by the verified application of any owner of property claiming to be entitled to a variance therefor, or of his
agent, which shall be filed with the Commission.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 391/436
(B) Hearing and Notice: The Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the matter of such application for variance. Notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten (10) days before the
hearing and by such other means as the Commission may deem necessary.
(C) Continuance: Any such hearing may be continued by the vote of the majority of the members present at such hearing, who may fix a time and
place to which such hearing shall be so continued, even in the absence of a quorum, in which case the presiding officer at such hearing shall
publicly announce prior to the conclusion of the hearing the time and place to which the hearing is to be continued, and no further notice shall be
required.
(D) Quorum and Voting: The number of members necessary for a quorum, and the number of votes necessary for the adoption of any resolution
granting or denying a variance, shall be a majority of the total voting membership of the Commission. All other matters shall be determined by the
majority vote of the members present.
(E) Report of Investigation: The Commission may consider at such hearing any report of any investigation by a committee of one or more members of
the Commission, or its staff, authorized by the Commission in its discretion.
(F) Reference to Council: Within thirty (30) days after adoption of a resolution granting a variance, the Commission shall file a copy thereof with the
Council.
(G) Consideration by Council: Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a copy of such resolution, the Council shall consider the same at a public meeting.
No notice of the consideration of such matter shall be required.
(H) Grounds: The approval or disapproval by the Council of the granting of said variance, or of any conditions attached thereto, shall be upon the
grounds specified in Section 11-26-7(B). The Council may impose new or different conditions to the granting of the variance. The action of the
Council shall be final.
(I) If the Council fails to adopt a resolution approving or disapproving the granting of said variance, or imposing a new or different condition to the
granting thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the copy of the resolution of the Commission by the Clerk, then such variance
shall be deemed to be granted with the conditions as provided to the resolution of the Commission.
11-26-9: APPEALS:
(A) Any applicant not satisfied with the action of the Commission, or whose application has been denied, or whose application has not been finally
acted upon by the Commission within a period of sixty (60) days after the filing of the application, may file an appeal in writing with the Council
within ten (10) days after the final action of the Commission or within sixty (60) days after the filing of said application in the case of no final action,
and the Council shall hold a public hearing with respect thereto.
(B) Such public hearing shall be conducted within thirty (30) days after the filing of such written appeal, and the final decision of the Council shall be
made within thirty (30) days after the public hearing. Failure of the Council to take final action within sixty (60) days from the date of the filing of the
written appeal shall be deemed to be a denial of the appeal.
(C) Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by at least one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least
ten (10) days before the hearing.
(D) On such appeal, the Council may grant the variance, or deny the granting of same, or attach conditions thereto, upon the grounds specified in
Section 11-26-7(B).
11-26-10: AMENDMENTS, PROCEDURE:
(A) The procedure for adoption of amendments to this chapter shall be as set forth in Title 7, Chapter 3, Article 11, of the Government Code of the
State of California (Section 65650 et. seq.) and otherwise under the applicable provisions of this chapter, if any, not in conflict therewith.
11-26-11: VIOLATIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE:
(A) Any building or other improvement erected or located or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby
declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
(B) Any act or condition in this section declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance shall, upon order of the Council, by appropriate proceedings
begun by the Attorney, be abated, removed, or enjoined in the manner prescribed by law; and such abatement shall be at the expense of the
persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it, and such expense shall be a lien on the property on which the nuisance is maintained and
a personal obligation of the owner of such property, when so determined by resolution of the Council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 392/436
(C) The remedies mentioned in this section shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 579; 12-2-63)
Chapter 27
INTERIM SCHOOL FACILITIES
11-27-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and cited as the "Interim School Facilities Ordinance".
11-27-2: AUTHORITY:
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapter 4.7 (commencing with section 65970) of division 1 of title 7 of the Government Code.
11-27-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a method of financing interim school facilities necessitated by conditions of overcrowding caused by new
residential developments.
11-27-4: REGULATIONS:
The City Council may, from time to time by resolution, issue regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this Chapter.
11-27-5: GENERAL PLAN:
The City General Plan provides for the location of public schools. Land required to be dedicated hereunder shall be consistent with the General Plan.
11-27-6: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
APPROVE A RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: For any residential development to:
(A) Issue a building permit;
(B) Approve a tentative, final or parcel map for subdivision of land; or
(C) Approve, grant or issue a variance, special permit, site plan review or planned development permit.
CONDITIONS OF OVERCROWDING: The total enrollment of a school attendance area, including enrollment from proposed development,
exceeds the capacity of such school attendance area as determined by the governing body of the district.
DECISION-MAKING BODY: The City Council, Planning Commission and such other board, commission, office or official as may be authorized or
empowered to approve a residential development.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof, or a mobile home, designed for residential occupation by one person or a group of two (2) or more
persons living together as a domestic unit. Dwelling unit shall not mean room additions to existing residential structures.
REASONABLE METHODS OF MITIGATING CONDITIONS OF OVERCROWDING: Shall include, but are not limited to:
(A) Agreements between a developer and the affected school district whereby fees are paid directly by a developer to the school district, or temporary
use buildings will be leased to or for the benefit of the school district, or temporary use buildings owned by the developer or school district will be
used by the district;
(B) The use of relocatable structures, student transportation, classroom double sessions, year-round school programs, school boundary realignments
and elimination of low priority school facility uses;
(C) The use of available tax and bond, and other revenue procedures, to the extent authorized by law.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: (A) The construction or one or more home dwelling units, mobile or otherwise;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 393/436
(B) The construction of a mobile home park;
(C) The subdivision of real property for the purpose of such construction or for the purpose of converting existing multiple family structures to
condominium stock cooperative ownership; or
(D) The conversion to a residential use of an existing structure or part thereof pursuant to a variance, special use permit, planned development permit
or other discretionary planning permit.
11-27-7: FINDINGS BY SCHOOL DISTRICT:
Pursuant to Government Code sections 65970 et seq., the governing board of a school district which has not received an apportionment pursuant to
the Leroy F. Green State School Building Lease - Purchase Law of 1976 (commencing with section 17700 of the California Education Code), with
respect to any of its attendance areas located in whole or in part within the incorporated territory of the City, may make and file with the City Council a
written notice of findings supported by clear and convincing evidence that:
(A) Conditions of overcrowding exist in the school or schools of such attendance area which will impair the normal functioning of educational
programs, including the reason for such conditions existing; and
(B) All reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated and considered by the governing board and no feasible
method of reducing such conditions exists.
11-27-8: CONTENT OF FINDINGS:
The notice of findings filed pursuant to Section 11-27-7 shall contain the following:
(A) A precise description of the geographic boundaries of the attendance areas to which the findings relate;
(B) A list of the mitigation measures evaluated by the governing board of the school district and a statement of the reasons why such measures were
found to be infeasible;
(C) A summary of the evidence upon which such findings are based; and
(D) Such other information as may be required by regulations adopted by the City Council pursuant to this Chapter.
11-27-9: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL:
After receipt of the notice findings complying with the requirements of this Chapter, and following a noticed public hearing thereon, the City Council
shall, by resolution, either concur in or reject such findings. The Council shall concur in the findings by resolution if the documentation and evidence
clearly and convincingly demonstrate to the Council the existence of conditions of overcrowding and the lack of feasible methods of mitigating
conditions of overcrowding within an attendance area of the district. Within an attendance area as to which the Council has concurred in a finding of
overcrowding and the lack of feasible mitigating measures, the approval of a residential development by any decision-making body shall be
conditioned upon the dedication of land or the payment of fees, or both, in the discretion of the decision-making body. At any time after it has
concurred in or rejected such findings, the Council may reconsider the matter, in a noticed public hearing.
11-27-10: SCHOOL DISTRICT SCHEDULE:
The school district shall also file with the City Council a schedule specifying how and when the school district will use fees or land received by it
pursuant to this Chapter to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, and the classroom facilities to
be made available, and the time when such facilities will be available. If the school district cannot meet the schedule, it shall file modifications with the
City Council together with a statement of the reasons for the modifications.
11-27-11: FINDINGS BY CITY COUNCIL:
After receipt of the schedule, the City Council shall, by resolution, determine whether the facilities and land use specified in such schedule are
consistent with the General Plan.
11-27-12: FINDINGS BY DECISION-MAKING BODY:
Within any attendance area where it has been determined pursuant to this Chapter that conditions of overcrowding exist, and where the City Council
has concurred in such findings, no decision-making body shall approve a residential development unless such decision-making body first determines
one of the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 394/436
(A) That the school district has entered into an agreement with the applicant or some other person which provides a feasible means for mitigating any
aggravation of such conditions of overcrowding which would be caused by the residential development.
(B) That the applicant has paid the school fees as required by this Section;
(C) That there are specific, overriding fiscal, economic, social or environmental factors which would benefit the City which justify approval of the
residential development without requiring the payment of fees otherwise required pursuant to this Chapter.
11-27-13: FACILITIES FEES AND DEDICATIONS:
The amount of the facilities fees per dwelling unit shall be set by resolution of the City Council after consultation with the affected school districts, and
shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary, junior high and high school facilities and
shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by residential development. However, fees shall not exceed the amount
necessary to pay five (5) annual lease payments for interim facilities prorated per student. The fee shall be paid at the time of the issuance of a
building permit, or when none is required, before occupancy of an existing structure.
11-27-14: DETERMINATION OF STUDENT POPULATION DENSITY AND DWELLING UNITS:
(A) Student population and density for the purpose of this Chapter shall be determined by resolution of the City Council based upon the number of
students reasonably expected to be housed in each dwelling unit in the development.
(B) The number of dwelling units shall be determined by reference to the building permit or map permitting conversion of existing structures to
residential use.
11-27-15: DEDICATION OR PROVISION OF FACILITIES IN LIEU OF FEES:
(A) A developer may dedicate land in lieu of paying the fees required by this Section. However, the payment of fees may be required only in
subdivisions containing fifty (50) or fewer parcels.
(B) The developer may, at his option and expense in lieu of fees, provide interim facilities meeting the standards and at a location established by the
affected school district. The developer shall remove such facilities at the conclusion of the fifth school year at his expense unless the developer and
the school district agree that such facilities may remain.
11-27-16: APPLICATION OF FEES:
(A) The fees collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be retained by the school district to be expended as required by this Section.
(B) The fees, land or facilities, or combination thereof, shall be used by the school district as and for interim facilities in accordance with the
requirements of chapter 4.7, division 1, title 7 of the Government Code, and as defined in section 65980 thereof.
11-27-17: SCHOOL DISTRICT REPORT, FREQUENCY THEREOF, CONTENTS:
The school district shall maintain a separate account for any fees received and shall file a report with the City Council on the balance in the account at
the end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall
specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins, and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist.
Such report shall be filed by October 15 of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the City Council. If overcrowding no longer
exists, the City shall cease levying fees pursuant to this Chapter for residential development in that attendance area.
11-27-18: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have
adopted this Chapter and any section, subsection or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsections or portions be
declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 874, 1-21-85)
Chapter 28
SIGN REGULATIONS
11-28-1: PURPOSE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 395/436
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard the life, health, property, and public welfare in keeping with the character of
the city by establishing and maintaining standards for the size, height, structural design, quality of materials, construction, location, illumination, and
maintenance of all exterior signs and sign structures including signs attached to or affixed upon the interior of windows, and to accomplish the
following results:
(A) To protect and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods and property values by prohibiting obtrusive and incompatible signs; and
(B) To promote and maintain healthy commercial centers and property values by providing for the effective communication of the nature of goods and
services and the avoidance of wasteful and unsightly competition in signs; and
(C) To provide a reasonable and comprehensive system of controls for signs; and
(D) To encourage a desirable urban character, which has a minimum of overhead clutter; and
(E) To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance and to provide incentive and latitude for variety, good design relationship,
spacing, and location; and
(F) To attract and direct persons to various activities and enterprises in order to provide for maximum public convenience; and
(G) To enhance the economic value of the community through the regulation of the size, location, design, and illumination of signs. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-
1995)
11-28-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND INSPECTIONS:
(A) Administration: It shall be the duty of the community development department to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Inspections: Every sign erected in the city shall be subject to inspection to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other laws
and ordinances of the city.
(C) Permits Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate, change, or otherwise
modify a sign within the city without first obtaining a sign review and approval from the community development department.
(D) Legal Interest In Property: In order to file an application for any action under this chapter, the applicant shall have a certain legal interest in the real
property which is the subject of the application. Legal interest shall be one of the following:
1. Owner;
2. Lessee, limited to the portion being leased and excluding common access drives and common parking areas; or
3. A verified agent of one of those listed above (such as a licensed sign contractor).
(E) Applications; Procedure: Applications for permits required by the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the city community development
department on forms provided by the city, shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set by the city council by resolution and shall contain the
following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property;
2. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant (sign owner);
3. The name, address and telephone number of the sign contractor;
4. The location of the building, structure or lot where the sign will be placed;
5. Three (3) copies of a plan showing the following:
(a) The location and size of all existing or proposed buildings or structures on the parcel where the sign will be located.
(b) The location of all off-street parking facilities, including major points of entry and exit.
(c) Fully dimensioned drawings showing the proposed design, size, colors, materials, location of the sign or sign structures and elevations if the
sign is to be placed on a building.
(d) The location and size of all existing freestanding signs on the parcel. The location and size of all wall signs, if the sign is to be placed on a
wall. Tenants in office or shopping centers only must show wall signs which pertain to their place of business.
6. Such other information as the Community Development Department shall require to show full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and
all other laws and ordinances of the City.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 396/436
(F) Approval Of Sign Reviews: The Community Development Department shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a sign review application based
on the following criteria:
1. The application has been properly made; and
2. The sign complies with the laws of the City; and
3. The permit fee has been paid; and
4. The sign's location and copy does not create a potential visibility or safety hazard; and
5. The sign does not require a conditional use permit as required by this Title.
(G) Referral To Planning Commission: The Community Development Director, at his discretion, may refer any application to the Planning Commission,
which may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the sign application in accordance with the criteria listed above.
(H) Action On Application: If a sign application is denied, the Community Development Department shall provide written notice of the denial to the
applicant after the decision is rendered. The applicant may appeal any decision of the Community Development Director to the Planning
Commission pursuant to the provisions of the appeals portion of this Chapter (subsection 11-28-2(I)).
If a sign is approved, the applicant shall obtain any required permits from the Building Division prior to installing, altering or relocating any sign.
(I) Appeals:
1. The applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal a decision, on an item pertaining to this Chapter, made by the Community Development
Director to the Planning Commission. Such an appeal shall be filed in writing, in the format prescribed by the Community Development Director,
not later than ten (10) calendar days after a decision has been rendered. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee required for an "Appeal of
a Staff Decision, Minor" and any pertinent data the appellant wishes to submit. The appeal shall be scheduled for the next regular Planning
Commission meeting, provided the meeting is at least fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the appeal. If the next meeting is sooner than
fourteen (14) days, the appeal shall be scheduled for the meeting following the next scheduled meeting.
2. The applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal a decision, on an item pertaining to this Chapter, made by the Planning Commission to the
City Council. Such an appeal shall be filed in writing, in the format prescribed by the Community Development Director, not later than ten (10)
calendar days after a decision has been rendered by the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee required for an
"Appeal of a Planning Commission Decision" and any pertinent data the appellant wishes to submit. The appeal shall be scheduled for the next
regular City Council meeting provided the meeting is at least fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of appeal. If the next meeting is sooner
than fourteen (14) days, the appeal shall be scheduled for the meeting following the next scheduled meeting. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
11-28-3: EXEMPT SIGNS:
(A) The following signs, if not illuminated and unless specifically provided for, shall be exempt from filing a sign application, however, they shall comply
with all other applicable requirements of this Chapter:
1. Notices or signs required to be posted by law.
2. Signs of a duly constituted governmental body required for official business.
3. Official traffic, fire and police related signs, temporary traffic control signs used during construction, utility identification signs, and other official
signs as required by the City State department or other official agency.
4. Temporary signs for the purpose of announcing civic events sponsored by the City and/or the Chamber of Commerce.
5. One each national, State and corporate flag, provided that the flags are displayed properly and comply with the United States Flag Code.
6. Holiday decorations, provided that they are appropriate to the holiday they represent and such decorations are not displayed in excess of an
aggregate of ninety (90) days.
7. Residential signs identifying the address or occupant of a single-family home, provided such signs do not exceed four (4) square feet in
aggregate. Residential address signs may be illuminated. Curb addresses shall not be counted against the allowable sign area. All address signs
shall be in accordance with applicable Fire Department regulations.
8. Signs inside buildings.
9. Emergency information signs not exceeding two (2) square feet which are limited to the name of the business, contact person and emergency
phone numbers.
10. Permanent window signs indicating hours of operation, credit card signs and similar ancillary business signs, provided the aggregate of such
signs does not exceed four (4) square feet. Additionally "open", "closed" and "help wanted" signs may be placed provided they do not exceed
three (3) square feet each. Signs indicating "open" and "closed" may be illuminated.
11. For sale, for rent, open house, garage sale, and similar signs, provided that no more than two (2) such signs are on the premises for which they
are advertising, they do not exceed eight (8) square feet per sign face and they are not placed in the public right of way.
12. Weekend off-site subdivision directional and off-site open house signs subject to the following regulations:
(a) Such signs shall not exceed ten (10) signs per subdivision or shall not exceed two (2) signs per open house.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 397/436
(b) Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
(c) Such signs shall not be placed in any public right of way or on any public utility fixture. No sign shall be placed without the property owner's
permission.
(d) Signs shall be posted no earlier than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of Friday afternoon and shall be removed not later than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
on Monday morning. If a legal holiday extends the weekend, signs may be posted during that holiday.
(e) Off-site subdivision and open house signs shall be subject to abatement as per subsection 11-28-4(G)2.
13. Off-site subdivision directional signs which are part of a City and Chamber of Commerce sponsored program approved by the City Council.
14. Temporary noncommercial signs including, but not limited to, religious, charitable, civic, homeowner association, educational, cultural, or
political signs, provided that such signs comply with the following regulations:
(a) Such signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet per sign face.
(b) No such sign shall be posted for a period of more than thirty (30) days before an event or sixty (60) days before an election and all such signs
shall be removed within seven (7) days of the completion of the event or election.
(c) Such signs shall not be stuck, glued, painted, pasted, posted, nailed, stapled or otherwise attached to any public property, in the public right
of way, publicly owned sign, utility pole, fire hydrant or similar fixture. It shall be unlawful to erect a sign or direct the erection of a sign without
the permission of the property owner.
(d) It shall be presumed that the organization or candidate which benefits from a sign is the party who erected the sign.
(e) Upon determination of a violation of the provisions of this subsection regulating temporary noncommercial signs, the Community
Development Department shall contact the property owner of the parcel in question and request that the illegal sign be voluntarily abated. If
the signs are not removed from private property within twenty four (24) hours, the Community Development Director may direct the removal of
such signs. Signs on public property may be removed immediately and without notice. The Community Development Department shall send
notification in writing to the owner of such sign, if the owner can be determined, stating the location where the sign is being held and that the
sign will be destroyed if not claimed by the owner within ten (10) days of such notice. If the sign is not claimed within the allotted time period,
the Director shall have the sign destroyed or disposed of. The Community Development Director shall not release any confiscated signs
without payment by the owner to reimburse the City for any costs incurred for the abatement and storage of the sign. If the sign is not claimed
the owner shall be responsible for the cost of abatement, storage and disposal of the sign and the City shall bill the owner to recover the costs
incurred by the City.
(f) No portion of this subsection shall prohibit the owner, or his authorized representative, of a piece of property from removing a sign from his
property. Further nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the Director from directing the immediate abatement of dangerous and unsafe signs.
(Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
11-28-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
(A) Purpose: The following general provisions are applicable to all signs and billboards regulated by this Chapter.
(B) Entitlements Strictly Construed: Because the regulations in this Chapter are established to protect the public health, safety and general welfare,
any sign entitlement authorized hereunder shall be strictly construed to further the purposes of this Chapter.
(C) Illumination Of Signs: Unless otherwise prohibited by this Chapter, signs requiring a permit may be illuminated subject to approval by the
Community Development Department.
(D) Obstruction Of Public Passage: No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct any door, fire escape or other emergency exit of any building. No sign
shall be erected in any public right of way.
(E) Construction: All signs, parts and supporting structures shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable Federal, State and City laws and
regulations. Any person engaged in the construction of signs shall have appropriate and valid licenses.
(F) Maintenance Of Signs: The following maintenance standards shall apply to all signs:
1. All signs, parts and supporting structures shall be continuously maintained in a safe, structurally sound, neatly painted, and well repaired
condition.
2. Illuminated signs shall be capable of being fully illuminated and legible. The faces of such a sign shall be intact without holes or other facial
damage.
(G) Enforcement: The Community Development Department is responsible for the enforcement of this Chapter.
1. Permanent Signs: Upon determination of a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the Community Development Department shall contact the
property owner of the parcel in question and request that the illegal sign be voluntarily abated. The Community Development Department shall
provide the owner with at least three (3) notices not closer than two (2) weeks apart. If after ninety (90) days no action is taken by the owner, the
Community Development Director may direct the removal of such signs after a resolution is passed by the City Council declaring the sign a
public nuisance. A minimum of ten (10) days notice shall be given to all persons owning property described in the resolution prior to its adoption
in accordance with chapter 2.6 of the California Business and Professions Code. After a sign's removal the Community Development
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 398/436
Department shall send notification in writing to the owner of the property stating the location where the sign is being held and that the sign will be
destroyed if not claimed by the owner within ten (10) days of such notice. If the sign is not claimed within the allotted time period, the Director
shall have the sign destroyed or disposed of. The Community Development Department shall not release any confiscated signs without a
payment by the owner to reimburse the City for any cost incurred for the abatement and storage of the sign. If the sign is not claimed the owner
shall be responsible for the cost of abatement, storage and disposal of the sign and the City shall bill the owner to recover the costs incurred by
the City.
2. Temporary Signs: Upon determination of a violation of the provisions of this Chapter regulating temporary signs, the Community Development
Department shall contact the property owner of the parcel in question and request the illegal sign be voluntarily abated. If the signs are not
removed from private property within twenty four (24) hours, the Community Development Director shall direct the removal of such signs. Signs
on public property may be removed immediately and without notice. The Community Development Department shall send notification in writing
to the owner of such sign, if the owner can be determined, stating the location where the sign is being held and that the sign will be destroyed if
not claimed by the owner within ten (10) days of such notice. If the sign is not claimed within the allotted time period, the Director shall have the
sign destroyed or disposed of. The Community Development Department shall not release any confiscated signs without payment by the owner
to reimburse the City for any costs incurred for the abatement and storage of the sign. If the sign is not claimed the owner shall be responsible
for the cost of abatement, storage and disposal of the sign and the City shall bill the owner to recover the costs incurred by the City.
(H) Existing Nonconforming Signs: All nonconforming signs which have been legally erected prior to the adoption of this Chapter shall be legal
nonconforming signs. It shall be legal for such signs to have their copy changed, provided they submit a sign application to the Community
Development Director for review as outlined below in subsection (I). Any physical changes, modifications or upgrades of a legal nonconforming
sign structure, not related to normal maintenance activities, shall be required to comply with all provisions of this Chapter.
All legal nonconforming signs shall be brought into compliance with this Chapter twenty (20) years after the adoption of this Chapter by the City
Council pursuant to section 5495 of the Business and Professions Code. Any sign which is not brought into compliance may at that time be subject
to abatement as a public nuisance.
(I) Change Of Copy: A change of copy shall consist of only changing the copy for a sign cabinet, wall sign or similar structure. Except for maintenance
of existing copy, painted signs, on walls or windows, shall not be eligible for a change of copy. All change of copy requests shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department for the tracking of signage within the City. Provided there are no physical changes to the sign structure and
no other portion of this Chapter is violated, the request shall be approved by the Community Development Department. There shall be no fees for a
change of copy request. The applicant shall file the request on an application form provided by Community Development Department and shall
include a dimensioned illustration of the proposed new sign copy.
(J) Right To Remove: No portion of this Chapter shall prohibit the owner, or his authorized representative, of a piece of property from removing a sign
from his property. Further, nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the Director from directing the immediate abatement of dangerous and unsafe
signs. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
11-28-5: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
(A) In addition to any sign not specifically permitted in accordance with this Chapter, the following signs shall be prohibited:
1. Animated signs.
2. Flashing signs, except for time and temperature signs and electronic reader boards.
3. Revolving signs, except barber poles.
4. Movable signs mounted on trailers, trucks or similar conveyance.
5. Pennants, banners and flags except as specifically permitted by this Chapter.
6. Off-site signs, except as specifically permitted by this Chapter.
7. Signs that display a message, graphic presentation, or other image that is obscene as defined by section 311 of the California Penal Code.
8. Roof Signs: All signs mounted on or above the roof line of a building, except that, the placement of signs on a mansard roof are permitted
provided that such signs are placed in the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the mansard and no portion of the sign extends into the top one-third (1/3) of
the mansard roof. All mansard roof signs shall be integrated into the mansard structure.
9. Projecting Signs: No projecting signs are permitted, except barber poles which may project twenty four inches (24").
10. Signs imitative of official street and traffic control signs, except when used for on-site traffic direction. Such signs would include those which
contain or imitate an official traffic sign or signal, or containing the words stop, go, slow, caution, danger, warning, or similar words which in
context of the sign could be misconstrued to be a traffic or safety warning sign.
11. Signs which are cut, burned, limed, painted or otherwise marked on a field, tree, rock or other natural feature. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
11-28-6: PERMITTED SIGNS:
(A) Maximum Entitlements: The size and quantity regulations set forth in this Section shall be the maximum permitted sign entitlements under this
Chapter. The use of the subject property determines the signage allowed in all zone districts.
(B) Determination Of Sign Area:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 399/436
1. Multiple signs for the same business or use shall be added together when determining existing and allowable sign area.
2. Nonintegrated signs, such as individual letters when not in a frame area, shall have their area determined by the number of square feet of the
smallest rectangle in which the entire copy of the proposed sign can be enclosed. If a particular letter or symbol is fifty percent (50%) or more in
height than the other letters or symbols, then the larger letter or symbol may be enclosed in a separate rectangle but still added into the total sign
area.
3. Three (3) dimensional objects, such as globes and cylinders, shall have their area determined by calculating the surface area of the object which
will be used for signage. Cubes and objects with signage on flat surfaces shall use the area of the flat surfaces. If the object is less than two feet
(2') in width or diameter, then the area shall be calculated as if the object were flat.
4. The base of all monument sign shall not be included in the allowable sign area but shall be included for maximum height.
(C) Sign Variance: The Community Development Director may grant a sign variance for a sign, provided that strict and literal interpretation and
enforcement of this Chapter would create an unnecessary hardship to the applicant. An unnecessary hardship may result from the size, shape, or
dimensions of a site, or the existing locations of structures on the site, or the physical conditions on the site or immediately adjacent to the site. In
no case shall the variance be granted for greater than ten percent (10%) of any one aspect of the sign. The applicant shall file an application as
provided by the Community Development Department, fees and an exact statement as to what hardship would be created. The decision of the
Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission as per the appeals section of this Chapter (subsection 11-28-2(I)).
(D) Setbacks: All freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum of five feet (5') from any property line as measured from the nearest portion of the
sign and its supports. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
11-28-6-1: RESIDENTIAL SIGNS:
(A) Single-Family Homes And Subdivision:
1. Model Home Signs: Each model home may have one model home sign not to exceed six (6) square feet and not to exceed five feet (5') in
height. In addition, each model home may have one flag per twenty feet (20') of street frontage. Such flags shall not exceed fifteen (15) square
feet in area and shall be mounted no more than eighteen feet (18') in height to the top of the flag. Model home signs may be illuminated,
however, the flags shall not be illuminated.
2. Subdivision Sales Sign: Each single-family home tract shall be permitted one sales sign per major arterial or one sales sign on the primary
frontage if not adjacent to a major arterial. Subdivision sales signs shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet in area and shall not exceed a
height of eight feet (8'). Subdivision sales sign may be illuminated, the remainder shall be nonilluminated.
3. Subdivision Entry Signs: Each single-family subdivision is permitted one permanent entry sign for each side of the street at each entrance
adjacent to a major arterial or its primary frontage if not adjacent to a major arterial. Subdivision entry signs shall not exceed forty (40) square
feet or a height of six feet (6'). All subdivision entry signs shall be constructed of masonry or other durable materials and integrated into walls or
fences. Landscaping and other features are encouraged to accentuate the entrance.
(B) Multiple-Family Dwellings:
1. Identification Signs: Each multi-family complex is permitted one permanent identification sign per two hundred fifty feet (250') of street frontage
or fraction thereof. Identification signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet or a height of six feet (6'). All identification shall be constructed of
masonry or other durable materials and integrated into walls or fences. Landscaping and other features are encouraged to accentuate the sign.
(C) Mobile Home Parks:
1. Identification Signs: Each mobile home park is permitted one permanent identification sign per two hundred fifty feet (250') of street frontage or
fraction thereof. Identification signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet or a height of six feet (6'). All identification shall be constructed of
masonry or other durable materials and integrated into walls or fences. Landscaping and other features are encouraged to accentuate the sign.
(Ord. 95-9, 8-7-95)
11-28-6-2: COMMERCIAL SIGNS:
(A) Single Tenant Retail Or Office Buildings Not Part Of A Shopping Or Office Center, Including Hospitals, Medical Clinics, Hotels And Motels:
1. Freestanding Signs: Single tenant retail or office buildings not part of a shopping or office center shall be permitted the following freestanding
signs based on the developed portion of the site:
(a) Sites Less Than Five Acres: One freestanding sign per two hundred fifty feet (250') of street frontage or fraction thereof. The sign face area
shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet and the overall sign height shall not exceed twenty feet (20'). Sign area shall not be exchanged
between signs.
(b) Sites Five Acres Or Greater: One freestanding sign per two hundred fifty feet (250') of street frontage or fraction thereof. The sign face area
shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet and the overall sign height shall not exceed twenty feet (20'). Sign area shall not be
exchanged between signs.
2. Wall Signs: Each single tenant retail or office building not part of a shopping or office center shall be permitted two (2) square feet of sign area
per linear foot of building frontage adjacent to a street, parking area or access drive. Sign area shall not be exchanged between walls.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 400/436
(B) Shopping And Office Centers:
1. Sign Program: All multi-tenant shopping or office centers shall submit a sign program to the Community Development Department for review and
approval.
2. Freestanding Signs: Each shopping or office center is permitted one freestanding sign per two hundred fifty feet (250') of street frontage or
fraction thereof. The sign face area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet and the overall sign height shall not exceed twenty feet (20').
Sign area shall not be exchanged between signs.
(a) Shopping and office centers between five (5) and twelve (12) acres, inclusive, in size shall be permitted one freestanding sign per street
frontage with a sign face area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a maximum overall sign height of twenty feet (20'). These
freestanding signs will take the place of one of the smaller permitted freestanding signs on a one for one basis.
(b) Shopping and office centers greater than twelve (12) acres in size shall be permitted on freestanding sign per street frontage with a sign face
area of two hundred (200) square feet and a maximum overall sign height of twenty feet (20'). These freestanding signs will take the place of
one of the smaller permitted freestanding signs on a one for one basis.
3. Wall Signs: Each tenant in a shopping or office center shall be permitted two (2) square feet of sign area per linear foot of building frontage, if
that tenant's shop or office area is adjacent to a street, alley, parking area or access drive. Sign area shall not be exchanged between walls or
tenants.
(C) Vehicle, Heavy Equipment And Boat Dealership:
1. Freestanding Signs: Each parcel of land which contains one or more vehicle, heavy equipment or boat franchise dealership, shall be permitted
one freestanding sign per franchise. No freestanding sign permitted under this subsection shall be closer than one hundred feet (100') to another
freestanding sign on the same parcel. The sign face area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per franchise and the overall sign
height shall not exceed twenty feet (20'). More than one franchise may be placed on a freestanding sign, provided the total signage on a single
freestanding sign does not exceed three hundred (300) square feet. Dealerships with only one franchise on a legal parcel shall have a maximum
sign face area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
2. Wall Signs: Two and one-half (21/2) square feet of sign area per linear foot of building frontage shall be permitted if the building is adjacent to a
public street, parking area or access drive. Sign area shall not be exchanged between walls.
3. Nongovernmental Flags, Pennants, Bunting And Similar Materials: Such advertising media shall be permitted provided they are kept in good
repair. No vinyl, paper or foil decorations shall be displayed for longer than one year or the life of the material whichever is less.
(D) Permanent Outside Retail Sales:
1. With A Building: If a building is on the same property as an outdoor retail sale use (subsection 11-28-6-2(A)), permitted signage shall be the
same as a freestanding retail use.
2. Without A Building: The use shall be allowed one freestanding sign per two hundred fifty feet (250') of street frontage or fraction thereof. The
sign face area shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet, the overall sign height shall not exceed twenty feet (20') and the width shall not exceed
twelve and one-half feet (121/2'). Sign area shall not be exchanged between signs.
(E) Freeway-Oriented Signs:
1. Eligibility: Any parcel within six hundred feet (600') of the Highway 99 right of way which is engaged in one of the following uses may have a
freeway-oriented sign:
(a) A hotel or motel.
(b) A restaurant.
(c) A service station.
(d) A shopping or office center.
(e) A new vehicle, heavy equipment or boat sales lot.
(f) A convenience store.
(g) Any use interpreted by the Planning Commission to be a freeway oriented business. A written request for an interpretation shall be submitted
to the Community Development Department a minimum of five (5) working days before a regularly scheduled meeting to be considered by the
Commission.
2. Design Standards:
(a) No freeway-oriented sign shall be greater than seventy five feet (75') in height to the top of the sign.
(b) The sign face area shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
(c) A single pole shall be used for support.
3. Placement: Freeway-oriented signs shall be setback a minimum of ten feet (10') from Highway 99 to the nearest portion of the sign and shall be
placed in the rear forty percent (40%) of the parcel.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 401/436
4. Site Plan Review: All freeway-oriented signs shall require a site plan review. Site plan review applications shall be applied for and processed as
per this Title (Chapter 11-20-1).
(F) Miscellaneous Commercial Signs:
1. Service Station Signs: Service stations shall be permitted the same signs as a freestanding retail business (subsection 11-28-6-2(A)) with the
following additions:
(a) Gasoline Price Signs: Service stations shall be permitted one gasoline price sign per street frontage. Price signs shall not exceed twenty (20)
square feet and shall not be mounted higher than twenty feet (20') to the top of the sign. Price signs and the allowed freestanding sign may be
combined.
(b) Gasoline Island Signs: Wall signs not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet shall be allowed on the wall of any gasoline island shelter, provided
that the sign only denotes the station name or brand. Additional miscellaneous signs not exceeding one square foot may be placed on top of
each pump, provided the signs advertise specials, products or services available at the service station. Gasoline island signs shall not require
a sign application.
2. Churches: Churches shall be permitted the following signs:
(a) Freestanding Signs Or Wall Signs: One freestanding sign per street frontage or wall signage not to exceed one and one-half (11/2) square
feet of sign area per linear foot of building frontage, but not both, shall be permitted. Freestanding sign face area shall not exceed forty (40)
square feet and the overall sign height shall not exceed six feet (6'). Sign area shall not be exchanged between signs.
(b) Changeable Copy Signs: One, freestanding or wall, changeable copy sign per street frontage not to exceed twenty (20) square feet. The
changeable copy sign if freestanding shall not exceed a height of six feet (6'). Wall mounted changeable copy signs shall not be mounted
higher than eight feet (8') to the top of the sign. Sign area shall not be exchanged between signs.
3. Temporary And Seasonal Commercial Uses: Temporary and seasonal commercial uses shall be permitted one movable sign not to exceed
sixteen (16) square feet per sign face with a maximum of two (2) sign faces. All movable signs shall be removed when the use is not in
operation, both daily and at the end of the season. Additional signage may be applied under temporary signage (see Section 11-28-7), and all
required fees shall be charged.
4. Bank Signs: Banks and similar financial businesses shall be permitted the same signs as a freestanding retail business (subsection 11-28-6-
2(A)) with the following addition:
(a) Automatic Teller Machine Signs: Banks with automatic teller machines shall be permitted an additional twelve (12) square feet of wall signage
for the exclusive use of advertising the automatic teller machine and posting any operating instructions or notices required for the machine.
Such signage shall be placed on or adjacent to the teller machine.
5. Theaters: Movie and live theaters and similar performance oriented facilities which change their featured performance often shall be permitted
the same signs as a freestanding retail business (subsection 11-28-6-2(A)) with the following additions:
(a) Marquee: Theaters shall be permitted an additional thirty (30) square feet, per stage or theater, for use as a changeable copy marquee. The
marquee shall only be used for advertising current or future features or acts. The Community Development Director shall review the use to
determine if the use qualifies for a marquee.
(b) Playbill Cabinets: Theaters shall be permitted two (2) wall mounted playbill cabinets per stage or theater. Playbill cabinets shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet each.
6. Fast Food Menu Boards: Fast food restaurants with drive-thru service shall be permitted menu boards, provided that the aggregate square
footage of all menu boards does not exceed seventy five (75) square feet.
7. Changeable Copy Signs: Changeable copy signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area except as permitted by this Chapter. The sign
area shall be counted against the permitted sign area for the type of mounting on which it is placed.
8. Canopy Signs: Advertising on decorative canopies and awnings is permitted. Advertising on canopies and awnings shall count against the
allowable wall signage permitted for the wall on which it is attached.
9. Under-Canopy Signs: Under-canopy signs are permitted for any use which has at least a five foot (5') wide covered walkway. One under canopy
sign per covered entrance is permitted. Under-canopy signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet with a maximum width of three feet (3'), and
shall have a minimum height clearance of eight feet (8').
10. On Site Directional Signs: The community development director shall review on site directional signs for the necessity of the signs and their
locations for function. No directional sign shall be greater than three (3) square feet in sign face area or more than five feet (5') in height. Copy on
such signs shall be limited to such words as: "out", "in" and "one way" and may contain a logo, provided the logo does not exceed one-third (1/3)
of the sign face area.
11. Directory Signs: Directory signs may be placed as needed subject to a review by the community development director.
12. Time And Temperature Signs: A conditional use permit shall be required for all time and temperature signs. Time and temperature signs shall
not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area. The sign area shall be counted against the permitted sign area for the type of mounting on which it
is placed. Conditional use permits shall be applied for and processed as per chapter 16 of this title.
13. Electronic Reader Board: A conditional use permit shall be required for all electronic reader boards. Electronic reader boards shall not exceed
eight hundred (800) square feet in area and shall not be mounted at a height of more than seventy five feet (75'). The sign area of an electronic
reader board shall not be counted against other permitted signage and may be combined with other permitted signage. Conditional use permits
shall be applied for and processed as per chapter 16 of this title. Electronic reader boards shall not contain any display or illumination which is in
motion or appears to be in motion or changes in intensity or exposes its message for less than four (4) seconds. The interval between messages
shall not be less than one second. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-1995)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 402/436
11-28-6-3: INDUSTRIAL SIGNS:
(A) Freestanding Signs: Each industrial complex shall be permitted one freestanding sign per two hundred fifty feet (250') of street frontage or fraction
thereof. The sign face area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet and the overall sign height shall not exceed twenty feet (20'). Sign area
shall not be exchanged between signs.
(B) Wall Signs: Each freestanding industrial building shall be permitted one square foot of sign area per linear foot of building frontage adjacent to a
public street, parking area or access drive. Sign area may not be exchanged between walls. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-1995)
11-28-6-4: LIMITATIONS ON RETAIL STOREFRONT SIGNAGE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city of Selma by assisting law enforcement's
efforts to prevent crime and apprehend criminals, reducing neighborhood blight, and increasing economic vitality through improved aesthetic
appeal.
(B) Definitions: The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall have the meanings defined in this subsection unless the context
clearly requires otherwise:
CLEAR: Transparent.
PERSON: Any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other
legal entity.
RETAIL STORE: Any business that sells or offers to sell or exchange, for any form of consideration, products to a consumer.
SIGNS AND SIGNAGE: Any words, lettering, figures, numerals, or images, which advertise, promote, or convey information about any business,
product, activity, or interest.
WINDOW: Any opening in the wall of a building that is fitted with glass or other transparent material.
(C) Exterior Signage Restrictions:
1. No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the square footage of each window and clear door that is visible to the public from a public thoroughfare,
sidewalk, or parking lot of any retail store shall bear signs.
2. The area covered by a sign is calculated using the perimeter of the sign and includes any clear areas or spaces within the sign, such as the
clear area within a neon sign. For irregularly shaped signs, the area is that of the smallest rectangle that wholly contains the sign.
3. For purposes of this section, signs that are not physically attached to the windows or clear doors but that are visible from the exterior of the
building in the same manner as if they were physically attached to the windows or clear doors shall constitute a sign subject to subsection (C)1
of this section.
4. All signs shall be placed and maintained in a manner that ensures that law enforcement personnel have a clear and unobstructed view of the
interior of the premises, including the area where the cash registers are maintained, from the exterior public sidewalks, parking lots, or entrance
to the premises. No sign shall be placed on or visible through the bottom one-third (1/3) of any window.
(D) Enforcement/Penalty:
1. Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
2. In addition to any other remedy available at law, any person who violates any provision of this section is subject to administrative, criminal, civil,
or other penalties pursuant to title I, chapter 4 of this code.
(E) Controlling Effect: The provisions of this section apply to any retail store notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this code including,
but not limited to, section 11-28-6-2 of this chapter and limit the area of walls or windows or clear doors that may be covered by any sign placed on
any retail store or establishment. (Ord. 2015-5, 7-6-2015)
11-28-6-5: MURALS:
(A) Definitions: The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall have the meanings defined in this subsection unless the context
clearly requires:
MURAL: A permanent picture painted directly on an exterior wall or on panels affixed to exterior walls.
MURAL PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of Selma authorizing the painting of a mural within the city of Selma.
(B) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide opportunities for art citywide that will contribute to livable, aesthetically pleasing and pedestrian
friendly streetscapes in accordance with the goals and objectives of the city's general plan. Promoting murals of historical or community
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 403/436
significance will assist in educating residents and visitors about the city. This section will promote the local economy, tourism and city beautification
efforts by establishing standards for murals, their location and design.
1. Application Required: Applications for a mural permit shall be filed with the city planning department. Such applications shall include the
following:
(a) The address and assessor's parcel number for the property.
(b) Written consent of the property owner or authorized representative.
(c) A description of the proposed mural, both in written and picture/design form, including a size estimate for the mural.
(d) Any other information the planning director deems necessary in describing whether the mural will comply with this section.
2. Application Fee: There shall be no fee for the application for a mural permit.
3. Location: Murals may be located on the sides of buildings and walls on property in any commercial and industrial zone district (C-1, C-2, C-3, M-
1, M-2) within the city of Selma.
4. Criteria For Design Of Murals:
(a) The subject matter of the mural shall be of historical or community significance regarding the growth and development of the city of Selma
and the region. A mural may not contain text, registered trademarks, logos or business advertising unless such items fall within the guidelines
of this section.
(b) The paint and materials to be used shall be appropriate for use in an outdoor locale, for an artistic rendition and shall be of a permanent, long
lasting variety.
(c) The mural shall be designed and painted by mural artists with knowledge in the design and painting of such projects. Mural artists must
demonstrate their knowledge by providing photographs of murals they have painted or by providing evidence of their experience.
(d) To the extent feasible, the mural shall be resistant to acts of vandalism, such as graffiti.
(e) Murals shall be subject to review by the Selma arts council, or individual designated by the city manager, every two (2) years or as needed to
determine physical condition and maintenance.
5. Mural Permit And Design Approval: Prior to painting, installation and execution of a mural, an application shall be submitted to the planning
department and approved by the Selma arts council, subject to appeal as described in this section. The application shall include all the criteria
detailed in this section, including a detailed drawing or sketch of the mural and other details as prescribed on the application. As required under
this section, the application shall provide proof that permission from the property owner has been secured for the wall on which the mural will be
applied; this will require written authorization by the property owner.
6. Selma Arts Council Review Of Mural Permit: The recreation/community services director shall forward the application for a mural permit, with
comments, to the Selma arts council. The arts council shall review and approve, approve with modifications, or deny the mural permit as
submitted according the criteria set forth in this section. A mural application shall otherwise be processed in accordance with section 11-16-15 of
this title as an administrative conditional use permit, subject to approval of the Selma arts council.
7. Appeal Process: Within ten (10) days of the Selma arts council's decision on a mural permit, any interested party may appeal a decision of the
arts council regarding a mural permit application. The appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the
action by the arts council. The appeal shall state specifically wherein the decision of the arts council was inappropriate. Following public notice
and public hearing, the appeal shall be considered by the city council. Action of the city council shall be considered final. (Ord. 2015-8, 9-8-2015)
11-28-7: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
(A) Construction Signs (except subdivision signs, see subsection 11-28-6-1(A) of this chapter):
1. Single-Family Home: Each single-family home that is not part of a housing tract shall be permitted one nonilluminated construction sign not to
exceed eight (8) square feet in area and five feet (5') in height. Single-family home construction signs shall not require a sign application to be
filed.
2. All Others: One nonilluminated construction sign per major arterial or the primary frontage if the site is not adjacent to a major arterial shall be
permitted. Construction signs shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet in area and eight feet (8') in height.
(B) Leasing Or Sales Signs (except for subdivision sales signs, see subsection 11-28-6-1(A)2 of this chapter): One nonilluminated leasing or sales
sign per major arterial or the primary frontage if the site is not adjacent to a major arterial shall be permitted. Leasing and sales signs shall not
exceed sixty four (64) square feet in area and shall not exceed a height of eight feet (8'). Off site leasing and sales signs are strictly prohibited.
(C) Banners, Pennants, Nongovernmental Flags, Balloons And Similar Temporary Signs: The above listed temporary signs are permitted for grand
opening and other special events provided the following conditions are met:
1. The total square footage of all banners, pennants, nongovernmental flags and other temporary advertising materials shall not exceed five
hundred (500) square feet or two thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet if it is a three-dimensional display.
2. All temporary signs shall be maintained in good repair and such that it does not create a safety hazard or public nuisance.
(D) Peddler Signs: Peddlers shall be permitted one 2-sided freestanding sign not to exceed six (6) square feet each face. Such signs shall only be
permitted in the parkway portion of a public right of way or on private property with the owners' consent. In no instance shall such signs block or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 404/436
interfere with any vehicular or pedestrian circulation or create a visibility hazard. Temporary sign permits for peddler signs shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of approval. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-1995)
11-28-8: BILLBOARDS (OFF PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURE):
(A) General Provisions:
1. No billboard shall be constructed, relocated or upgraded within the city without a conditional use permit. All new, relocated or upgraded
billboards shall comply with the following regulations:
(a) Billboards shall only be permitted within two hundred feet (200') of Highway 99 south of Park Street and only in the M-1, and M-2 zone
districts.
(b) No billboards shall be permitted within five hundred feet (500') of residential uses, zoning, or general plan designations. Uses across Highway
99 from a proposed billboard shall not be considered in this requirement.
(c) No billboard shall be placed within six hundred sixty feet (660') of another billboard or a freeway oriented sign.
(d) The total height of a billboard shall not exceed thirty two feet (32') to the top of the structure.
(e) The total area of a single sign face shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet. No billboard shall have more than two (2) sign faces.
(f) All billboards shall be supported by a single pole.
(g) The minimum height to the bottom of a billboard shall be seven feet (7').
(h) All support structures of the billboard shall be fully enclosed. (Ord. 95-9, 8-7-1995)
Chapter 29
ADULT BUSINESS REGULATIONS
11-29-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to regulate adult oriented businesses in the City which, unless closely regulated, tend to have serious
secondary effects on the community, which effects include, but are not limited to, the following: depreciation of property values and increase in
vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners' enjoyment of their
property when such property is located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise and vandalism; higher crime
rates in the vicinity of adult businesses; and blighting conditions such as low-level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots, which
thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse effects and the
blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the adult businesses.
It is neither the intent nor the effect of this Chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is
neither the intent nor the effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to communication materials or to deny access by the distributors or
exhibitors of adult businesses to their intended market.
Nothing in this Chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which
violates any City ordinance or any statute of the State regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or
obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that
another meaning is intended:
ADULT ARCADE: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar
machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: An establishment which has a regular and substantial portion of its stock-in-trade business in any
one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, sculptures, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual
representations ("adult material") which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
ADULT BUSINESS: Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs or operates as an adult
bookstore, or adult video store, adult theater, adult motion picture theater, adult cabaret, adult motel/hotel, adult arcade, or any other business or
concern which as a regular and substantial portion of its business offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
but not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by State law. "Adult business" shall also include any establishment
which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides or allows performers, models, or employees to appear in any public place dressed only
in lingerie.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 405/436
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, restaurant or similar business establishment which features live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities" or films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL: A hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration where one or
more of the following conditions exist: a) at least twenty percent (20%) of the gross receipts of the hotel/motel sales from providing patrons with closed
circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions are derived from circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and/or b) rents, leases, or lets any room for
less than a six (6) hour period, or rents, leases or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty four (24) hour period.
ADULT MATERIAL(S): Any book, magazine, newspaper, video recording, or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph,
motion picture, other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical, or electrical
reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines, or materials which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas but not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is
preempted by State law.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material
which is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
BAR OR TAVERN: A facility primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises, in which the serving of
food is incidental. "Bar or tavern" includes those facilities located within a hotel, motel, or other similar transient occupancy establishment.
CHILD DAYCARE FACILITY: A facility which provides nonmedical care to children under eighteen (18) years of age in need of personal services,
supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty four (24) hour
basis.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: Means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by
such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and
theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. When the phrase refers to adult motel or hotel, the primary purpose
of providing patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions must be to provide adult material to patrons.
ESTABLISHMENT: Establishment of an adult business includes any of the following:
(A) The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; or
(B) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any of the adult businesses defined herein; or
(C) The addition of any of the adult businesses defined herein to any other existing adult business; or
(D) The relocation of any such adult business.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A home which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision of twelve (12) or fewer children, in the provider's own
home, for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and includes the following:
(A) Large Family Daycare Home: A home, which provides family daycare to seven (7) to twelve (12) children, inclusive, including children under the
age of ten (10) years who reside at the home, as defined in regulations.
(B) Small Family Daycare Home: A home, which provides family daycare to six (6) or fewer children, including children under the age of ten (10) years
who reside at the home, as defined in regulations.
FIGURE MODEL: Any person who, for any form of consideration, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted.
GROSS RECEIPTS: Means and includes the total amounts actually received or receivable from the sale, trade, rental, display or presentation of
services, products, adult material or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
LIQUOR STORE: A commercial establishment devoted primarily to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off-site.
MINOR: Any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age.
NIGHTCLUB: Any commercial establishment located in a building, room or structure that provides entertainment, alcoholic beverages and/or dining.
OWNER OR PERMIT HOLDER OR PERMITTEE: For purposes of this Chapter, shall mean any of the following:
(A) The sole proprietor of an adult business; or
(B) Any general partner of a partnership which owns and operates an adult business; or
(C) The owner of a controlling interest in a corporation which owns and operates an adult business; or
(D) The person designated by the officers of a corporation to be the permit holder for an adult business owned and operated by the corporation.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 406/436
PERSON: Means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, or any other forms of business organization or group(s).
REGULAR AND SUBSTANTIAL COURSE OF CONDUCT AND REGULAR AND SUBSTANTIAL PORTION: Any adult business where one or more of
the following conditions exist:
(A) The area(s) devoted to the display of adult material exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the total display area of the business; or
(B) A business or concern, including an adult theater, adult cabaret, and adult motion picture theater, which presents any type of entertainment
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or performers, models or employees
appearing in public nude, seminude, or dressed only in lingerie, on any two (2) or more separate days within a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more
separate days within a sixty (60) day period; or four (4) or more separate days within a one hundred eighty (180) day period; or
(C) At least twenty percent (20%) of the gross receipts of the business, in any three (3) month period, are derived from the sale, trade, rental, display
or presentation of services, products, adult material, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION OR CHURCH: A structure, which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
SCHOOL: Any childcare facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study
required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a
nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school or any special institution of education, but it does not include a
vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Includes any of the following:
(A) Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
(B) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Includes any of the following:
(A) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or
(B) Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or
(C) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(D) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsections (A) through (C) of this definition; or
(E) Striptease, or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models dressed only in lingerie to the point
where specified anatomical areas are totally exposed, partially exposed or opaquely covered.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT: The increase in floor area occupied by the business, by more than ten percent (10%) as the floor area exists on the
effective date of this Chapter.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT BUSINESS: Shall mean and include any of the following:
(A) The sale, lease or sublease of the business; or
(B) The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
(C) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, including the transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-3: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
Adult businesses shall be allowed only in the areas of the City identified on the map attached to Ordinance 99-9 on file in the City Clerk's office and
incorporated herein by reference. In addition, no adult businesses shall be located:
(A) Within five hundred feet (500') of any bar, tavern, nightclub, liquor store or other adult business located either inside or outside of the City limits;
(B) Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any existing church, school, library, park or other recreational facility where minors congregate, nonprofit youth
facilities, including, but not limited to, facilities serving Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, or Campfire Girls located either inside or outside of the City limits;
(C) Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any property planned for a park, school, library or other recreational facility where minors congregate located
inside or outside of the City limits;
(D) Within five hundred feet (500') of any land described by the Land Use Element of the City General Plan with any residential land use, located either
inside or outside of the City limits.
(E) Within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any existing restaurant or grocery store which is likely to be frequented by minors.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 407/436
As used in this Section, "existing" means at the time the permit application is submitted. "Planned for", means property designated in the General
Plan of the City for such use, or other official planning documents of the City, or property owned or leased by Selma for such use.
The distances set forth above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, as a radius from the property line of the
adult business to the closest property line of the other use.
Adult businesses are prohibited from all areas of the City except as expressly permitted in this Section. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-4: STATEMENTS AND RECORDS:
(A) Person(s) required to obtain an adult business license pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter for any business establishment which provides
products, adult material, merchandise, services or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined in Section 11-29-2 of this Chapter, shall maintain
complete records which can be segregated with regard to all transactions involving such products, merchandise, adult material, services or
entertainment which are sufficient to establish the percentage of gross receipts of the business which is derived from such transactions. Such
records shall be maintained for a period of at least three (3) years.
(B) No person required to keep records under this Section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the City to examine said records at
reasonable times and places. The City shall inspect these only in the instance when there is a dispute as to whether a business is an adult
business and needs to comply with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-5: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult business within the City unless the person of the adult business
first obtains, and continues to maintain in full force and effect an adult business license pursuant to Section 11-29-9 of this Chapter, and a conditional
use permit. In addition to the base zoning requirements governing conditional use permits generally, the following additional requirements shall be
satisfied by adult businesses. Such additional requirements shall be included in any approved conditional use permit:
(A) Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the Selma Fire
Department and building regulations and standards adopted by the City.
(B) No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This
provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
(C) Lighting shall be required which is designed to illuminate all off-street parking areas serving such use for the purpose of increasing the personal
safety of store patrons and reducing the incidents of vandalism and theft. Said lighting shall be shown on the required plot plans and shall be
reviewed and approved by the City Community Development Department.
(D) No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult business or the amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond
the walls of the building in which such use is conducted or which violates any noise restrictions as may be adopted by the City.
(E) The building entrance to an adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are precluded from entering the
premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Selma Community Development Director.
(F) The adult business shall not be located, in whole or in part, within any portable structure.
(G) The adult business shall not conduct or sponsor any special events, promotions, festivals, concerts or similar activities which would increase the
demand for parking spaces beyond the approved number of spaces for the business.
(H) The adult business shall not conduct any massage, acupuncture, figure modeling, tattooing, acupressure or escort services and shall not allow
such activities on the premises.
(I) Any adult business which allows customers to remain on the premises while viewing any live, filmed or recorded entertainment, or while using or
consuming the products or service supplied on the premises, shall conform to the following requirements:
1. At least one security guard shall be on duty outside the premises, patrolling the grounds and parking areas, at all times while the business is
open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than fifty (50) persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty inside the premises.
The security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this
Chapter, and notifying the City Police Department and City Community Development Department of any violations of law observed. Any security
guard required by this subsection shall be uniformed in such manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be
duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of State and/or local law. No security guard required pursuant to this
subsection shall act as a doorperson, ticket seller, ticket taker, or admittance person while acting as a security guard hereunder;
2. The adult business shall submit the landscaping plan to the Selma Community Development Director for review and approval. If the adult
business is the sole use on a lot, no planting shall exceed thirty inches (30") in height, except trees with foliage not less than six feet (6') above
the ground;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 408/436
3. The adult business shall submit plans to the Selma Community Development Director for review and approval, for lighting the entire exterior
grounds, including the parking lot;
4. The premises within which the adult business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said
premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right of way within any other building or other separate unit within the
same building;
5. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows
shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. Such opaque covering shall be subject to approval of the Selma Community Development
Director;
6. Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an
entrance/exit to the business.
(J) All indoor areas of the adult business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view at all times.
(K) Except as specifically provided in this Section, the adult business shall comply with the zoning, development and design standards applicable to
the zone in which the business is located.
(L) Adult businesses shall comply with the off-street parking standards pursuant to Chapter 17 of this Title, except the number of off-street parking
spaces required for adult businesses shall be not less than as follows:
1. Adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, one for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor space.
2. Adult cabaret, one for each four (4) seats, and in any case, not less than one for each fifty (50) square feet used for dancing.
3. Adult hotel/motel, one for each sleeping or dwelling unit.
4. Adult motion picture theater or adult theater, one for each five (5) seats.
(M) No adult material shall be displayed in such manner as to be visible from any location other than within the premises occupied by the adult
business.
(N) No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time.
(O) The adult business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees and female patrons and employees.
Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited
from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall
be free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or
reproduction equipment.
(P) Except as otherwise required by law for adult motion picture theaters, and except as provided in subsection (S) of this Section with regard to adult
arcades, and subsection (T) of this Section with regard to adult businesses providing live entertainment, all areas of the adult business accessible
to patrons shall be illuminated at least to the extent of twenty (20) foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level.
(Q) All signage shall comply with the sign regulations pursuant to Chapter 28 of this Title, except the following signs shall be prohibited for all adult
businesses:
1. Animated signs.
2. Illuminated or flashing signs.
3. Revolving signs.
4. Movable signs mounted on trailers, trucks or similar conveyance.
5. Murals, paintings, pennants, banners and flags placed on the building.
6. Off-site signs, including freeway oriented signs.
7. Signs that display a message, graphic presentation, or other image that are obscene as defined in section 311 of the California Penal Code.
8. Signs that are mounted on or above the roofline of a building.
9. Projecting signs.
10. Signs that are cut, burned, limed, painted or otherwise marked on a field, tree, rock or other natural feature.
11. Freestanding signs.
All signs shall be attached to the wall of the building. The adult business shall be permitted two (2) square feet of sign area per linear foot of the
front of the building adjacent to a street, parking area or access drive. The sign area shall be on the front of the building facing the street. Any
parcel within one thousand feet (1,000') of Highway 99 right of way shall not have a sign that faces the freeway, but may have a sign on the side
or back of the building, subject to the review of the City Planning Commission. All sign designs shall be submitted to, and reviewed and approved
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 409/436
by the Selma Planning Commission. All adult materials and activities shall be concealed from view from any public right of way, parking lot or
neighboring property.
(R) No adult business shall be open or operating during the hours from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
(S) The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult arcades, which provide one or more viewing area(s):
1. Upon application for a conditional use permit for an adult arcade, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a
plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of
the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area with no
dimension greater than eight feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the place at which the adult business license will be conspicuously
posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient
to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the adult arcade to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6").
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the owner under penalty of perjury.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station(s) may be made without the prior approval of the City Planning Commission.
4. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any
patron is present inside the adult arcade.
5. The interior of the adult arcade shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the adult arcade to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. If the adult arcade has two (2) or more manager's
stations designated, then the interior of the adult arcade shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of
the adult arcade to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the manager's stations. The
view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
6. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and it shall also be the duty of all employees present on the adult arcade to ensure that the individual viewing
area specified in subsection (S)7 of this Section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, persons, merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the adult arcade which has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (S)1 of this Section.
7. No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. "Individual viewing area" shall mean a viewing area
designed for occupancy by one person. Individual viewing areas of the adult arcade shall be operated and maintained without any hole or other
opening or means of direct communication or visual or physical access between the interior space of two (2) or more individual viewing areas.
8. No individual viewing area shall contain booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of such individual viewing area used for the viewing of adult
material or other forms of entertainment, having doors, curtains or portal partitions, unless such individual viewing areas containing booths, stalls
or partitioned portions have at least one side open to the manager's station and visible to such manager's station. Any booth, stall or partitioned
portion of an individual viewing area authorized under this subsection (S)8 shall be constructed so as to allow twelve inches (12") of open space
between the bottom of the stall or partition and the floor. Such open space shall remain unobstructed at all times.
9. The adult arcade shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which persons are permitted
access but such lighting shall not be of an intensity as to prevent the viewing of the adult material.
10. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and it shall also be the duty of all employees present on the adult arcade to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the adult arcade.
(T) The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or
involving specified sexual activities:
1. No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a stage at least eighteen inches (18") above the level of
the floor which is separated by a distance of at least six feet (6') from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted
within six feet (6') of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. "Entertainer" shall mean any person who is an employee or
independent contractor of the adult business, or any person who, without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live
entertainment for patrons of an adult business.
2. The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers that are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use.
3. The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit to the adult arcade for entertainers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.
4. The adult business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms that is completely separated from the
patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three foot (3') wide walk aisle for
entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers
capable of (and that actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.
5. No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact
with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer.
6. Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches (30") in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by
this subsection.
7. The adult business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access with an illumination of not less than twenty (20) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
The foregoing applicable requirements of this Section shall be deemed conditions of permit approval, and failure to comply with each and all of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 410/436
such requirements shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit and the adult business license issued pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-6: TIME LIMITS FOR ACTION ON CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
An application for a conditional use permit shall be approved or denied by the City Planning Commission within forty five (45) days of its acceptance
as complete by the Selma Community Development Department. The Selma Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall approve an
application for a conditional use permit for an adult business upon findings that the applicant has met all the applicable requirements and performance
standards of this Chapter. Any proceeding to appeal such decision to the City Council shall be filed with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of such
decision. An appeal shall be heard within thirty (30) days of its filing with the City Clerk. Any proceeding to seek judicial review of any City Council
decision shall be brought in accordance with the provisions of this Code and applicable State law. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-7: SALE; SERVING OF ALCOHOL AND INTOXICATED PERSONS:
(A) It is unlawful to sell, serve or permit the consumption of alcohol in a structure occupied by an adult business.
(B) It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years or any obviously intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises of an
adult business at any time. A sign giving notice of this provision shall be prominently posted at each entrance to the premises of the adult business.
(C) It is unlawful for any person having responsibility for the operation of an adult business, to allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years
to enter or remain on the premises of the business, whether or not such person having responsibility for the operation of an adult business has
knowledge that the person is under the age of eighteen (18) years; or to allow any obviously intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises
of the business. For the purposes of this Section, the licensee of an adult business license, when present on the premises, and the manager or
other person(s) in charge of the premises, are persons having responsibility for the operation of the business. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-8: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The City Planning Commission may suspend or revoke any conditional use permit if it is found that any of the following conditions exist in addition to
the criteria set forth in this Chapter:
(A) The operation conducted by the permittee does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the City's building, health, zoning
and fire ordinances, the requirements of this Chapter, and the conditions of approval of the conditional use permit; or
(B) The approved use has been substantially enlarged without City approval; that the approved use has been partially or wholly converted to another
adult business without City approval; that the conditional use permit has not been utilized within six (6) months of its issuance; or
(C) The adult business license has been suspended, revoked or expired. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-9: ADULT BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
An applicant for the operation of an adult business must obtain an adult business license in addition to a conditional use permit. No adult business
license shall be sold, transferred, or assigned by any license holder, or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation or any
other entity, and any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender
of such license, and such license shall be thereafter null and void. An adult business license held by an individual in a corporation or partnership is
subject to the same rules of transferability as contained above. Any change in the nature or composition of the adult business from one type of adult
business use to another type of adult business use shall also render the license null and void. An adult business license shall be valid only for the
exact location specified in the license. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-10: APPLICATION FOR ADULT BUSINESS LICENSE:
Applicants for such licenses shall file a written, signed and verified application or renewal application on a form provided by the Community
Development Department. Such application shall contain:
(A) If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, permanent and business address, phone number(s) and submit
satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age; or
(B) If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the partnership's complete name, whether it is a general or limited partnership, and show
the name, permanent and business address, and phone number(s) of each of the partners, except limited partners. A copy of the partnership
agreement, if any, shall also be provided; or
(C) If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as set forth in its articles of incorporation and the applicant shall show the name,
permanent and business address, and phone number(s) of each of the officers and directors. The applicant shall also provide the date of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 411/436
incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, and the name of the registered corporate agent and
the address of the registered office for service of process. A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws shall also be provided.
(D) The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.
(E) If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the
adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.
(F) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number, and/or his/her State or federally issued tax identification number.
(G) The location of the proposed adult business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s) if any, plus the
names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site, if any.
(H) A floor plan showing where the specific entertainment uses are proposed to be conducted within the building. The floor plan shall include a sketch
or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including the size and location of the manager's station, if applicable, the size and location of
video or other view areas, if applicable, and a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required. However, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated
street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of
the interior of the adult business to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6").
(I) A detailed description of the adult business for which the permit is required, including all information which classifies the business as an adult
business.
(J) The manner of providing proposed entertainment, including type of entertainment and the number of persons engaged in the entertainment.
(K) A statement of the nature and character of applicant's business, if any, to be carried on in conjunction with such entertainment.
(L) Proposed hours of operation.
(M) A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to the application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be
occupied by the adult business; and
1. The property line of any other adult business within five hundred feet (500') of the property line of the adult business for which a permit is
requested;
2. The property line of any land that carries a Selma General Plan land use designation containing the words residence or residential within its title
within five hundred feet (500') of the property line of the adult business for which a permit is requested;
3. The property line of any existing religious institution, school, library, park or other recreational facility where minors congregate, or any planned
park or other recreational facility where minors congregate, within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of the adult business for which a
permit is requested.
(N) A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult business showing the location of the lighting system.
(O) The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's business and of any entertainment, including
those persons who will be the operator of an adult business and who are required by Section 11-29-9 of this Chapter to obtain an adult business
operator license.
(P) The names of all employees, independent contractors, or other persons required by Section 11-29-9 of this Chapter to obtain an adult business
performer license.
(Q) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals pursuant to this Section has had a previous permit under this Chapter or other similar
ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals
listed pursuant to this Section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose permit has
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the permit was denied, suspended
or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(R) Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to this Section holds any other permits and/or licenses for an adult business from
another city or county, and if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.
If a person who wishes to operate an adult business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate an adult business is a partnership or corporation, each partner, except limited partners, and each officer and director, must sign
the application for a permit as applicant.
All applications for a license or renewal shall be filed with the City Community Development Department. Each application shall be accompanied by
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 412/436
a nonrefundable fee for filing or renewal in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council, which fees will be used to defray the costs of
investigation, inspection and processing of such application.
Applicants for a license under this Section shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this Section in
the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within
thirty (30) days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the City Community Development Director or his/her
designees, shall be grounds for revocation of a license. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-11: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION:
Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the City Community Development Department and upon payment of the nonrefundable application
fee, the Selma Community Development Department shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send
photocopies of the application to the Selma Police Department and any other City departments or other agencies responsible for enforcement of
health, fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the
proposed adult business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this Chapter. The City Community Development
Department shall complete said investigation within twenty five (25) days of receipt of the application. At the conclusion of its investigation, each
department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it
disapproves, state the reasons therefor.
A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed adult business will be in violation of any provision of any statute,
code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the City. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall
immediately return the photocopy of the application to the City Community Development Department. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-12: DECISION BY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR ON APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The Community Development Director or designee (hereinafter "Director") shall grant or deny an application for a license within sixty (60) days from
the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the sixtieth day, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the
applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for which the license is sought, unless and until the Director notifies the applicant of a
denial of the application and states the reason(s) for that denial. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-13: GRANT OF LICENSE:
(A) The Director shall grant the application unless one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 11-29-14 of this Chapter is present.
(B) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
adult business. The license shall also indicate that the adult business whether permitted or not shall be subject to any applicable California Statutes
or City regulations or ordinances consistent therewith. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult
business so that it can be easily read at any time. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-14: DENIAL OF APPLICATION OF LICENSE:
The Director shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:
(A) The building, structure, equipment and location used by the business for which a license is required herein do not comply with the requirements
and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the State and of the City; or
(B) The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license or in any report or record required to be filed with the Selma Police Department,
Fresno County Sheriffs or other department of the City; or
(C) The applicant has had any type of adult business license revoked by any public entity within two (2) years of the date of the application; or
(D) The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor which offense is classified by the State as an offense involving sexual crimes
against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including,
but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code section 290, or any violation of Penal
Code sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 315,
316, or 647; or
(E) On the date that the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be no responsible adult on the premises
to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; or
(F) A conditional use permit has been denied for the proposed use; or
(G) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 413/436
(H) An applicant, manager, or any agent or employee of the applicant or manager has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime
in conjunction with or as a result of the operation of an adult business or any sex-related crime prior to the filing of the application. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of the applicant; or
(I) The required application fees have not been paid.
If the Director denies the application, he shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial.
If a person applies for a license for a particular location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial of a previous application for a
license at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a
different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be denied. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-15: INSPECTION:
An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Selma Police Department, Fresno County Sheriff's Department, Fresno County Health
Department, Selma Fire Department, Selma Code Enforcement, Selma Planning Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the
premises of an adult business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who
operates an adult business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this Section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or opened for business. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-16: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 11-29-10 of this
Chapter (for renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient). Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license shall not be affected.
When the Director denies renewal of the license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the Director finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least
ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-17: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
After an investigation, notice and hearing, the Director shall revoke an existing adult business license, as shall be found necessary to assure the
preservation of the public health and safety, if the evidence presented establishes that one or more of the following conditions exist:
(A) The building, structure, equipment and location used by the business fail to comply with the requirements or fail to meet the standards of the
health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the State, or of the regulations or ordinances of the City; or
(B) The licensee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material facts in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the Selma Police, Fresno County
Sheriffs or other departments of the City; or
(C) The licensee has had any type of adult business license revoked by any public entity within three (3) years of the date the license was issued; or
(D) There is not a responsible adult on the premises to act as a manager at all times in which the business is open or operating; or
(E) The licensee is convicted of a felony or misdemeanor which offense is classified by the State as an offense involving sexual crimes against
children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not
necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code section 290, or any violation of Penal Code
sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 315, 316 or
647; or
(F) If, on one or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons has (have) been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor for an
offense set forth in subsection (E) of this Section, which offense has occurred as a result of or has originated from such persons' activity on the
premises or property on which the adult business is located, and the person or persons were employees, contractors or agents of the adult
business at the time the offenses were committed; or
(G) If the licensee or any employee of the licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution, or solicitation for prostitution, on the premises; or
(H) The adult business has been operated in violation of any of the requirements of this Chapter, and
1. If the violation is of a continuous nature, the business continues to be operated in violation of such provision for more than ten (10) days
following the date written notice of such violation is mailed or delivered to the licensee; or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 414/436
2. If the violation is of a noncontinuous nature, two (2) or more additional violations of the same provision, or four (4) or more violations of any other
of the provisions of this Chapter occur (regardless of whether notice of each individual violation is given to licensee within any 12 month period);
or
(I) The subject adult business has employed minors; or
(J) The conditional use permit for the use has been suspended or revoked. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-18: HEARING ON REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
(A) Upon determining that grounds for license revocation exist, the Director shall furnish written notice of the proposed revocation to the licensee.
Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the proposed revocation; shall state that the licensee may request a hearing within fifteen
(15) calendar days of the postmarked date on the notice; and shall be delivered both by posting the notice at the location of the adult business and
by sending the notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee as that name and address appear on the license. Within fifteen
(15) calendar days after the later of the mailing or posting of the notice the licensee may file a request for hearing with the Director. If the request
for a hearing is filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of the mailing or posting of the notice referred to herein, the Director shall transmit the request
to the City Planning Commission, and the hearing shall be provided.
(B) Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing, the Selma Planning Commission shall conduct a hearing. The Planning Commission shall conduct
a hearing within forty five (45) calendar days of the filing of such request by the licensee. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given to
the licensee. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given to the licensee by personal service or via certified mail, postage prepaid, at
least fifteen (15) calendar days in advance of the date set for the public hearing. At the hearing, the licensee and the City shall be entitled to
present relevant evidence, testify under oath and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. The Selma Planning Commission shall not be bound
by the statutory rules of evidence in the hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the determination of the Planning
Commission.
(C) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Selma Planning Commission shall decide whether the grounds for revocation exist and shall submit a written
report to the Director. Such written report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and shall state findings, conclusions and
directives of the Director regarding whether the license is to be revoked. All such reports shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be public
records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee on the day it is filed with the City Clerk. If the
Planning Commission determines that any grounds for revocation exist, as provided in Section 11-29-17 of this Chapter, the Director, based upon
the report of the Planning Commission or, if no hearing was requested by the licensee, based upon the report of the City staff, shall immediately
revoke the adult business license. The decision of the Selma Planning Commission shall be appealable to the City Council by the filing of a written
appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of mailing of such decision. A timely filed appeal shall vacate the
decision of the Planning Commission.
Any such appeal shall be a de novo public hearing held in the manner and within the time limitations set forth in Section 11-29-6 of this Chapter.
The decision of the City Council upon appeal, or the decision of the Planning Commission in the absence of a timely appeal, shall be final and
conclusive.
No application for an adult business license shall be accepted or processed for any person, corporation, partnership, or member thereof, or any
other entity for which an adult business license has been revoked within the preceding three (3) year period. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-19: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Chapter, an action or proceeding to review the issuance, revocation, suspension, or denial of a permit
or license under this Chapter the applicant may seek judicial review of the action in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8.
(Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-20: REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE:
The regulations set forth in this Chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other
regulations pertaining to the operation of adult businesses as adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-21: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any firm, corporation, or person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall
constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
11-29-22: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the penalties set forth at Section 11-29-21 of this Chapter, any adult business, which is operating in violation of this Chapter or any
provision thereof is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-
1999)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 415/436
11-29-23: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, or regulations in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 99-9, 8-16-1999)
Chapter 30
DENSITY BONUSES AND OTHER INCENTIVES
11-30-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the DENSITY BONUS ORDINANCE of the city. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-2: PURPOSE:
In accordance with sections 65913 and 65913.9 of the Government Code regarding the shortage of affordable housing, including housing for elderly
seniors and families, this chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of section 65915 of the Government Code to establish policies which facilitate
the development of affordable housing to serve a variety of economic needs within the city. In order to encourage the provision for lower and very low
income housing, the city shall provide to developers/property owners, who agree to meet the requirements which are established by this chapter, a
density bonus and additional incentives if it is found that it is necessary for affordability, or provide other incentives of equivalent financial value. The
regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply citywide. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AFFORDABILITY: Is determined by the economic feasibility to construct lower income housing in the proposed development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing costs as defined in section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or rents at qualifying levels for lower income
or very low income households.
DENSITY BONUS: A density increase of at least twenty five percent (25%) over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the
zoning ordinance and the land use element of the general plan as of the date of filing of an application for development. The density bonus shall not
be included when determining the number of housing units which is equal to ten percent (10%) or twenty percent (20%) of the total.
EQUIVALENT FINANCIAL VALUE: Refers to the cost to the developer/property based on the land with and without the density bonus.
LOWER AND VERY LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS: Are defined by income limits published by the state department of housing and community
development. This applies to both for rent and for sale housing. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-4: DENSITY BONUS ENTITLEMENT:
When the applicant for the development of five (5) or more housing units agrees or proposes to construct at least: a) twenty percent (20%) of the total
housing units for lower income households, as defined in section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or b) ten percent (10%) of the total housing
units for very low income households, as defined in section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code, or c) fifty percent (50%) of the total housing units for
qualifying senior citizen residents, as defined in section 51.3(cl) of the Civil Code, the city shall either:
(A) Grant a density bonus and at least one of the concessions or incentives identified in section 11-30-6 of this chapter, unless the city council makes a
written finding that the additional concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs as defined in section
50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in section 11-30-12 of this chapter; or
(B) Provide other incentives of equivalent value based upon the land cost per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-5: LIMITATION ON ENTITLEMENT:
If a developer agrees to construct both twenty percent (20%) of the total housing units for lower income households and ten percent (10%) of the total
housing units for very low income households, the density bonus and at least one additional concession or incentive identified in section 11-30-6 of
this chapter or in section 65913.4 of the Government Code; provided, however, that the city, in its discretion, may grant more than one density bonus.
(Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-6: CONCESSION OR INCENTIVE DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, "concession or incentive" means any of the following:
(A) Reduction in minimum lot size required for senior citizens projects only;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 416/436
(B) Increase in maximum lot coverage allowed;
(C) Reduction in minimum property line or street setbacks required;
(D) Reduction in amount of landscaping required;
(E) Reduction of minimum distance between building on the same property;
(F) Reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required;
(G) Allowing additional increases in density;
(H) Allowing mixed use (e.g., residential/commercial, residential/office professional or residential/industrial), if compatible with the proposed housing
development and with existing or planned development in the vicinity;
(I) A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning and/or architectural design requirements, but only to the extent that such
requirements exceed the minimum building standards approved by the state building standards commission as provided in paragraph 2.5
(commencing with section 189-01) of division 3 of the Health and Safety Code;
(J) Other regulatory incentives or concessions that result in identifiable cost reductions. This does not limit or require the provision of direct financial
incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements;
(K) Other financial incentives, including waiver or reduction or deferment of applicable fees and charges, the provision of required infrastructure, the
use of redevelopment funds, or other forms of direct financial assistance. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-7: APPLICATION FOR CONCESSIONS OR INCENTIVES:
A developer may submit to the city a preliminary written proposal for the development of housing pursuant to this chapter prior to the submittal of any
formal requests for general plan amendments, zoning amendments or subdivision map approvals. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a proposal, the
city shall notify the developer, in writing, of the procedures to be followed in complying with the requirements of this chapter, which shall include city
council approval. Such procedures shall be established, and from time to time may be amended, by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-
2002)
11-30-8: FILING AND PROCESSING OF APPLICATIONS:
(A) Applications for additional concessions and incentives shall be made in writing to the planning division of the city, who shall determine whether or
not the application is complete and complies with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. The application shall
specify the concession or incentive requested and shall clearly indicate how the additional concession or incentive is necessary in order to ensure
that the development will provide a reasonable economic return while still allowing the set aside housing units to be affordable as required by this
chapter. At a minimum, the application shall include an itemized accounting of projected costs and revenues of the development, both with and
without the additional concessions and incentives required. Project revenues shall include monies from the sale or rental of all units, including the
density bonus units. Project costs shall not include the "lost opportunity" cost of the set aside units, i.e., the amount that would have been
generated had the set aside units been rented or sold at market rate. Project costs may include items that are required solely as a result of the
inclusion of the density bonus units and would not have been required without such units. The community development director shall, within sixty
(60) days after the date on which he certifies the application as complete, respond to the request for additional concessions and incentives in one
of the following ways:
1. By recommending approval of the request;
2. By recommending a different or modified additional concession or incentive in lieu of one or more requested in the application;
3. By recommending disapproval of the request.
(B) If a different or modified additional concession or incentive is recommended, the community development director shall indicate how the
recommended concession or incentive has the equivalent effect in terms of the affordability of the set aside units. If disapproval of the request is
recommended, the community development director shall indicate why the requested concession or incentive is not necessary in order to make the
set aside units affordable. The written recommendation of the city planner shall be presented to the planning commission within forty five (45) days
after the date on which the application is determined by the community development director to be complete and in compliance, as hereinabove in
this section set forth. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-9: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
(A) Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the community development director upon an application filed pursuant to this chapter, the
planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall give notice of such hearing pursuant to the provisions of sections 65090 and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 417/436
65091 of the Government Code. Following the hearing, the commission shall make its written recommendation to the city council with respect to
the application.
(B) The planning commission shall evaluate and make its written recommendation to the city council upon an application for concessions or incentives
pursuant to this chapter, based on the following criteria:
1. The requested concessions or incentive must be economically necessary in order to make the set aside unit or units affordable as required by
this chapter. The materials submitted by the developer must clearly indicate how the requested concession or incentive would make the project
economically feasible.
2. The requested concession or incentive shall not result in a net profit of greater than twenty percent (20%) in comparison to the profit that would
be made from the development without the density bonus and without the concessions and incentives available to the development under the
provisions of this chapter.
3. The requested concession or incentive shall not be materially detrimental to public health, safety and welfare, nor injurious to property and/or
improvements in the vicinity of the development.
4. The requested concession or incentive shall not result in an overall development pattern that is incompatible with other structures in the
immediate vicinity. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-10: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission concerning an application filed pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall hold a
public hearing upon the application and shall give notice of such hearing pursuant to the provisions of sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government
Code. Following the hearing, the council shall do one of the following:
(A) Approve the request contained in the application;
(B) Approve a different or modified additional concession or incentive in lieu of one or more requested in the application; or
(C) Disapprove the request. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-11: ALL DENSITY BONUS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS:
The following provisions shall apply to both rental and ownership density bonus projects:
(A) The owner shall enter into a binding agreement with the city which sets forth the conditions and guidelines to be met in the implementation of the
density bonus law requirements. The agreement will also establish specific compliance standards and remedies available to the city upon failure by
the property owner to make units accessible to intended households.
(B) All set aside units shall have a bedroom mix and amenities representative of the project as a whole.
(C) All set aside units shall be disbursed throughout the project.
(D) The total number of housing units allowed under a density bonus shall be calculated by dividing the number of square feet of land available (less
public use land dedications) by the number of square feet required per housing unit under the applicable zoning designation, and multiplying the
result by 1.25. If the result, including the density bonus, contains a fraction of a unit, the number of allowable units shall be determined by rounding
that number up to the next highest full unit.
(E) The provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall be binding upon future owners of properties within the development. Prior to the
issuance of the first building permit for a project, the developer shall record deed restrictions in favor of the city which subject the rental, sales or
resale of set aside units to the provisions of this chapter for a period of thirty (30) years (or a longer period of time for developments that receive
federal, state or local construction or mortgage assistance, mortgage insurance or rent subsidies), except that the rental, sale and resale restriction
for units for which no additional concession or incentive is granted shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter for a period of ten (10) years.
(Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-12: RENTAL DENSITY BONUS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS:
The following provisions shall apply only to rental density bonus projects:
(A) Set aside units shall be subject to the affordability requirements of this chapter for a period of thirty (30) years (or a longer period of time for
developments that receive federal, state or local construction or mortgage assistance, mortgage insurance or rent subsidies), beginning when the
units are first available for occupancy, except that set aside units for which no additional concession or incentive is granted shall be subject to the
conditions of this chapter for a period of ten (10) years.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 418/436
(B) Those units targeted for lower income households, as defined in section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, shall be affordable at a rent that
does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of sixty percent (60%) of area median income; those units targeted for very low income households as
defined in section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code, shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of fifty percent
(50%) of area median income.
(C) The owner shall submit annually, and within thirty (30) days of occupancy of a set aside unit, a certificate of compliance, which shall include the
name, address and income of each tenant currently occupying a set aside unit.
(D) The owner shall maintain and keep on file annual sworn and notarized income statements and current tax returns for all tenants occupying the set
aside units.
(E) The city shall have the right to inspect the owner's project related records at any reasonable time and shall be entitled to audit the owner's records
once a year.
(F) No subletting of rental set aside units shall be allowed unless the subleases qualifies as a very low or lower income or senior citizen household and
the combined income of all persons occupying the subleases premises, adjusted for family size, does not exceed the income limits set forth in this
section. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
11-30-13: OWNERSHIP DENSITY BONUS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS:
The following provisions shall apply only to ownership density bonus projects:
(A) At least twenty percent (20%) of the units allowed prior to adding in the density bonus units shall be sold to low income households, as defined in
section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or at least ten percent (10%) of the units allowed prior to adding in the density bonus units shall be
sold to very low income households, as defined in section 50505 of the Health and Safety Code, or at least fifty percent (50%) of the units allowed
prior to adding in the density bonus units shall be sold to senior citizens, as defined in section 51.3(c) of the Civil Code.
(B) All ownership set aside units shall be occupied by their purchasers; no renting or leasing shall be allowed.
(C) Prior to sale of a set aside unit the developer shall record a lien in favor of the city for the difference between the sale price of a like unit and the
set aside unit. That amount will be referred to as the "subsidy value". Upon the resale the subsidy value shall be paid to the city for set aside units
that have been owned for a period of less than ten (10) years. For set aside units owned for a period of more than ten (10) years the subsidy value
shall be zero. (Ord. 2002-8, 8-19-2002)
Chapter 31
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
11-31-1: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE:
See adopted planned unit development plan on file with the city of Selma planning department. (Ord. 2004-2, 2-2-2004)
Chapter 32
MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES OR SALES PROHIBITED
11-32-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the city of Selma by prohibiting the establishment of marijuana
dispensaries or sales in any area within the jurisdiction of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-32-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words have the meanings ascribed to them in this section as follows:
CANNABIS OR MARIJUANA: Shall have the same meaning given to the term "marijuana" by section 11018 of the Health And Safety Code. The terms
"cannabis" and "marijuana" are interchangeable and shall have the same meaning.
COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY: Includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing,
labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery or sale of marijuana and marijuana products.
CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 419/436
IDENTIFICATION CARD: Shall have the same meaning given to that term by Health And Safety Code section 11362.7 or as it may be amended.
Marijuana shall have the same meaning as Health And Safety Code section 11018 as it is now or may be amended.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS AND MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES: Shall have the same meaning given to those terms by Health And Safety Code
sections 11018.1 and 11018.2, respectively.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA: Marijuana authorized for medical use as set forth in and in strict compliance with California Health And Safety Code section
11362.5 et seq., as it is now or as amended.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA COOPERATIVE OR COLLECTIVE OR MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY: Shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the
same meaning as "medical marijuana dispensary".
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY OR COLLECTIVE: Any facility or location where medical marijuana is made available to or distributed by or to
the following: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a person with an identification card in strict compliance with Health And Safety Code section
11362.5 et seq. A "medical marijuana dispensary" shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by
this code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to chapter 1 of division 2 of the Health And Safety Code; a healthcare facility licensed pursuant
to chapter 2 of division 2 of the Health And Safety Code; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life threatening illness licensed pursuant to
chapter 3.01 of division 2 of the Health And Safety Code; a resident care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to chapter 3.2 of division 2 of the
Health And Safety Code; a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to chapter 8 of the Health And Safety Code, as long as any
such use strictly complies with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health And Safety Code section 11362.5 et seq.
NONMEDICAL MARIJUANA: Marijuana used for any other purpose authorized by law.
PERSON WITH AN IDENTIFICATION CARD: Shall have the same meaning given to that term by Health And Safety Code section 11362.7 or as it
may be amended.
PRIMARY CAREGIVER: Shall have the same meaning given to that term by Health And Safety Code section 11362.7 or as it may be amended.
QUALIFIED PATIENT: Shall have the same meaning given to that term by Health And Safety Code section 11362.7 or as it may be amended.
SELL, SALE, AND TO SELL: Includes any transaction whereby for any consideration, title to marijuana is transferred from one person to another and
includes the delivery of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order
for the same. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-32-3: COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY, DISPENSARIES AND SALES PROHIBITED:
Medical marijuana and nonmedical marijuana dispensaries or commercial marijuana activity of every type and/or sale of marijuana and marijuana
products are prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any such activity in or upon any premises located in any zone or anywhere
else within the boundaries or jurisdiction of the city of Selma. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-32-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and constitute a public nuisance and shall be enforced and/or abated in
accordance with title I, chapter 4 of this code or other applicable section of this code. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 33
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION
11-33-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to restrict the cultivation of medical marijuana and nonmedical marijuana to only appropriately located, secured,
enclosed, and ventilated structures, so as not to be visible to the general public, to prevent odor created by marijuana plants from impacting
surrounding properties, to ensure that marijuana is grown for only lawful purposes and remains secure, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the public.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the use, possession, sale, distribution or cultivation of marijuana in violation of state or federal law.
(Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-33-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, terms and words shall have the meanings associated to those words and terms of section 11-32-2 of this title and the following
words shall mean the following:
CHILDCARE CENTER: Any licensed childcare or daycare center, childcare home, or preschool.
DETACHED STRUCTURE: A building fully detached from a residence or other building that complies with the building regulations of the city of Selma
and approved by the community development director or his or her designee, as set forth in this chapter.
FENCE: A fence constructed of a substantial material that prevents viewing the contents of one side from the other.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 420/436
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: A building used for human habitation.
SCHOOL: An institution of learning whether public or private, offering regular courses of instruction, including, without limitation to, elementary
schools, middle or junior high schools, senior high schools, community colleges, or vocational colleges or institutions. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-33-3: CULTIVATION REGULATED:
Cultivation of medical marijuana and nonmedical marijuana is prohibited in the city of Selma as follows:
(A) Outdoor Cultivation: Outdoor cultivation is unlawful and declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or
possession of any parcel or premises within any zone in the city of Selma to cause or suffer such parcel or premises to be used for the outdoor
cultivation of marijuana plants.
(B) Nonresidential Zones: It is unlawful and a public nuisance to cultivate medical marijuana or nonmedical marijuana in any nonresidential zone in the
city of Selma.
(C) Cultivation Within A Residence: It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cultivate or allow the cultivation of medical marijuana or
nonmedical marijuana inside any residential structure or building suitable for human habitation in any zone of the city, except as permitted by this
chapter.
(D) Proximity To Childcare Centers, Parks And Schools: It is unlawful and declared a public nuisance to cultivate or allow the cultivation of nonmedical
marijuana or medical marijuana on any parcel or premises within five hundred feet (500') from any childcare center, public park or school. The five
hundred foot (500') distance shall be measured from the closest property line of the childcare center, public park, or school to the closest property
line of the parcel upon which the cultivation is present. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-33-4: CULTIVATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) Cultivation Permit: No person may engage in the cultivation of marijuana without first obtaining a marijuana cultivation permit from the community
development director or his or her designee.
(B) Permit Application: Any person seeking a permit to cultivate marijuana shall complete an application for a cultivation permit on a form provided by
the city of Selma which shall contain, but is not limited to, the following:
1. The physical site address of the premises where the marijuana will be cultivated.
2. The name of each person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of the premises where the marijuana will be cultivated and, in the event
that the person owning said parcel is not the person applying for a cultivation permit, then a signed, notarized, consent to the cultivation of
marijuana at the premises on a form provided by the city of Selma.
3. A signed consent form from the applicant(s) and/or property owner authorizing city staff, including the Selma fire department and the Selma
police department, to conduct an inspection of the area used for the cultivation of marijuana upon request.
(C) Building Standards; Approval Required: Prior to the issuance of a cultivation permit pursuant to this chapter, the structure wherein the marijuana
will be cultivated must be reviewed, inspected and approved by the community development director or his or her designee pursuant to sections
11-33-5 and 11-33-6 of this chapter.
(D) Term Of Permit: A marijuana cultivation permit shall be valid for no more than one year.
(E) Permit Renewal: A marijuana cultivation permit may only be renewed upon an application for renewal to the community development director or his
or her designee on a form provided by the city of Selma.
(F) Fees: The city council may establish or amend, by resolution, a fee or fees required to be paid upon the filing of an application for a permit, or
renewal thereof, as provided for in this chapter, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of administering this chapter.
(G) Denial Of Permit:
1. The community development director, or his or her designee, may deny any application for a marijuana cultivation permit, or extension thereof, if
he or she finds, in his or her discretion, based on the facts available that the issuance of such permit, or extension thereof, does not meet the
requirements of this chapter and would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-33-5: CULTIVATION, RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE:
(A) Indoor Cultivation: The indoor cultivation of marijuana in a residential zone within a residential structure shall not exceed an area of fifty (50)
square feet, unless a larger area is required to cultivate a greater quantity as allowed either by the marijuana medical regulation and safety act for
medical marijuana or by the control, regulate and tax use of marijuana act for nonmedical marijuana.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 421/436
(B) Approval Required: Any person seeking to cultivate marijuana pursuant to this chapter in a residential structure shall first obtain approval of the
residential structure and a cultivation permit from the community development director or his or her designee. The community development director
may establish any procedures or forms necessary for the processing of the approval/cultivation permit described in this chapter.
(C) Standards: The residential structure to be used for marijuana cultivation shall conform to this code, building standards of the city of Selma
including all adopted codes, and any requirements deemed necessary by the community development director or his or her designee including, but
not limited to, the following minimum standards:
1. Indoor grow lights in a residential structure shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) watts or other limit as determined by the city and shall comply
with the building regulations of the city of Selma and all adopted codes including, but not limited to, the California building and electrical codes
and shall be inspected and approved by the fire chief and/or building inspector.
2. Indoor cultivation within a residential structure shall not take place in a kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, or common area of the residence and shall
be secured by one or more lockable doors.
3. Any cultivation within a residential structure shall have a ventilation system separate from the remaining area of the residential structure with a
filtration system that shall prevent marijuana plant odors from exiting the interior of the cultivation area or the residential structure. Said
ventilation system shall comply with the building regulations of the city of Selma and adopted codes including, but not limited to, the applicable
sections of the California building code related to mechanical ventilation.
4. The use of generators or any other internal combustion engine or use of any combustible products including, without limitation to, gasoline,
diesel fuel, butane, propane, or natural gas within the residential structure shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-33-6: CULTIVATION, DETACHED STRUCTURE:
(A) Approval Required: Any person seeking to cultivate marijuana pursuant to this chapter in a detached structure shall first obtain approval of the
detached structure and a cultivation permit from the community development director or his or her designee. The community development director
may establish any procedures or forms necessary for the processing of the approval/cultivation permit described in this chapter.
(B) Standards: The detached structure shall conform to this code, building standards of the city of Selma including all adopted codes, and any
requirements deemed necessary by the community development director or his or her designee including, but not limited to, the following minimum
standards:
1. The detached structure shall be attached to a slab foundation or equivalent base by bolts or similar attachments.
2. The walls and roofs of the detached structure must be constructed of two inch by four inch (2" x 4") or larger material. The frame of the structure
must be overlaid with at least five-eighths inch (5/8") exterior plywood or other suitable material and shall be covered with materials similar to or
conforming with the materials used on surrounding structures.
3. The detached structure shall be accessible by one or more lockable exterior grade doors.
4. The total area of the detached structure shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet unless a larger area is required to cultivate a greater
quality of marijuana set forth in the marijuana medical regulation and safety act for medical marijuana or by the control, regulate and tax use of
marijuana act for nonmedical marijuana.
5. Indoor grow lights shall not exceed a maximum wattage to be determined by the community development director or his or her designee.
Electricity to the building must be provided by suitable connection as determined by the community development director. Use of portable
generators, portable heaters, or combustible products including, but not limited to, gasoline, diesel fuel, propane, butane, or natural gas, unless
expressly permitted by the community development director or his or her designee, are strictly prohibited. The detached secure structure shall
have a ventilation and filtration system installed to prevent odors from marijuana plants from exiting the interior of the building and shall comply
with the building regulations of the city of Selma and all adopted codes, including, but not limited to, applicable California building code sections
related to mechanical ventilation.
6. The secured structure shall be located within the rear yard of any premises and must be set back at least ten feet (10') from any building, pool,
or property line. If any greater setback is required by any other provision of this code or any other code, the greater setback distance shall apply.
7. The area surrounding the secured structure must be enclosed by a solid fence at least six feet (6') in height and an adequate mechanical or
electronic security system approved by the community development director or his or her designee or the chief of police must be installed in and
around the detached structure.
8. The detached structure shall be inspected and approved by the fire chief and/or building inspector. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-33-7: VIOLATION OF PERMIT:
If any requirement relating to cultivation, or terms of any permit issued for cultivation in accordance with this chapter is determined by any city officer or
official to have been violated, that officer or official may immediately revoke the permit and, if deemed necessary to correct or prevent any such or any
further violation of either this chapter or the terms of any permit issued thereunder, such officer or official of the city may immediately confiscate or
destroy any growing marijuana, harvested or processed marijuana or any marijuana products. The city officer or official shall issue a written order
revoking the permit as soon as practicable upon detecting the violation of this chapter or of any permit leading to the revocation. Any confiscation or
destruction of any marijuana or marijuana products shall be final and conclusive, and not subject to an appeal insofar as the confiscation or destruction
of marijuana or marijuana products occurs in connection with the action taken by the officer or official in revoking the permit. The revocation of the
permit shall, however, be subject to an appeal as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 422/436
11-33-8: APPEAL:
Any applicant for or holder of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which application or permit has been denied, revoked, or
suspended by order of the chief of police, community development director, or other officer or official of the city shall have the right to appeal such
order or denial, revocation or suspension to the city council within twenty (20) days after the date on which such order is hand delivered to the
applicant or permittee, or deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant or permittee.
An appeal shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk of the city of Selma within the twenty (20) day period set forth in this section.
The filing of such appeal shall not suspend the order of denial, revocation or suspension of said permit. The city council shall hear the appeal within a
reasonable time, not exceeding ninety (90) days, from and after the date of receipt of the notice of appeal by the city clerk. The city council shall
conduct a public hearing, written notice of the time and place thereof being mailed to the applicant or permittee not less than ten (10) days prior to said
hearing, unless timely notice be waived by the applicant or permittee. The rules of evidence shall not apply to the hearing and the applicant or
permittee shall have the right to the assistance of counsel and the reasonable presentation of witnesses and evidence. The council shall make an
order affirming, overruling or modifying the denial, revocation or suspension of such permit within sixty (60) days from and after the date the hearing
on said appeal is concluded. The city council decision shall be limited to addressing whether a permit that has been revoked, denied or suspended
shall or shall not be reinstated or issued. Any action taken by the chief of police, community development director or other officer or official of the city in
connection with the denial, revocation of or suspension of any permit other than the order revoking, denying or suspending the permit, shall be final,
conclusive, and unreviewable. The decision of the city council shall be the final decision of the city. Any person who has a permit issued under this
chapter revoked shall be precluded from holding or being issued any such permit for a period of one year from the date of the order revoking the
permit or the city council's decision upholding the revocation, whichever is later. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-33-9: PENALTY:
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and constitutes a public nuisance and shall be enforced and/or abated in
accordance with title I, chapter 4 of this code or other applicable section of this code. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
11-33-10: NONEXCLUSIVE:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to be an exclusive penalty or remedy. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the use, possession, sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana in violation of state or federal law. (Ord. 2016-8, 12-5-2016)
Chapter 34
STORAGE CONTAINER(S) IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
11-34-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish procedures and standards for the use and maintenance of storage container(s) within the city of
Selma to prevent hazards to the public, disruptions of traffic, unsightly properties, and negative impacts to the aesthetics of residential neighborhoods
in the city. (Ord. 2015-6, 7-6-2015)
11-34-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, "storage container" or "portable storage container" means a shipping container, portable on demand storage or PODS,
shedlike structure or other container or receptacle that is capable of being moved and is, or may be, used for the storage of property of any kind. (Ord.
2015-6, 7-6-2015)
11-34-3: APPLICATION TO RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
(A) Residential Zones: This section shall apply only to the following zones:
All zones with the "R" zoning designation including, but not limited to, the following: R-1, R-1-9, R-1-12, R-2, R-2-A, R-2-P, R-3, R-3-A, and R-3-P.
(B) Location Of Storage Container(s): No person shall place, keep, store or maintain a storage container(s) on or over or within ten feet (10') of any
public street, sidewalk, right of way or curb line.
(C) Permit Required: No person shall place, keep, store or maintain a storage container on property in any residential zone without first obtaining a
permit from the city. The fee for the permit shall be the same as the fee for a permit to erect or construct a fence. The community development
director or designee shall issue the permit on payment of the fee, provided the storage container(s) for which the permit is sought satisfies the
number and size requirements established by this section.
(D) Maximum Number Of Storage Container(s): No person shall place, keep or store on any property applicable to this section more than one storage
container per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor space of all buildings on the property, up to a maximum of two (2) storage
container(s).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 423/436
(E) Maximum Size Of Storage Container(s):
1. No person shall place, keep or store any storage container(s) that exceeds sixteen feet (16') in length, eight feet (8') in width, and/or eight feet
(8') in height.
(F) Length Of Time Permitted:
1. No person shall place, keep, or store a storage container(s) on any property applicable to this section for more than sixty (60) consecutive or
nonconsecutive days in any twelve (12) month period.
2. Notwithstanding subsection (F)1 of this section, storage container(s) may be kept on a property during the term of a waiver as specified in
subsection (H) of this section, or valid building permit issued by the city for work on the property as determined by the community development
director or his or her designee. Any storage container placed, kept, or stored on any property pursuant to this subsection must be removed from
said property within forty eight (48) hours after the expiration of the term stated in the waiver or permit.
(G) Maintenance Of The Storage Container(s):
1. No person, including, but not limited to, the owner, agent, tenant, or occupant of any property shall maintain a storage container(s) in an
unsightly condition or any condition that contributes to blight, including, but not limited to, graffiti, weeds, rust, or any other visible form of neglect
or deterioration.
(H) Waiver: Any persons seeking to place, keep, or store additional storage container(s), oversized storage container(s), or a storage container(s) in a
prohibited location or to maintain the storage container beyond the time period specified, may request, in writing, a waiver from community
development director or his or her designee. The community development director or his or her designee may grant a waiver for the size, location,
or number of storage container(s) on a case by case basis. The community development director or his or her designee may also grant a waiver to
place, keep or store a storage container(s) for a longer period of time than permitted pursuant to subsection (F) of this section. In that event,
however, the written waiver issued shall specify the time period during which the storage container may be maintained on the property and the
container must be removed within forty eight (48) hours after expiration of the terms stated in the waiver. (Ord. 2015-6, 7-6-2015)
11-34-4: PENALTY:
(A) Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(B) In addition to any other remedy available at law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to administrative, criminal, civil, or
other penalties pursuant to title I, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2015-6, 7-6-2015)
Chapter 35
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
11-35-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to allow for accessory dwelling units on lots developed with single family dwellings. Facilitating the
development of accessory dwelling units will increase the housing options and housing stock in the City. This section addresses the specific needs
of the City by providing limitations consistent with State law in order to maximize neighborhood compatibility.
(B) Applicability: The provisions of this section apply to all lots that are developed with a single-family dwelling unit and zoned Residential.
(C) Not Part Of Density Calculation: An accessory dwelling unit that conforms to all applicable requirements of this section shall not be considered in
the calculation of allowable density for the lot upon which it is located, and is deemed to be a residential use that is consistent with the existing
General Plan and zoning designations for the lot.
(D) Requirements Applicable To All Accessory Dwelling Units:
1. Permitted By Right: An accessory dwelling unit may be constructed on a lot by right, provided that such accessory dwelling unit complies with all
requirements set forth in this section.
2. Relationship To Primary Dwelling: The accessory second unit may be either attached to the primary dwelling or be a detached structure.
3. Maximum Of One Per Parcel: There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling unit allowed on each single-family residential lot.
4. Entrances: Entrances shall be incidental to the primary dwelling and minimally visible from the front of the primary dwelling. No passageway to
the primary dwelling shall be required with the construction of the accessory dwelling unit.
5. Fire Sprinklers: Accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers unless required for the primary residence.
6. Utility Hookups: Separate utility hookups are permitted, but are not mandatory.
7. Occupancy Requirements: The applicant for a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit shall be the owner and occupant of the property.
The owner shall be required to permanently occupy either the primary unit or the accessory dwelling unit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 424/436
8. Deed Restriction Required: Before obtaining a building permit for an allowed accessory dwelling unit, the property owner shall file with the
County Recorder a declaration or agreement of restrictions, which has been approved by the City Attorney as to its form and content. The
declaration or agreement of restrictions shall contain a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the owner and shall state
that:
(a) The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately.
(b) The accessory dwelling unit is restricted to the maximum size allowed as identified by the development standards in this section.
(c) The accessory dwelling unit shall be considered legal only so long as either the primary residence, or the second dwelling unit, is occupied by
the owner of record of the property.
(d) The restrictions shall be binding upon any successor or assigned in ownership of the property, and lack of compliance shall result in legal
action against the property owner.
(E) Requirements Applicable To Newly Constructed Or Expanded Structures:
1. Maximum Gross Floor Area: No accessory dwelling unit, either attached or detached shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the size of the living
area of the primary dwelling, and in no case shall the accessory dwelling unit exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in gross
floor area.
2. Development Standards: The accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum property development standards of the Residential Zones
in compliance with this title, including but not limited to minimum lot size, lot width, lot depth, setbacks, distance between buildings, and lot
coverage, unless modified by this chapter.
3. Second Story Prohibited: Accessory dwelling units shall not be permitted on any story above the first story.
4. Maximum Height: All detached accessory dwelling units shall be limited in height to one story and fifteen feet (15').
5. Roof Pitch And Roof Materials: All accessory dwelling units shall have a roof pitch equal to the primary residence and shall have roofing material
compatible with the roof material of the primary residence.
6. Bedrooms: The maximum number of bedrooms in any accessory dwelling unit is one.
7. Location: No detached unit may be placed in front of the primary dwelling.
8. Architectural Design, Form, And Materials: The accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed to be compatible with the existing primary residence
located on the site in terms of architectural design, form, and materials.
9. Parking:
(a) In addition to the parking spaces required for the primary residence, at least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each
accessory dwelling unit, which may be provided as tandem parking in an existing driveway.
(b) If a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is converted or demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling
unit, those off-street parking spaces shall be replaced. The replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the
accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces. Replacement parking may only
occur on paved driveways leading to a required parking space.
(c) Additional parking is not required in the following instances:
(1) Where a property is located within one-half (1/2) mile from a public transit stop. Public transit stop is defined to be a stop at which service is
provided at no greater than 15-minute intervals during peak hours. Public transit means scheduled services provided by a public agency.
(2) For properties located within an architecturally and historically significant Historic District, as adopted by the City.
(3) For properties in an area where on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU.
(4) For properties located within one block of a car share area approved by the City.
(F) Requirements To Convert Existing Space In A Single-Family Structure To An Accessory Dwelling Unit:
1. Building Permit: An application for a building permit to create one accessory dwelling unit per single-family lot within the existing space of a
legally permitted accessory structure or single-family dwelling shall be ministerially approved.
2. Setbacks: Side and rear setbacks must be sufficient for fire safety. Conversion of detached structures that meet applicable zone district
standards for side and rear setbacks and distance between buildings may be denied if a finding is made that the setbacks are insufficient for fire
safety.
3. Access: The unit shall have an exterior access independent from the primary residence. No passageway between the primary residence and the
accessory dwelling unit shall be required.
4. Size: No conversions of existing space shall exceed eight hundred (800) square feet in size and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the living
area of the primary dwelling unit.
5. Parking: An off-street parking space for the accessory dwelling unit shall not be required. However, the applicant shall be required to replace any
parking spaces lost as a result of the conversion of the existing space to an accessory dwelling unit. The replacement spaces may be located in
any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including but not limited to covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem
spaces. Replacement parking may only occur on driveways leading to a required parking space.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 425/436
6. Setbacks For Conversions Of Existing Space: No setback is required for an existing structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit. For
conversion of existing and legally permitted space above a garage, a minimum five foot (5') rear and side yard setback shall be required.
7. Conversions Of Or Within Nonconforming Structures: Existing space within existing structures that are nonconforming with respect to setbacks,
building height, or lot coverage may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit, provided the nonconformity is not increased in any manner and
the accessory dwelling unit meets the size limitations established in this chapter. (Ord. 2019-1, 3-4-2019)
Title 12
FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
Chapter 1
FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
12-1-1: INTENT:
Pursuant to article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the City Council to require the setting and recovery of costs reasonably borne
from fees and charges levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services set forth in a resolution of the City Council.
12-1-2: DESIGNATION:
The City Manager is hereby delegated the authority and directed to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne in
providing the regulation, products or services enumerated as the percentage of costs set forth in the schedule of rates established by resolution of the
City Council. In so adjusting fees and charges, the City Manager shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the
standards and criteria established by this Chapter.
12-1-3: COSTS REASONABLY BORNE:
"Costs reasonably borne" are:
(A) All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, fringe benefits, services and supplies, operations expenses, contracted
services, special supplies and any other direct expense incurred.
(B) All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance, communication, printing and reproduction, and like distributed
expenses.
(C) Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation on fixed assets and additional charges, calculated on the current estimated cost of
replacement divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the depreciation not previously
recovered and reserved in cash also shall be calculated so as to recover such unrecovered depreciation over the remaining life of the asset.
(D) General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the City Council, City Manager, Finance Department,
City Treasurer, City Clerk, City Attorney, community promotion, personnel and all other staff and support services.
(E) Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting
expenses.
12-1-4: SCHEDULE OF FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES:
The City Manager, Director of Finance and each department head under the direction of the City Manager shall review the fees and service charges
listed and the schedule of frequency listed, and shall set and adjust the fee or charge schedule so as to recover the listed percentage of the estimated
reasonable cost of providing the listed regulation, product or service.
12-1-5: PUBLIC MEETING:
The City Manager shall cause notice of any increase in such fees and charges to be provided pursuant to Government Code section 54992. At a
public meeting the City Council shall receive oral and written presentations concerning proposed fees and charges described in Government Code
sections 54990 and 54991. Such notice and opportunity for public comment shall be provided before the City Council takes any action on any new or
increased fees or charges described in Government Code sections 54990 and 54991.
12-1-6: SERVICES CLASSIFICATIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 426/436
The City Council shall by resolution establish a schedule of fees for services provided pursuant to the following services classifications:
(A) Community Development: These services shall consist of the engineering and planning functions relating to land use and the regulation thereof.
(B) Public Safety: These services shall consist of the police, fire protection, and health and safety functions and the regulation thereof.
(C) Park and Recreation Services: These services shall consist of the parks uses and the recreation programs provided directly by the City or by
others under the direction of the said City.
(D) Ambulance Services: These services shall consist of pre-hospital treatment, emergency transport of patients to hospital care, inter-care facility
transport and any other service related to emergency health care to the acutely ill or injured.
(E) Maintenance Services: These services shall consist of cleaning, clearing, sweeping, rights of way repair, and maintenance and other special
services for the benefit of individuals or others.
(F) Finance and Administrative: These services shall consist of business and supportive services related to business office functions, billing,
accounting report preparation and related services.
12-1-7: RESOLUTION INFORMATION:
The resolution establishing the system of fees for services shall indicate the percentage of the actual costs of providing the service that shall be
recovered by the fees.
12-1-8: FEE SCHEDULE MAINTENANCE:
The fee schedule shall be reviewed and updated periodically, but not less than annually, to set fees that will recover costs reasonably borne in
providing the services required.
12-1-9: GENERAL FUND REVENUES:
Revenue received from the charge of service fees shall be deposited in the General Fund to reimburse the expenditures to provide the services.
12-1-10: PROVISION OF DATA:
Pursuant to section 54992 of the California Government Code, the City Manager shall, at least ten (10) days prior to the required public meeting set
out in said Government Code section, make available to the public data indicating the cost or estimated cost required and the revenue sources
anticipated, including General Fund revenues, to provide the services set out in Government Code sections 54990 and 54991.
12-1-11: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined by the City Manager pursuant to the directions in this Chapter is in excess of the percentage
of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set forth in resolution of the City Council, or that such fee or charge has not been reviewed within the
review schedule as set out in Section 12-1-4, may appeal in writing to the City Council. No fee shall be charged for such appeal.
No fee for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the City Council. Such appealed fee or charge shall take effect immediately
upon hearing by the City Council unless ordered otherwise by the City Council. The City Council may uphold, modify and uphold or reverse the
determination of the City Manager. The decision of the City Council shall be conclusive and final. (Ord. 932, 5-21-90)
Chapter 2
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
12-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT, PURPOSE AND USE OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES:
(A) The City Council hereby creates and establishes a development impact fee ("the fee") for the City which shall be used to mitigate unfavorable
impacts attributed to new development. Specifically, this fee shall be used by the City to pay a portion of the costs of designated public facilities
and, insofar as is permissible, for operations cost increases due to development. This fee shall be based on a formula designed to insure that
developers pay their fair share of the costs of such public facilities required to serve the City's growing population.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 427/436
(B) Such public facilities are currently identified by category in the draft of the City's Capital Improvement Program (CIP), which shall be adopted and
revised annually. The CIP facilities may be added to or deleted from the plan, but the City Council directs that this fee shall be used only for public
facilities in these categories: government and public safety facilities, vehicles and equipment, essential infrastructure and related facilities, and
cultural and recreation facilities required for the continued health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City.
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, these words shall have the following meanings:
COSTS OF PUBLIC FACILITIES: Any costs related to acquisition, construction, repair and financing of public facilities and equipment funded through
the City's CIP and to the extent permitted by law for the increased costs of Safety Departments operations resulting from development impact on those
services.
CULTURAL AND RECREATION FACILITIES: Any recreation buildings, parks, playgrounds, pools, courts and similar facilities located in the City.
ESSENTIAL INFRASTRUCTURE: Any facilities for the collection and disposal of storm waters and for flood control purposes; transportation and
transit facilities, including but not limited to streets, alleys and supporting improvements, roads, overpasses, public transit equipment and related
facilities; and any other capital projects identified in the CIP.
GOVERNMENT FACILITIES: City Hall, City garage and corporation yard, City offices and City parking areas, and similar facilities in or through which
the City conducts general City operations.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Any residential, commercial, or industrial development, including development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Government and public safety facilities, essential infrastructure and related facilities, cultural and recreation facilities and capital
equipment.
PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES: Any capital improvements or capital equipment related to City police and fire operations.
RELATED FACILITIES: Any major landscaping, fountains, monuments, signs and similar facilities, activities and operations of general benefit to the
City.
12-2-3: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN NEED FOR ADDITIONAL PUBLIC FACILITIES AND TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT:
The City Council is committed to maintaining the same level of public facilities and services and the same public facilities-to-population relationship
which existed on the date of the adoption of this Chapter in order to ensure that, to the extent City growth occurs in the future, there will be the same
level of public facilities and services that existed on said date. The City Council finds that a reasonable relationship exists between the need for
additional public facilities, equipment and operations and the type of development project for which the fee is imposed for the following reasons:
(A) The City Council has determined that commercial and industrial developments result in a need for additional public services, which in turn,
ultimately result in a need for additional government and public safety facilities and essential infrastructure and related facilities. Based on the level
of public services and the public facilities-to-population relationship which existed on the date of the adoption of this Chapter, and the extent to
which commercial and industrial developments contribute to growth, the City Council determines that commercial and industrial development
should be assessed at rates to be established by resolution of the said City Council as the fair share of contribution for the costs of these required
public facilities and services.
(B) The City Council has determined that residential development, including new mobile home park development, results in significant increases in
City population, and that such residential development adversely affects the public facilities-to-population relationship which existed on the date of
the adoption of this Chapter. The City Council has further determined that because residential development results in significant increases in
population, such development results in the need for additional government and public safety facilities, essential infrastructure and related facilities,
and cultural and recreation facilities, and public safety operational costs based on the public facilities-to-population relationship which existed on
said date and the extent to which residential development contributes to the City's growth, the City Council determines that residential development
shall be assessed at the rate established by resolution of the City Council for the costs for these required public facilities and services. (Ord. 931,
6-4-1990)
(C) The City Council has determined that development agreements and assessment districts approved by the City provide for public improvements for
which the expense is not provided for by the standard fees provided for in this Title and for which a zone of benefit and schedule of special fees
and charges are necessary to equitably charge the properties benefited by such improvements. The zone of benefit and schedule of surcharge
fees shall be established in essentially the same manner as provided in this Chapter but no annual revision or determination is required beyond the
initial establishment of such surcharge fees which may use the development agreement, assessment proceedings or other similar contract and
statutory proceedings as the basis for the "costs reasonably borne" provisions of Section 12-3-3 of this Title. (Ord. 98-5, 7-6-1998)
12-2-4: ADJUSTMENT OF FEES:
The fees set forth herein shall be adjusted from time to time but not less than annually as of July 1 of each year, subject to City Council review and
approval, to reflect changes in costs as determined by the City Manager and the department head staff. (Ord. 931, 6-4-1990)
12-2-5: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AMOUNT OF FEES AND COST OF FACILITIES ATTRIBUTABLE TO DEVELOPMENT ON
WHICH FEE IS IMPOSED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 428/436
The City Council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fees set by resolution of the City Council and the cost of the
public facilities or portions thereof attributable to the development on which the fees are imposed. The basis for such determination is set out in reports
to the City Council from the City Manager and such consultants as the City Council determines is necessary to develop accurate costs and fees to
cover such costs. (Ord. 931, 6-4-1990)
12-2-6: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FEE'S USE AND TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT:
The City Council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the use of the fee for specified categories of public facilities and the type of
development project for which the fee is imposed for the following reasons:
(A) The City Council finds that the use of fees generated from commercial and industrial development for cultural and recreation facilities is not
reasonable because the City Council determines that there is no substantial demand placed on such facilities as a result of commercial and
industrial development. Because commercial and industrial developments do increase demand on government and public safety facilities and
essential infrastructure and related facilities, the City Council finds that the use of fees generated from commercial and industrial development for
such facilities is reasonable.
(B) The City Council finds that the use of fees generated from residential development for government and public safety facilities, essential
infrastructure and related facilities, and cultural and recreation facilities is reasonable because growth in the residential population places demand
on all such facilities.
(C) The City Council further finds that funding of the costs of government and public safety facilities, including capital equipment set forth in the CIP,
accomplishes the goals and purposes set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this Section and that the use revenues generated by development
impact fees for projects and outlays set forth in the CIP is warranted and justified. (Ord. 931, 6-4-1990)
12-2-7: PAYMENT OF FEE:
Any owner or developer applying for a building permit for commercial or industrial development shall be assessed and shall pay the fee in conjunction
with payment for the building permit subject to the provision of Government Code section 66007. Any owner or developer of a residential development
shall pay the fee on the date of final inspection or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. In the case of a subdivision,
the fees shall be paid on a lump sum basis when the first dwelling in the development receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy,
whichever occurs first. (Ord. 931, 6-4-1990)
12-2-8: EXEMPTED ACTIVITIES:
Any developer engaging in development activities which satisfy the following criteria shall not be required to pay the fee:
(A) An alteration which does not increase the floor area of a structure; or
(B) An addition to a single-family residential dwelling unit which does not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit as defined by the Uniform Building
Code. (Ord. 931, 6-4-1990)
12-2-9: ACCOUNTING FOR FUNDS:
(A) Pursuant to Government Code section 66006, the City Council directs that all fees collected hereunder shall be maintained in a fund separate from
the City's General Fund and shall be separated into two (2) special accounts, one for fees generated from residential development, and the other
for fees generated from commercial and industrial development. The City shall utilize the fees in these accounts, along with any interest earnings,
only for the costs of public facilities as specified herein.
(B) If a fee paid by a developer for a particular development has been retained by the City for five (5) or more years, and the City has not committed
that fee to costs for public facilities, then the City Council shall make findings describing the continuing need to retain the fee each fiscal year after
the first five (5) years.
(C) If the City Council does not make such findings, then the City Council shall refund the collected fees as appropriate. (Ord. 931, 6-4-1990)
12-2-10: ANNUAL FINDINGS:
Each fiscal year, at the time of adoption of the Capital Improvement Program, the City Council shall do the following:
(A) Identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put; and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 429/436
(B) Demonstrate whether there is a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which the fee was charged. If the City Council
determines that there is such reasonable relationship, then such determination shall be supported as appropriate. (Ord. 931, 6-4-1990)
12-2-11: CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT:
The Planning and Development Director has provided public notice that adoption of this Chapter will produce no significant impact on the environment
and of the intent of the City Council to adopt a declaration to that effect. The City Council has reviewed such notice, along with the initial study and
staff report, and hereby finds that there will be no significant environmental impacts from adoption of this Chapter, and adopts said negative
declaration in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 931, 6-4-1990)
Chapter 3
FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM
12-3-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
(A) Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the City Council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs
reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter
enumerated in this Chapter.
(B) The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set forth in this Chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the
City for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged.
(C) The adoption of this Chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code sections 2100 et seq.), because it
approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting and operating expenses of City departments, as set forth in
Public Resources Code sections 21080 (b) (8) (1).
12-3-2: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY AND DIRECTION TO MANAGER:
(A) The City Manager is hereby delegated the authority and directed to provide documents to the City Council to implement its herein enumerated
policy to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne as established hereby, in providing the regulation, product or
service enumerated in this Chapter in the percentage of costs reasonably borne and on the schedule of rate review and revision as hereinafter
established in this Chapter.
(B) The City Manager is hereby delegated authority to issue Executive Orders defining terms, setting out administrative, fee collection, and financial
procedures, definitions, and establishing effective dates of all fees set by the City Council by resolution. All Executive Orders shall be originated
and signed by the affected department head, shall be signed by the Finance Director certifying that the financial requirements of this Chapter are
complied with, and shall be signed by the City Manager connoting the effective date of the Executive Order and new or revised rate structure,
procedure or definition.
(C) "Costs reasonably borne" shall be defined in Section 12-3-3. In adjusting fees and charges, the City Manager shall act in an administrative and
ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this Chapter, and the procedures set hereby and by applicable
State law. All Executive Orders issued hereunder shall comply in all respects with this Chapter, and the several schedules of fees and rates as set
by the City Council by resolution.
12-3-3: "COSTS REASONABLY BORNE" DEFINED:
"Costs reasonably borne", as used and ordered to be applied in this Chapter are to consist of the following elements:
(A) All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and
operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred.
(B) All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations,
communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service, and like expenses when
distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system.
(C) Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the
current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the
difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be
calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of
the asset.
(D) General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the City Council, City Attorney, City Administration, City
Clerk, City Treasurer, Economic Development, Finance Department, Personnel Office, and City Promotion, and all other staff and support service
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 430/436
provided to the entire City organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of said
percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs.
(E) Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting
expenses as enumerated in subsections (A), (B), (C), and (F) of this Section.
(F) Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond,
certificate, note or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond
basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law
applicable to the City. (Ord. 91-9, 9-3-1991)
12-3-4: SCHEDULE OF FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES:
(A) The City Manager, Finance Director and each City department head, under the direction of the City Manager, shall review annually the fees and
service charges listed following, and provide an adjusted fee or charge schedule to the City Council for its consideration so as to recover the listed
percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the listed regulation, product or service.
Regulation, Product Or Service
Percentage Of Cost
Reasonably Borne
To Be Recovered
Notes
1. Building plan check 100%
2. Building inspection 100%
3. Miscellaneous building inspection 100%
4. Building relocation inspection 100%
5. Building demolition inspection 100%
6. Change of occupancy inspection 100%
7. Compliance review 100%
8. Preliminary map review 100%
9. Tentative parcel map review 100%
10. Tentative tract map review 100%
11. Lot line adjustment review 100%
12. Site plan review 100%
13. Precise plan review 100%
14. Development agreement review 100%
15. Conditional use review 100%
16. Home occupation permit review 100%
17. Variance review 100%
18. General Plan review revision 100%
19. Annexation processing 100%
20. Zoning change review 100%
21. Zoning text amendment review 100%
22. Environmental impact report review 100%
23. Environmental assessment 100%
24. Mitigation monitoring 100%
25. Architectural design review 100%
26. Sign plan review 100%
27. Processing appeal of commission decision 100%
28. Processing appeal of staff decision 100%
29. Landscape plan check 100%
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 431/436
30. Landscape inspection 100%
31. Minor modification review 100%
32. Tentative map extension review 100%
33. Grading plan check 100%
34. Grading inspection 100%
35. Final parcel map check 100%
36. Final tract map check 100%
37. Public improvement plan check/inspection 100%
38. Street vacation request processing 100%
39. Permanent ROW encroachment review 100%
40. Special traffic/curb markings service 100%
41. Special engineering service 100%
42. CAD assistance _ other agencies 100%
43. "Wide, overweight, overlong load review" 100% up to State maximum
44. Zoning Code enforcement 100%
45. Building Code enforcement 100%
46. Special business regulation 100%
47. Bicycle registration 25% up to State maximum
48. Vehicle Code enforcement 100%
49. Parking enforcement 100%
50. Parking administrative review 100%
51. Parking administrative board review 100%
52. Noise disturbance response call-back 100% after first response
53. Police false alarm response 100% after second response
54. Records check/clearance letter 100%
55. Fingerprinting 100%
56. Police report copy 100% up to State law requirements
57. Traffic collision report copy 100% up to State law requirements
58. Noninjury accident report
investigation/copy
100%
up to State law requirements
59. Crime scene/police photo reproduction 100%
60. Statutory offender registration 100%
61. Removal of abandoned vehicles 100%
62. Vehicle identification (VIN verification) 100%
63. DUI accident investigation/arrest procedure 100%
64. Animal control _ license 50%
65. Animal control _ redemption fees 50%
66. False report response 100%
67. Special event application review 100%
68. Special police services 100%
69. Voluntary gun registration 100%
70. Concealed weapon permit review 100%
71. Vehicle equipment correction inspection 0%
100%
residents
nonresidents
72. Street blocking service 0%
50%
neighborhood watch
others
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 432/436
73. Ambulance service 100%
74. Fire false alarm response 100% after second response
75. Fire/ambulance report copy 100% up to State maximum
76. Fire Code enforcement inspection 100%
77. Fire Code enforcement second reinspection 100%
78. Target (high) hazard inspection 100%
79. State mandated fire inspection 100% up to State maximum
80. Sprinkler plan check and inspection 100%
81. Special fire service 100%
82. Spilled load cleanup 100%
83. Fireworks application inspection/review 100%
84. CPR classes 75%
85. Illegal burn suppression 100%
86. Weed abatement 100%
87. Vehicle release processing 100%
88. Court order service 100%
89. Adult sports programs 75% (i)
90. Youth sports programs 50% (i)
91. Private youth ballfield usage 50% (i)
92. Private adult ballfield usage 75% (i)
93. Tennis court lighting maintenance 65% (i)
94. Recreational swimming 50% (i)
95. Salazar recreational swimming 50% (i)
96. Swimming lessons 50% (i)
97. Pool rental 50% (i)
98. Picnic shelter rental 65%
100%
resident (i)
nonresident (i)
99. Salazar Center rental 75% (i)
100. Community Center rental 75% (i)
101. Art center rental 75% (i)
102. Pioneer village rental 75% (i)
103. Pioneer village-general admission 75% (i)
104. Tiny tot program 50% (i)
105. Communitywide special events 65% (i)
106. Greyhound ticket 50% (i)
107. After school drop-in program 50% (i)
108. City recreation class 50% (i)
109. Special population program 50% (i)
110. Storm drain maintenance 100% (ii)
111. Utility street usage 100%
112. Sewer utility street usage 100%
113. Refuse utility street usage 100%
114. Street sweeping 100% (ii)
115. Landscape maintenance 100%
116. Median and island maintenance 100% (ii)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 433/436
117. Alley maintenance 100% (ii)
118. Street tree maintenance 100% (ii)
119. Streetlight maintenance 100% (ii)
120. Signal maintenance 100%
121. Public parking lot maintenance 100%
122. New/moved business license application
review
100%
123. Business license listing 100%
124. Return check processing 100% up to State maximum
125. Yard sale permit review 100%
126. Rental property maintenance 100%
127. Record research service 100%
128. Document printing and copying 100% up to State maximum
129. Agenda/minute mailing service 100% up to State maximum
130. Document certification 100%
131. Notary certification 100% up to State maximum
132. Business license renewal 100%
133. Bingo license application 100%
134. Change of parcel address 100%
135. Radius map listings 100%
NOTES:
(i) These percentages are the maximum percentage of recovery that the Council has approved. However the actual percentage of recovery shall
be determined by the Recreation and Community Services Director at a level to maintain the program while moving toward this percentage.
(ii) These services are to be phased in by January 2000 in a percentage sufficient to maintain the service at the Council-determined levels.
(Ord. 98-4, 6-15-1998)
(B) The hereinabove services as listed in this Section shall be as defined in that certain document entitled "Cost Control System for the City of Selma"
dated May 8, 1991, as produced by Management Services Institute, Incorporated, of Anaheim, California.
(C) All fees and charges set pursuant to this Chapter shall take effect ten (10) days after the City Manager signs an executive order stipulating that all
provisions of this Chapter have been complied with, and no written appeal has been filed.
(D) The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the City Manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage
requirements of any bond, certificate, or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract, or action under which securities have been issued by the City
which contain any coverage factor requirement.
(E) The City Manager may vary the review schedule listed in this Section if, in the judgment of the City Manager and a directly affected and requesting
department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by not revising the rate schedule. Any such rate revision which deviates from the review
schedule as set herein shall be reported to the City Council at its next succeeding meeting. (Ord. 91-9, 9-3-1991)
12-3-5: STATUTORY PUBLIC MEETING:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 54992, 54994.1 and 54994.2, the City Clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in
Government Code sections 54992, 54994.1 and 6062a, and the City Council periodically, at least annually, shall receive at a regularly scheduled
meeting oral and written presentations concerning fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral and written presentation,
and public meeting shall be provided prior to the City Council taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public
hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the City annual budget process hearing. (Ord. 91-9, 9-3-1991)
12-3-6: PROVISION OF DATA:
Pursuant to the California Government Code, at least ten (10) days prior to the required public hearing set out herein, the City Manager shall make
available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed
to be made or fees or charges imposed. The City Manager also shall provide a summary to the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 434/436
at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of such changes also shall be published per the requirements of Government Code section
6062a. (Ord. 91-9, 9-3-1991)
12-3-7: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
(A) Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set
out in this Chapter, or that such fee or charge has been reviewed prior to or has not been reviewed within the review schedule as set out herein,
may appeal in writing to the City Council.
(B) No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the City Council. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of
the next ensuing regular Council meeting after receipt of such appeal, and heard at the next ensuing regular Council meeting. Such appealed fee
or charge shall take effect immediately upon hearing by the City Council unless ordered otherwise by the City Council by ordinance amending this
Chapter. (Ord. 91-9, 9-3-1991)
Chapter 4
GROUNDWATER OVERDRAFT MITIGATION FEES
12-4-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The city council finds, determines and declares that:
(A) Local water resources are among the most precious resources of the city and surrounding area.
(B) Management of the water resources serving the residents of the city is critical to the long term health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the city.
(C) The city's primary water supplies are from underground water resources, which are being depleted by groundwater extraction that exceeds
groundwater replenishment ("groundwater overdraft").
(D) Conversion of land from agricultural to urban uses increases the local groundwater overdraft and has the potential to seriously deplete available
groundwater resources over time.
(E) Provision of municipal water supplies by a public utility within the boundaries of the city of Selma contributes substantially to the continuing
groundwater overdraft.
(F) The causes of and methods for mitigating groundwater overdraft has been determined through a series of technical studies presented to or
prepared for the city and including a hydrology report prepared by an engineering firm and included within the environmental impact report (EIR)
certified by the city in connection with approval and adoption of its 2030 general plan update, which studies and analysis have been reviewed and
considered by the city council prior to adoption of this chapter. The aforementioned technical analysis provides the basis for the fees established by
this chapter.
(G) California constitution article XI, section 7, and California Public Utilities Code section 6203 and 6294 and policies and objectives of the city's 2030
general plan update authorize the city to enact this chapter. (Ord. 2012-4, 11-5-2012)
12-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to assess a volumetric fee upon urban water extractions by the public utility providing water for urban and municipal
residential, commercial, or industrial uses anywhere within the boundaries of the city, the sphere of influence of the city of Selma as determined by the
Fresno County local agency formation commission, or within the "Selma district" of the utility as established by the California public utilities
commission (CPUC) to the extent such extractions of groundwater by the public utility is used, in whole or in part, to provide water for municipal,
residential, commercial or industrial uses within the sphere of influence of the city of Selma and/or the Selma district of California Water Service
Company as defined by the CPUC to fund programs to mitigate the impact of such groundwater extraction upon the conditions of groundwater
overdraft. Such activities will include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(A) Acquisition of surface water rights and surface water supplies.
(B) Development of groundwater recharge facilities.
(C) Reconfiguration of stormwater facilities designed to retain as much stormwater as possible within and near the city of Selma.
(D) Enhancement of cooperative programs with local water management agencies and companies.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 435/436
(E) Development of more efficient water delivery systems. (Ord. 2014-6, 9-2-2014)
12-4-3: SHORT TITLE AND APPLICATION:
(A) This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF SELMA WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND GROUNDWATER
OVERDRAFT MITIGATION FEE ORDINANCE.
(B) This chapter shall apply within the incorporated area of the city of Selma, and within the city of Selma sphere of influence and the Selma district of
California Water Service Company, the utility providing water service for municipal, residential, commercial and industrial uses within and outside of
the city boundaries to the full extent permitted by article XI, sections 7 and 9 of the constitution of the state of California. (Ord. 2014-6, 9-2-2014)
12-4-4: GROUNDWATER IMPACT FEE:
(A) Commencing on the date on which a determination of the California public utilities commission relating to the application of this chapter becomes
effective or final (the "effective date"), the public utility, California Water Service Company, or its successor (the "utility"), which supplies municipal
water within the city of Selma to residential, commercial or industrial water users shall pay to the city a groundwater impact or replenishment fee
computed as follows:
1. The utility shall equip all groundwater wells, operated by it and located within the city of Selma boundaries, or the city of Selma sphere of
influence, or within the "Selma district" of the utility used to provide water anywhere within such territory for municipal, residential, commercial or
industrial use, with meters that accurately measure the instantaneous flow and accumulated volume of water extracted from the groundwater by
those wells ("groundwater extraction") and report to the city within thirty (30) days after each calendar quarter, of each year following the effective
date hereof, the volume of groundwater extraction for the previous calendar quarter.
2. The volume of net groundwater extraction shall be determined by reducing the reported volume of groundwater extraction by twenty seven
percent (27%).
3. The utility shall pay to the city of Selma within thirty (30) days after the end of the calendar year following the effective date hereof, and annually
thereafter, the following amounts:
(a) Sixty nine one-thousandths dollars ($0.069) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of net groundwater extraction occurring during the calendar
year; and
(b) Twenty three one-hundredths dollars ($0.23) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of net groundwater extraction occurring during the calendar
year (the "replenishment fee").
(B) The utility shall maintain records of all pumping for the purpose of supplying water within the city. Such records shall identify the volume of water
pumped from each well utilized to provide water service within the city. Such records shall be subject to inspection by the city during normal
business hours after providing five (5) working days' notice of intent to inspect such records.
(C) In lieu of the payment of the fee specified above, the city may, in its sole discretion, reduce the portion of the replenishment fee that is twenty three
one-hundredths dollars ($0.23) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of net groundwater extraction occurring during the calendar year to an amount
that is equal to the following percentages of said portion of the replenishment fee:
1. For the first year during which this chapter and the obligation for payment of the replenishment fee is in effect, twelve and one-half percent
(12.5%) of said portion of such fee.
2. During the second year this chapter is in effect, twenty five percent (25%) of said portion of such fee.
3. During the third year this chapter is in effect, thirty seven and one-half percent (37.5%) of said portion of such fee.
4. During the fourth year this chapter is in effect, fifty percent (50%) of said portion of such fee.
5. During the fifth year this chapter is in effect, sixty two and one-half percent (62.5%) of said portion of such fee.
6. During the sixth year this chapter is in effect, seventy five percent (75%) of said portion of such fee.
7. During the seventh year this chapter is in effect, eighty seven and one-half percent (87.5%) of said portion of such fee.
8. During and after the eighth year this chapter is in effect, one hundred percent (100%) of said portion of such fee shall be payable.
(D) The groundwater impact or replenishment fee required by this section shall be payable, if, but only if, by application to the California public utilities
commission, the utility is permitted and authorized to impose a surcharge payable by the customers of the utility in an amount necessary to cover
the full amount of the fees payable and the time for payment of the fees, and the implementation of all actions required or allowed by this chapter
shall be determined by reference to the date on which such approval of the California public utilities commission is effective or final.
(E) Within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, the utility shall file with the California public utilities commission and, thereafter diligently
pursue appropriate applications for approval of the California public utilities commission (PUC) of the utility undertaking the obligations imposed by
this chapter and after receiving approval of the PUC shall observe and perform all requirements of this chapter. In the event the PUC does not
approve of the imposition of the fees required by this chapter on the utility, or does not approve the surcharge necessary to fund the payments
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=517 436/436
required by this chapter, the utility shall timely petition the PUC to reconsider and revise its opinion or order or shall appeal the same in the manner
permitted by law.
(F) Following the fifth anniversary on which this chapter becomes effective, the fees payable by the utility to the city as required in this section, shall be
subject to an annual increase equal to the amount of the increase of the consumer price index (CPI) using the "All Urban Consumers San
Francisco-Oakland-San Jose Area, All Items (1982-84=100) Index", as published by the United States department of labor, bureau of labor
statistics. The utility shall include in its application or petition to the PUC to approve the payment of fees required by this chapter and/or the
imposition of a surcharge to customers necessary to fund payments required by this chapter a request or application that the fee shall increase by
the amount of the said index, in the manner specified above.
(G) That portion of the replenishment fee that is twenty three one-hundredths dollars ($0.23) shall be placed into a replenishment fund and may only
be used for the purpose of developing recharge projects or for the transfer, delivery or purchase of surface water for recharge, as determined by a
vote of a committee established for that purpose. In connection with making any decision concerning use of any money in the replenishment fund,
the city of Selma will meet and confer with the utility, California Water Service Company, or its successor, concerning how it should vote relating to
the making of expenditures from the replenishment fund for recharge activities or projects, and in the event of any disagreement over the proposed
expenditure between the city and California Water Service Company, the city shall defer to California Water Service Company and the city
representative on the said committee shall vote in the manner requested by the utility. (Ord. 2014-11, 10-20-2014)
12-4-5: EXPIRATION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect for the entire term of that certain cooperative agreement between the city of Selma and consolidated
irrigation district dated October 1, 2012, either as originally set by the agreement or as extended pursuant to the provisions thereof and this chapter
will expire and cease to be of any force or effect on the date on which the cooperative agreement is terminated. (Ord. 2014-7, 9-2-2014)
12-4-6: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors and upon conviction the violator shall be punished according
to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution the city shall have the power and standing to sue in civil court to enforce the
provisions of this chapter against the utility. (Ord. 2014-7, 9-2-2014)
12-4-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction such
portions shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holdings shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof. (Ord. 2014-7, 9-2-2014)