
Santa Paula, CA Municipal Code


CITY OF SANTA PAULA, CALIFORNIA
MUNICIPAL CODE




Contains 2019 S-21 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 1282 passed 5-1-19










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: www.amlegal.com




TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter




      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION





      11.   CITATIONS AND REMEDIES





      12.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY COMMISSIONS, BOARDS, AND
COMMITTEES





      13.   GENERAL PENALTIES





      14.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



   10.19   Notice; proof of service



   10.20   Maintenance of code



   10.21   Violations; imposition and determination of penalty



   10.22   Final decisions of city



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Santa Paula
shall be designated as the Santa Paula Municipal Code and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted, amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Specific definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   CITY or TOWN.  The City of Santa Paula, California, or the area within
the territorial limits of the City of Santa Paula, and such territory outside
of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any
constitutional or statutory provision.



   CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the city.  “All its members” or
“all Council members” means the total number of Council members holding
office.



   COUNTY.  Ventura County, California.



   DAY.  The period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.



   DAYTIME and NIGHTTIME. DAYTIME is the period of time between sunrise
and sunset; NIGHTTIME is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.



   DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, AGENCY, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE.  A
department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the city.



   IN THE CITY.  All territory over which the city now has, or shall
hereafter acquire, the jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or
other regulatory powers.



   JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.



   LAW.  Applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the
State of California, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any
and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICIAL TIME.  Whenever certain hours are named in this code they
mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, whichever may be in
current use in the city.



   OWNER.  Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of such building or land.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action
and evidences of debt.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   PROCESS.  Includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial
proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



   PUBLICATION.  A newspaper of general circulation in the city.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of California.



   STREET.  All streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or
may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public
property so designated in any law of this state.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   TENANT and OCCUPANT.  Applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   WEEK.  Consists of seven consecutive days.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



('81 Code, § 1.04.020)



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)    AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body shall take effect in
accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 36937 or other
applicable state statute.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
ordinance repealing or modifying it becomes effective, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.



Example:  (Cal. Penal Code § 1212)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-85).



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This city shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.



   Statutory reference:



      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see
Cal. Govt. Code §§ 6250.0 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1981 and subsequently amended, the 1981
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “('81 Code, §  
  ).”



§ 10.19  NOTICE; PROOF OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code,
unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the code, such
notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be
notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his last known
business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of
the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is
directed.  Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the
time of deposit in the Postal Service.



   (B)   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of
any officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the
age of 18 years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this code
or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.



§ 10.20  MAINTENANCE OF CODE.



   (A)   Not less than three copies of this code shall be filed for use
and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk.  At least
three additional copies, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be
maintained on file in his office as the official copies of the code. 
Additional copies of the code shall be distributed to the departments and
divisions of the city as shall be prescribed by the City Manager.



   (B)   Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this code,
or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify
thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of
this code of the taking of such action, noting the number and date of the
ordinance pursuant to which such action is taken.



   (C)   Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the
code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such
purpose, duly indexed for ready reference.



   (D)   At least quarterly the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf
pages of this code in which changes have been made to be reproduced,
including the notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which
such change is adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies
of the code, prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and
employees of the city and the general public, may be brought up-to-date.



§ 10.21  VIOLATIONS; IMPOSITION AND DETERMINATION OF PENALTY.



   (A)   Prohibited acts.  Whenever in this code any act or omission
is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission.



   (B)   Imposition of penalty.  The provisions of this code which
declare certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned devolve a duty
upon the court authorized to pass sentence to determine and impose the
punishment described.



   (C)   Determination of punishment.  Whenever in this code the
punishment for a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the
punishment to be inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the
court authorized to pass sentence, within such limits as may be prescribed by
this code.



§ 10.22  FINAL DECISIONS OF CITY.



   (A)   Provisions of Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.6 are applicable to
the final decisions of the city.



   (B)   The Council shall by resolution establish a notice procedure
as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of Cal. Civ. Proc. Code §
1094.6.



('81 Code, § 1.04.150)



CHAPTER 11:  CITATIONS AND REMEDIES



Section




Administrative Remedies




   11.40   Applicability



   11.41   Director; defined



   11.42   Compliance order



   11.43   Method of service



   11.44   Hearing



   11.45   Notice of hearing



   11.46   Hearing; findings and order



   11.47   Administrative order



   11.48   Administrative penalties



   11.49   Administrative costs



   11.50   Failure to comply with administrative order



   11.51   Right of judicial review



   11.52   Recovery of administrative civil penalties



   11.53   Report of compliance after administrative order



   11.54   Compliance dispute



   11.55   Lien procedure



   11.56   Public hearings and protests



   11.57   Recording of lien



   11.58   Satisfaction of lien



   11.59   Foreclosure of real property lien



   11.60   Redemption of lien



   11.61   Penalties as a Personal Obligation



   11.62   Interest



   11.63   Rules and Regulations



ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES



§ 11.40  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §
53069.4.



   (B)   This subchapter provides for administrative remedies, which
are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be
pursued by the city to address any violation of this Code.



   (C)   The administrative remedies process set forth in this
subchapter applies to continuing violations of this code, not limited to
violations of the:



      (1)   Uniform Administrative Code (§§ 150.001 and 150.002);



      (2)   Uniform Building Code (§§ 150.015 and 150.016);



      (3)   Uniform Plumbing Code (§§ 150.025 and 150.026);



      (4)   Uniform Fire Code (§§ 150.035 to 150.040);



      (5)   National Electrical Code (§§ 150.045 and 150.046);



      (6)   Uniform Housing Code (§§ 150.055 and 150.056);



      (7)   Uniform Mechanical Code (§§ 150.065 and 150.066);



      (8)   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
(§ 150.075);



      (9)   Uniform Code for Building Conservation (§§ 150.085 and
150.086); and



      (10)    Zoning Code (Chapter 156)



   (D)   This subchapter shall be used at the sole discretion of the
city, subject to division (C) above.



('81 Code, § 1.14.010) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.41 DIRECTOR; DEFINED.



   For purposes of this subchapter, DIRECTOR means the head of any city
department which is charged with responsibility for enforcement of any
provision of this Code, or any person as the City Manager may designate.



('81 Code, § 1.14.020) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.42  COMPLIANCE ORDER.



   (A)   Whenever the Director determines that a violation of any
provision of this Code within the Director's responsibility is occurring or
exists, the Director may issue a written compliance order to any person
responsible for the violation.



   (B)   A compliance order issued pursuant to this subchapter shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The date and location of the violation;



      (2)   The section of this Code violated and a description of
the violation;



      (3)   The action required to correct the violation;



      (4)   The time period after which administrative penalties
will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved;



      (5)   Either a copy of this subchapter or an explanation of
the consequences of noncompliance with this subchapter and a description of
the hearing procedure and appeal process.



('81 Code, § 1.14.030)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



   (C)  The Director shall give the violator a reasonable period in which
to comply with the compliance order.  However, should the violation
constitute an imminent threat to life or property, immediate compliance may
be ordered.



(Ord. 1026, passed 2-16-99)



§ 11.43  METHOD OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Except where real property is involved, all notices required
by this subchapter shall be served in the manner provided in § 14.04.



   (B)   Where real property is involved, written notice shall be
mailed to the property owner at the address as shown on the last equalized
County assessment roll, and a copy of the order shall be conspicuously posted
at the property which is the subject of the order.



   (C)   The failure of any person to receive any notice required under
this subchapter shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under
this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 1.14.040)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.44  HEARING.



   (A)   If the Director determines that all violations have been
corrected within the time specified in the compliance order, no further
action shall be taken.



   (B)   If full compliance is not achieved within the time-specified
in the compliance order, the Director shall advise the secretary to the
Appeals Hearing Board, established by resolution of the City Council, to set
a hearing before the Board.



   (C)   The Appeals Hearing Board shall cause a written notice of
hearing to be served on the violator and, where real property is involved, a
notice of hearing shall be served on the property owner at the address as it
appears on the last equalized county assessment roll available on the date
the notice is prepared, and a copy of the notice shall be conspicuously
posted at the property which is the subject of the notice.



('81 Code, § 1.14.050)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.45  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   (A)   Every notice of hearing on a compliance order shall contain
the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted by the
Appeals Hearing Board.



   (B)   Each hearing shall be set on a date not less than 10 days nor
more than 60 days from the date of the notice of hearing unless the Director
determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an
extension of time.



   (C)   At the hearing, any person subject to a compliance order,
shall be given a full opportunity to object to the determination that a
violation has occurred and/or that the violation has continued to exist. The
failure of any person subject to a compliance order, pursuant to this
subchapter, to appear at the hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies, and a waiver of the right to be heard by the Appeals
Hearing Board.



('81 Code, § 1.14.060) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.46  HEARING; FINDINGS AND ORDER.



   (A)   At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the
Appeals Hearing Board shall conduct a hearing on the compliance order issued
pursuant to § 11.42.



   (B)   Consistent with any rules and procedures it may adopt, the
Board shall consider any written or oral evidence regarding the violation and
compliance by the violator or by the real property owner.



   (C)   Within 15 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the
Board shall make findings and issue its determination regarding:



      (1)   The existence of the violation;



      (2)   The failure of the violator or owner to take required
corrective action within the required time period.



   (D)   The Board shall issue written findings on each violation. The
findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing.



   (E)   If the Board finds, by majority vote, that there is a
preponderance of the evidence showing that a violation has occurred and that
the violation was not corrected within the time period specified in the
compliance order, the Board shall issue an administrative order.



   (F)   If the Board finds that no violation has occurred or that the
violation was corrected within the time period specified in the compliance
order, the Board shall issue a finding of those facts.



('81 Code, § 1.14.070)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.47  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.



   If the Appeals Hearing Board determines that a violation occurred which
was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order,
the Board shall issue an administrative order described in § 11.46 which
imposes any or all of the following:



   (A)   An order to correct, including a schedule for correction where
appropriate;



   (B)   Administrative penalties as provided in § 11.48;



   (C)   Administrative costs as provided in § 11.49.



('81 Code, § 1.14.080)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.48  ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   (A)   The Appeals Hearing Board may impose administrative penalties
for the violation of any provision of this Code in an amount not to exceed a
maximum of $1,000 per day for each ongoing violation, except that the total
administrative penalty shall not exceed $100,000 exclusive of administrative
costs, interest and restitution for compliance reinspections, or for any
related series of violations.



   (B)   In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the
Board may take any or all of the following factors into consideration:



      (1)   The duration of the violation;



      (2)   The frequency, recurrence and number of violations,
related or unrelated, by the same violator;



      (3)   The seriousness of the violation;



      (4)   The good faith efforts of the violator to come into
compliance;



      (5)   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;



      (6)   The impact of the violation on the community;



      (7)   Such other factors as justice may require.



   (C)   Administrative penalties imposed by the Board shall accrue
from the date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on
the date the violation is corrected as determined by the Director or the
Board.



   (D)   The Board, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of
applicable penalties for any period of time during which:



      (1)   The violator has filed for necessary permits; and



      (2)   Such permits are required to achieve compliance; and



      (3)   Such permit applications are actively pending before the
city, state or other appropriate governmental agency.



   (E)   Administrative penalties assessed by the Board shall be due by
the date specified in the administrative order.



   (F)   Administrative penalties assessed by the Board are a debt owed
to the city and, in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the
violation is located on real property, may be enforced by means of a lien
against the real property on which the violation occurred.



   (G)   If the violation is not corrected as specified in the Board's
order to correct, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on a
daily basis until the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount
set forth in division (A) above.



   (H)   If the violator gives written notice to the Director that the
violation has been corrected and if the Director finds that compliance has
been achieved, the Director shall deem the date the written notice was
postmarked or personally delivered to the Director or the date of the final
inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was
corrected. If no written notice is provided to the Director, the violation
will be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection.



('81 Code, § 1.14.090)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.49  ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.



   (A)   The Appeals Hearing Board shall assess administrative costs
against the violator when it finds that a violation has occurred and that
compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the compliance
order.



   (B)   The administrative costs may include any and all costs
incurred by the city in connection with the matter before the Appeals Hearing
Board including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs
incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, attorney
fees and costs for all reinspections necessary to enforce the compliance
order.



('81 Code, § 1.14.100)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.50  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.



   Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and administrative
costs specified in the administrative order of the Appeals Hearing Board may
be enforced as:



   (A)   A personal obligation of the violator, and/or



   (B)   If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien
upon the real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the
administrative penalties, interest and administrative costs are paid in full.



('81 Code, § 1.14.110) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.51  RIGHT OF JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Any person aggrieved by an administrative order of an Appeals Board
hearing may obtain review of the administrative order by filing a motion for
review with the Municipal Court in Ventura County in accordance with the
timelines requirements and provisions set forth in Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.4.



('81 Code, § 1.14.120) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96; Am. Ord. 1015, passed
7-7-97)



§ 11.52  RECOVERY OF ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES.



   The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and
administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including
recordation of a lien pursuant to § 11.55. 



('81 Code, § 1.14.130) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.53  REPORT OF COMPLIANCE AFTER ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.



   If the Director determines that compliance has been achieved after a
compliance order has been sustained by the Appeals Hearing Board, the
Director shall file a report indicating that compliance has been achieved.



('81 Code, § 1.14.140) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.54  COMPLIANCE DISPUTE.



   (A)   If the Director does not file a report pursuant to § 11.53, a
violator who believes that compliance has been achieved may request a
compliance hearing before the Appeals Hearing Board by filing a request for a
hearing with the Board.



   (B)   The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner
as a hearing on a compliance order provided in §§ 11.45 and 11.46.



   (C)   The Board shall determine the dispute as follows:



      (1)   If compliance has been achieved, when it was achieved,
and what relief, if any, the violator may be entitled.



      (2)   If compliance has not been achieved, to what extent has
it not.  Further, for good cause shown, the Board may amend or modify its
original order.



('81 Code, § 1.14.150)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96; Am. Ord. 1026, passed
2-16-99)



§ 11.55  LIEN PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or
administrative cost imposed by the Appeals Hearing Board pursuant to this
subchapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full
within 90 days and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely writ
of mandate, this obligation may constitute a lien against the real property
on which the violation occurred.



   (B)   The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until
recorded with the County Recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order
shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by
the provisions of the Cal. Civ. Proc. Code §§ 697.340 and may be extended
as provided in Cal. Civ. Proc. Code §§ 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive.



   (C)   Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the lien
remaining unsatisfied pursuant to the law applicable to civil money
judgements.



   (D)   Prior to recording any such lien, the Director of Finance
shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report stating the amounts due
and owing.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall fix a time, date and place for hearing
such report and any protests or objections thereto by the City Council.



   (F)   The Director of Finance shall cause written notice to be
served on the property owner not less than ten days prior to the time set for
the hearing. Such notice shall be served as provided in § 11.43.



('81 Code, § 1.14.160)  (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96; Am. Ord. 1026, passed
2-16-99)



§ 11.56  PUBLIC HEARING AND PROTESTS.



   (A)   Any person whose real property is subject to a lien pursuant
to § 11.55 may file a written protest with the City Clerk and/or may protest
orally at the City Council meeting.



   (B)   Each written protest or objection must contain a description
of the property in which the protesting party is interested and the grounds
of such protest or objection.



   (C)   The City Council shall set the matter for hearing no sooner
than 15 days and no later than 60 days after the receipt of the protest.



   (D)   The City Council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution
confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien.



('81 Code, § 1.14.170) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.57  RECORDING OF LIEN.



   Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council
imposing a lien the City Clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the
office of the County Recorder of Ventura County, California. The lien may
carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of
the City Council.



('81 Code, § 1.14.180) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.58  SATISFACTION OF LIEN.



   Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties
and costs, the Director of Finance shall either record a notice of
satisfaction or provide the property owner,or financial institution, with a
notice of satisfaction so they may record the notice with the office of the
County Recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city's lien.



('81 Code, § 1.14.190) (Ord. 1010, passed 10-21-96)



§ 11.59  FORECLOSURE OF REAL PROPERTY LIEN.



   The lien may be foreclosed and the real property sold, by the filing of
a complaint for foreclosure in a court of competent jurisdiction, and the
issuance of a judgement to foreclose.  There shall be no right to trial by
jury.  The City shall be entitled to its attorneys fees and costs.



(Ord. 1026, passed 2-16-99)



§ 11.60  REDEMPTION OF LIEN.



   The lien may be redeemed by the payment in full of all amounts secured
by the lien within six months after the lien is recorded and notice is given
to the property owner.



(Ord. 1026, passed 2-16-99)



§ 11.61  PENALTIES AS A PERSONAL OBLIGATION.



   If it is determined by the City Council that the administrative
penalties and costs set forth in the Board's order should become a personal
obligation of the violator, it may direct that a petition be filed with a
court of competent jurisdiction to enter said order as a judgement of that
court.  The City shall be entitled to its attorneys fees and costs.



(Ord. 1026, passed 2-16-99)



§ 11.62  INTEREST.



   Interest shall accrue on all amounts declared due by the Appeals
Hearing Board, and unpaid, from the date of the administrative order to the
date paid pursuant to the laws applicable to civil money judgements.



(Ord. 1026, passed 2-16-99)



§ 11.63  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Council, may, by resolution, adopt such rules and regulations
for the administration and interpretation of this chapter as it may consider
proper.



(Ord. 1026, passed 2-16-99)



CHAPTER 12:  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY COMMISSIONS, BOARDS, AND
COMMITTEES



Section



   12.01   Purpose



   12.02   Compensation



   12.03   Further provisions



   12.04   Membership



   12.05   Terms of office



   12.06   Appointment procedures



   12.07   Removal by City Council



   12.08   Organization



   12.09   Nonattendance



   12.10   Vacancy



§ 12.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of setting forth the enabling
provisions establishing the city's various bodies, boards, and commissions
(collectively “committees”) that assist the City Council in conducting
public business and prescribing the manner in which persons may be appointed
to such committees.  Additional committees may be created by City Council
resolution.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§ 12.02  COMPENSATION.



   The City Council may, by resolution, determine whether, and in what
amount, compensation will be provided for members of the committees
established by this division.  Without a City Council resolution
establishing compensation, it shall be conclusively presumed that no
compensation is to be provided.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§12.03  FURTHER PROVISIONS.



   Member qualifications and/or committee duties or responsibilities may
be revised or amended by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§ 12.04  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, committees established pursuant to
this division consist of five members appointed by the City Council in the
manner provided by this chapter.  Three members constitute a quorum.  The
City Manager may designate an ex-officio staff person to serve as secretary
and custodian of records who will not have a vote.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, during their incumbency all members
must be, and remain, residents in fact of the city.  Should any member cease
to be a city resident, that office is deemed vacant.  The secretary will
notify the City Council and the City Clerk of the termination as soon as
administratively possible.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§ 12.05  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, of members first appointed to a
committee, two will be appointed for a term of one year, two will be
appointed for a term of two years, and one will be appointed for a three year
term.  Succeeding members will be appointed for terms of four years.  The
secretary’s term may be designated by the City Manager.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, all committee members will serve
until a successor is qualified and appointed.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§ 12.06  APPOINTMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Persons seeking appointment to a committee should file
applications, in a form prescribed by the City Clerk, or designee, to the
City Clerk’s Office.



   (B)   The City Clerk will forward applications received for
committee vacancies to the City Council, and interviews of applicants will be
scheduled at a properly noticed and open meeting of the City Council.  The
meetings will generally occur outside the City Council chambers in an
appropriate city facility to allow for informal interaction between the City
Council and the applicants.



   (C)   Applicants will be interviewed individually on a staggered
schedule.



   (D)   The City Council will take action regarding committee
appointments at a regular or special City Council meeting after interviewing
all qualified applicants.  Candidates for a committee vacancy will be
nominated by individual Council members and voted on an individual basis
rather than by a slate vote.



   (E)   An applicant must be appointed to a committee by a majority
vote of the City Council.



   (F)   If, following a City Council vote on all available applicants
for a committee vacancy, the vacancies for a committee are not all filled,
the application period to fill the vacancies will be automatically extended
by an additional 30 days or the City Council may designate a different time
period by majority vote.



   (G)   Upon the time period being extended, the City Clerk’s Office
will seek further applications, not excluding previous applications, in
accordance with applicable law including, without limitation, this code.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§ 12.07  REMOVAL BY CITY COUNCIL.



   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, all members serve at the
City Council’s pleasure and may be removed by a majority vote of the City
Council at any time.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§ 12.08  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   Each January, a committee will annually organize and elect a
chairperson and vice-chairperson from its membership for a one-year term. 
In the chairperson’s or vice-chairperson’s absence or disability, the
committee may designate a chairperson or vice-chairperson pro tempore.



   (B)   Regular meetings may be held on a day and time established by
committee resolution and may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Committees may establish a procedure for calling special
meetings and may also adopt application requirements, meeting procedures, and
other reasonable rules and regulations for conducting  business.  Minutes
must be kept of all meetings and the secretary will deliver copies of minutes
to the City Manager and City Clerk for filing and distribution to City
Council members.



   (D)   Committees may designate one of its members, or a subcommittee
composed of less than a quorum to study, review, consider, or make
recommendations concerning any matter within the committee’s purview.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§ 12.09  NONATTENDANCE.



   Unless otherwise provided, if a committee member fails to attend three
consecutive meetings, unless excused for cause by the committee chairperson,
that member’s office is deemed vacant.  The committee secretary must
immediately notify the City Council and City Clerk of such termination.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



§ 12.10  VACANCY.



   If a vacancy occurs other than term expiration, notice must be given to
the City Council and City Clerk.  The City Council may appoint a new member
in accordance with this chapter for the remaining portion of the term.



(Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03)



CHAPTER 13:  GENERAL PENALTIES



Section



   13.01   General prohibition



   13.02   General penalty



   13.03   Penalties for infractions



   13.04   Code enforcement



   13.05   Citation procedure for violations



   13.06   Failure to appear



   13.07   Prosecutorial duties of the City Attorney



§ 13.01  GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to violate, or fail to comply
with, any provision of the Santa Paula Municipal Code.  Each and every
violation of any part of this code including, without limitation, any
franchise or permit issued pursuant to this code, is a misdemeanor unless
otherwise specified.



   (B)   Every person violating the code is guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of
any provision of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by the
person.



   (C)   In addition to these criminal penalties, any condition caused
or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code is a
public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with this code.



(Ord. 1085, passed 12-1-03)



§ 13.02  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Persons convicted of a misdemeanor, the penalty for which is not
otherwise prescribed, will be punished by a fine not to exceed more than
$1,000; by imprisonment for not more than six  months; or by both a fine and
imprisonment for each violation of this code.



(Ord. 1085, passed 12-1-03)



§ 13.03  PENALTIES FOR INFRACTIONS.



   Each infraction is punishable as follows:



   (A)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first violation;



   (B)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same
provision within one year;



   (C)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the
same provision within one year of the first violation.



(Ord. 1085, passed 12-1-03)



§ 13.04  CODE ENFORCEMENT.




   (A)   Authorization.  The Police Department, Fire Department,
Utilities Division, Building Official, and other persons designated by the
City Manager are authorized to enforce the various provisions of this code
under their respective authority or as is specifically assigned to them by
the City Manager or Council.





   (B)   Powers of arrest.  Officials and employees designated to
enforce provision of this code have authority to arrest persons pursuant to
Cal. Penal Code § 836.5 for purposes of issuing citations for violations of
provisions of this code.  Police officers have full authority to arrest
persons for violations of the provision of this code pursuant to any
applicable provision of the California Penal Code.




(Ord. 1085, passed 12-1-03)



§ 13.05  CITATION PROCEDURE FOR VIOLATIONS.




   (A)   Any city officer or employee arresting any person for a
violation of any provision of this code, who does not immediately take such
arrested person before a magistrate, as prescribed in the California Penal
Code of the state, must prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in
court.





   (B)   The notice must contain:





      (1)   The name and address of the person arrested;





      (2)   The offense charged, the time and place of the alleged
violation;





      (3)   Where and when such person must appear in court.  The
time specified in the notice for appearance must be at least ten days after
the arrest.  The place specified in the notice to appear and the notice must
conform with all applicable provisions of the California Penal Code.





      (4)   The arresting city officer or employee must deliver one
copy of the notice to appear to the alleged violator. In order to secure
immediate release, the violator must give a written promise to appear in
court at the time and place indicated on the notice by signing the duplicate
notice.  That signed copy must be retained by the city officer or
employee.  Thereafter, the arresting city officer and employee must release
the alleged violator from custody.  The duplicate copy of the notice to
appear must be filed in the manner prescribed in the California Penal Code.




(Ord. 1085, passed 12-1-03)



§ 13.06  FAILURE TO APPEAR.




   Any person who willfully violates a written promise to appear in court
by failing to appear at the time and place stated is guilty of a misdemeanor
regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which the person was
originally arrested.




(Ord. 1085, passed 12-1-03)



§ 13.07  PROSECUTORIAL DUTIES OF THE CITY ATTORNEY.




   (A)   In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties
given to the City Attorney by this code or California law, the City Attorney
will:





      (1)   Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil
cases for violations of this code; any franchises or permits issued pursuant
to this code; city ordinances; and any state misdemeanors that the City
Council elects to enforce.




      (2)   Draft complaints for such cases and prosecute all
recognizances and bail bonds forfeited arising from or resulting from the
commission of such offenses.



      (3)   Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines,
penalties, forfeitures, and other money accruing to the city under this code
or otherwise.



      (4)   Represent the city in all appeals arising as a
consequence of the City Attorney's prosecutions.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the City
Attorney is the only officer that may file misdemeanor charges in accordance
with this code. The City Attorney may, in his or her discretion, prosecute
misdemeanor violations of this code as infractions.



   (C)   Nothing contained in this section will interfere with the
authority of public safety officials to arrest persons pursuant to any
applicable provision of this code and/or the California Penal Code.



(Ord. 1085, passed 12-1-03; Am. Ord. 1231, passed 9-7-10)



CHAPTER 14:  ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS



Section




   General Provisions




   14.01   Purpose



   14.02   Applicability



   14.03   Definitions



   14.04   Notices




   Administrative Citations




   14.10   Administrative citations



   14.11   Amount of administrative fines



   14.12   Payment of administrative fines



   14.13   Delinquent administrative fines - penalties and interest



   14.14   Issuance of permits



   14.15   Compliance orders



   14.16   Correction of violation




   Administrative Review and Hearings




   14.20   Initial Administrative Review - Request



   14.21   Initial Administrative Review - Procedure



   14.22   Initial Administrative Review - Decision




   Administrative Hearing Procedures




   14.25   Request for administrative hearing



   14.26   Advance deposit; hardship waiver



   14.27   Hearing officer



   14.28   Hearing date



   14.29   Conduct of hearings



   14.30   Hearing officer’s decision



   14.31   Disposition of administrative fines



   14.32   Right to judicial review




   Collection and Lien Procedures




   14.35   Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs



   14.36   Lien procedure



   14.37   Recording a lien



   14.38   Administrative fee



   14.39   Satisfaction of lien



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 14.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s police powers and Cal.
Gov’t Code § 53069.4 for the purpose of making any violation of the Santa
Paula Municipal Code subject to an administrative fine and to set forth the
procedures for the imposition and collection of fines.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.02  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter provides for administrative citations that are in addition
to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which the city may pursue to
address any violation of this code.  The use of this chapter is at the sole
discretion of the city officer or employee enforcing this code.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITEE means the person(s) to whom a code enforcement officer issued an
administrative citation pursuant to this chapter.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER means any city employee or agent with the
authority to enforce any provision of this code.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.04  NOTICES.



   Unless otherwise provided, all notices and citations required by this
chapter must be served on citee via personal service or first-class mail,
postage prepaid, to citee’s last known address.  Service is effective when
personally served or when deposited into the United States mail.  The
individual serving a citee with notice must complete a declaration of
service.  Failure to receive any notice does not affect the validity of the
proceedings conducted under this chapter.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS



§ 14.10  ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.



   (A)   Issuing citation.  Issuing an administrative citation
pursuant to this chapter is in lieu of any criminal citation that could have
been issued for the same violation.  The issuance of the administrative
citation does not, however, prevent the issuance of a criminal citation for a
subsequent violation of the same nature.



   (B)   Contents of administrative citation. Each administrative
citation must contain the following information:



      (1)   The date of the violation;



      (2)   The address or a definite description of the geographic
location where the violation occurred or is occurring;



      (3)   The section of this code that was violated;



      (4)   A description of the conditions causing the code
violation;



      (5)   The amount of the administrative fine for the code
violation;



      (6)   A description of the fine payment process, including a
description of the time within which, and the place where, the fine must be
paid;



      (7)   An order prohibiting the continued or repeated
occurrence of the code violation described in the administrative citation;



      (8)   Notification that payment of a fine under this chapter
does not excuse or discharge any continued or repeated occurrence of the code
violation that is the subject of the administrative citation;



      (9)   A description of the administrative citation review
process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be
contested and the manner in which a request for review of the citation may be
requested; and



      (10)   The name of the citing code enforcement officer.



   (C)   Service and filing of administrative citations.  The code
enforcement officer must serve the original citation on the person cited in
the manner set forth in this chapter and forward a copy of the administrative
citation to the City Clerk.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.11  AMOUNT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   The amounts of the administrative fines imposed for code violations
under this chapter are established by City Council resolution.  That
resolution must also set forth any increased fines for repeat violations of
the same code provision by the same person within 12 months from the date of
a previous administrative citation.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.12  PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   An administrative fine must be paid to the city within 30 days from the
date of the administrative citation or, if a request for an initial
administrative review is submitted, within 15 days after the date of the
notice of the conclusions of that initial administrative review, whichever is
later.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.13  DELINQUENT ADMINISTRATIVE FINES - PENALTIES AND INTEREST.



   (A)   A penalty of 10% is added on any delinquent fines on the last
day of each month after the due date.  The penalty will not exceed 50% of
the fine.



   (B)   In addition to penalties provided by this section, delinquent
fines accrue interest at the rate of 1% per month, exclusive of penalties,
from the due date.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.14  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   Should a code enforcement officer issue a citation because the citee
lacks a required permit and the fine is delinquent, the city will not issue a
permit until the delinquent fine, and any applicable penalties and interest,
is paid.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.15  COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   (A)   Before issuing an administrative citation for any violation of
building, plumbing, electrical, or similar regulation set forth in this code
or incorporated by reference, or any violation of Title 15 of this code, the
code enforcement officer must first issue a written compliance order to the
person(s) responsible for the violation unless the violation constitutes an
immediate threat to public health or safety. 



   (B)   The compliance order must contain all of the following:



      (1)   The date on which, and geographic location where, the
violation was observed;



      (2)   The section of this code violated;



      (3)   A description of the conditions causing the code
violation;



      (4)   Actions required to correct the violation;



      (5)   A reasonable time period for the correction of the
violation;



      (6)   Notice that if the violation is not corrected by the
date specified in the compliance order, that an administrative citation may
be issued and administrative fines imposed for failure to correct violations
by the date specified.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.16  CORRECTION OF VIOLATION.



   No further action is required if the code enforcement officer
determines that all violations in the compliance order were cured.  If the
code enforcement officer determines that all violations were not corrected
within the time specified, an administrative citation may be issued to each
person named in the compliance order as a responsible person.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND HEARINGS



§ 14.20  INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW - REQUEST.



   Citees may request an initial administrative review of the citation
within 20 days of its issuance.  This request must be made in writing to the
City Clerk and set forth with particularity the reasons the citee believes a
violation did not occur or that the citee was not responsible for the
violation(s); must include a copy of the citation; and contain the address to
which the conclusions of the city’s review should be mailed.  A request
for an initial administrative review is a mandatory prerequisite to a request
for an administrative hearing.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.21  INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW - PROCEDURE.



   The City Clerk will forward initial administrative review requests to
the department director supervising the code enforcement officer who issued
the administrative citation.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.22  INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW - DECISION.



   (A)   Upon receiving these requests from the City Clerk, the
reviewing officer will review the requests and provide the Clerk with a
written notification that:



      (1)   The citation should be vacated because there was no
violation, or the citee was not responsible for the violation, and setting
forth the basis for that conclusion;



      (2)   The citation should not be vacated because no
justification could be found;



      (3)   The City Clerk’s office should mail a copy of the
notification to the citee at the address on the request for initial
administrative review along with notice establishing the fine due date and
the procedure for requesting an administrative hearing.



   (B)   The reviewing officer should complete his/her review within
ten days of receiving the citee’s request.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES



§ 14.25  REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   Any citee dissatisfied with the conclusions of an initial
administrative review may contest that citation by requesting an
administrative hearing.  A citee must request an administrative hearing
within 15 days after the date the city served the citee with notice of the
administrative review decision.  Requests must be submitted to the City
Clerk’s office and be accompanied by an advance deposit of the fine or a
request for a hardship waiver.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.26  ADVANCE DEPOSIT; HARDSHIP WAIVER.



   (A)   Citees financially unable to make an advance deposit of the
administrative fine, may file for a hardship waiver.  The request for a
hardship waiver must be filed with the City Clerk’s office on a form
containing information that may be required by the City Clerk.  The City
Clerk will review the request and determine whether a waiver is justified. 
A waiver may only be approved if the request for waiver is accompanied by a
sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials,
demonstrating that the citee’s actual financial inability to deposit the
full amount of the fine.



   (B)   The City Clerk will inform the citee in writing regarding
whether the city clerk approved the waiver.  This determination must be
served upon the citee by mail at the address provided in the waiver
application.  The City Clerk’s determination is final.



   (C)   Should the Clerk determine that a waiver is unjustified, the
citee must deposit the fine amount with the city not later than ten days
after the date of that decision.  Failure to make a deposit within ten days
after waiver denial is deemed a waiver of the citee’s right to an
administrative hearing and the administrative fine will be deemed delinquent.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.27  HEARING OFFICER.



   The City Manager designates the hearing officer for the administrative
citation hearing.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.28  HEARING DATE.



   After receiving a timely hearing request and deposit, or waiver, of the
fine amount, the City Clerk sets an administrative hearing on a date not less
than 15 nor more than 60 days from the date the hearing is requested. 
Written notice of the date, time and location of the administrative hearing
must be provided to the citee at least 15 days before the hearing date.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.29  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   Evidentiary rules. The administrative citation is prima facie
evidence of the respective facts contained in the citation.  Both the citee
and code enforcement officer have the opportunity to testify and present
additional evidence concerning the administrative citation.  Evidence may
include, without limitation, witness testimony, documents, or other similar
evidence.  Evidence sought to be introduced is not limited to any legal
rules of evidence except for the rule that it must be relevant and material
to the issues of whether the violation alleged in the citation occurred and
whether the citee was responsible for the violation.



   (B)   Waiver of personal appearance at hearing.  In lieu of
personally appearing at an administrative hearing, the citee may request that
the hearing officer decide the matter based on the citation itself and any
other documentary evidence submitted by the citee or code enforcement officer
before the hearing date.



   (C)   Failure to appear at hearing.  Failure of a citee to appear
at the hearing is deemed a waiver of the right to be personally present at
the hearing.  The hearing officer must then decide the matter based upon the
citation itself, any documentary evidence previously submitted, and any
additional evidence that may be presented at the hearing by the code
enforcement officer.



   (D)   Attendance of code enforcement officer.  The code enforcement
officer who issued the administrative citation may, but is not required to,
attend the administrative hearing.  If the code enforcement officer does not
attend, the code enforcement officer may, before the hearing date, submit
reports, photos or other documentation regarding the violation to the hearing
officer for consideration at the hearing.



   (E)   Continuation of hearings.  The hearing officer may continue
any hearing and request additional information from the code enforcement
officer or citee before issuing a written decision.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.30  HEARING OFFICER’S DECISION.



   (A)   The hearing officer must issue a written decision to uphold or
set aside the administrative citation and present the reasons for that
decision.



   (B)   The City Clerk must send a copy of the hearing officer’s
decision to the citee with notice of the citee’s right to appeal the
decision in Superior Court.



   (C)   The hearing officer’s decision is the city’s final action
on the matter.  There is no right to an appeal other than as provided in
this chapter.  The hearing officer’s decision is final as of the date of
the decision.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.31  DISPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   Should the hearing officer uphold the administrative citation,
then the city can retain the deposited fine amount.



   (B)   Should the hearing officer vacate the administrative citation,
then the city must promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine, if any.



   (C)   Should the hearing officer uphold the administrative citation
and a hardship waiver was previously granted, the due date for paying the
administrative fine will be 30 days from the date of the notice of the
hearing officer’s decision.



   (D)   The city may use all legal means to collect any past due
fines, including penalties and interest, should a citee fail to pay in a
timely manner.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.32  RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   A citee may appeal the hearing officer’s decision by filing
an appeal with the Superior Court pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4,
or any successor statute, within 20 days from service of the hearing
officer’s decision.



   (B)   Should the citee file a timely appeal with the Superior Court,
the requirement to pay the fine is suspended and the payment of the fine, if
any, will be in accordance with the Superior Court decision.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



COLLECTION AND LIEN PROCEDURES



§ 14.35  RECOVERY OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION FINES AND COSTS.



   In addition to any other legal remedy, the city may place a lien on
property owned by the citee in an amount equal to the sum of the fines
delinquent for more than 90 days, plus penalties and interest.  Imposition
of a lien must stem from a citation for the condition or use of real
property, or its improvements, that is owned by the citee.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.36  LIEN PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The City Manager, or designee, may initiate proceedings to
record a lien conforming with this subchapter if the decision is not appealed
within the time required by this chapter.



   (B)   Before recording the lien, the City Manager, or designee, must
submit a report to the City Clerk stating the amounts due and owing.



   (C)   The City Clerk will fix a time, date, and place for the City
Council to consider the report and any protests or objections to it.



   (D)   The City Clerk must serve the citee with a hearing notice not
less than ten days before the hearing date. The notice must set forth the
amount of the delinquent administrative fine, and any penalties and interest
that is due.  Notice must be delivered first-class mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to each citee’s address as it appears on the last equalized
assessment roll or supplemental roll of the County of Ventura, whichever is
more current.  Service by mail is effective on the date of mailing and
failure of citee to actually receive notice does not affect its validity.



   (E)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council will adopt
a resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the lien amount.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.37  RECORDING A LIEN.



   Within 30 days following the City Council’s adoption of a resolution
imposing a lien, the City Clerk will file same as a judgment lien in the
Ventura County Recorder’s Office.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§ 14.38  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.



   Each citee against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to
this chapter will also be assessed an administrative fee in an amount
established by City Council resolution based on the costs incurred in levying
the assessment.  The administrative fee will be included in the lien amount
approved by the city council and recorded against the citee’s property.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



§14.39  SATISFACTION OF LIEN.



   Once the city receives full payment for outstanding principal,
penalties, and costs, the City Clerk will either record a notice of
satisfaction or provide the citee with a notice of satisfaction for
recordation at the Ventura County Recorders Office.  This notice of
satisfaction will cancel the city’s lien.



(Ord. 1092, passed 1-20-04)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY COUNCIL



      31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



      32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AGENCIES



      33.   PERSONNEL SYSTEM



      34.   CIVIL DEFENSE



      35.   [RESERVED]



      36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



      37.   TAXATION



      38.   CITY POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Meetings



   30.02   Mayor



   30.03   Standing committees



   30.04   Compensation of Council members



   30.05   Municipal election deferred to date of statewide general
election



   30.06   Execution of contracts and agreements



Statutory reference:



   City Council, see §§ 36513 et seq. and  §§ 36801 et seq.



§ 30.01  MEETINGS.




   (A)   Regular meetings.  Regular City Council meetings are
scheduled for the first and third Wednesdays of every calendar month in the
Council chambers except as otherwise permitted under Cal. Gov’t Code §
54954, and any successor statute or regulation.  Regular City Council
meetings begin at 5:30 p.m. for closed session matters and interviews or
appointments for committees, boards and commissions, and at 6:30 p.m. for all
other matters addressed in open session.





   (B)   Holidays. Should the date of a regular meeting fall upon a
holiday when city hall offices are closed then the regular meeting will be
scheduled for the next succeeding business day.





   (C)   Special meetings.  Special meetings may be called at any time
by the mayor, or by a majority of the Council, upon providing 24 hours'
notice, pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 54956, and any successor statute or
regulation.





   (D)   Open meetings.  Unless otherwise provided by the Cal. Gov't
Code, all City Council meetings are open and public.  All persons are
permitted to attend any City Council meeting, except as otherwise provided in
the Cal. Gov't Code.




(‘81 Code, §§ 2.04.010 and 2.04.020)  (Am. Ord. 1013, passed 2-18-97;
Am. Ord. 1032, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1089, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1278,
passed 7-16-18)



§ 30.02  MAYOR.




   (A)   A  Mayor and Vice Mayor shall be selected by the Council from
among its members annually at its first regular meeting in December of each
year.





   (B)   The Mayor and Vice Mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council for a term of approximately one year, or until the next Mayor and
Vice Mayor have been selected.





   (C)   The Vice Mayor shall act as Mayor in the event of the Mayor's
absence, disability, or inability to act.





   (D)   Hereafter, in all ordinances, resolutions, and other documents
and writings all references to the Mayor Pro Tem shall be deemed to be the
Vice Mayor.




('81 Code, § 2.04.025)  (Ord. 941, passed  - -91)  (Am. Ord. 1032, passed
8-16-99)



§ 30.03  STANDING COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint such standing committees of the
Council, as the Council shall from time to time designate, no later than the
second regular meeting in the month following appointment as Mayor.



   (B)   Members of such committees shall serve for one year.



   (C)   The Mayor shall fill vacancies occurring in such committees at
any time.



('81 Code, § 2.04.030)  (Ord. 941, passed  - -91)



§ 30.04  COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   Purpose.  This section is enacted pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code
§ 36516, authorizing the Council to provide by ordinance that each member of
the Council receive a prescribed salary, the amount of which is based upon
the population of the city as determined by estimates made by the State
Department of Finance.



   (B)   Salaries.  The compensation of the members of the City
Council shall be as set from time to time by the Council in accordance with
state law provisions.



   (C)   Increase or decrease.  Following any new and later estimate
of population made by the Department of Finance, placing the city in a
population group other than that set forth in division (B) of this section,
the salary payable to each member of the Council shall be increased or
decreased accordingly by ordinance to equal the sum prescribed for that
population group in Cal. Gov't Code § 36514, as added by Chapter 286 of the
Statutes of 1965; provided, however, that the salary as so increased or
decreased shall become payable only on and after the date upon which one or
more members of the Council become eligible therefor by virtue of beginning a
new term of office following the next succeeding general municipal election
held in the city.



   (D)   Reimbursement.  The salaries prescribed in this section are
and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the Council
as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the
performance of official duties for the city.



   (E)   Operative date.  This section shall become operative only on
and after the date upon which one or more members of the Council of the city
become eligible for the salary prescribed in this section by virtue of
beginning a new term of office following the general municipal election next
succeeding its effective date.



('81 Code, § 2.04.040)  (Ord. 785, passed  - -82)



§ 30.05  MUNICIPAL ELECTION DEFERRED TO DATE OF STATEWIDE GENERAL ELECTION.



   The city's general municipal election shall be deferred to the date of
the statewide general election  in accordance with the provisions of the
Cal. Elec. Code §§ 2601 and 10404 and Cal. Gov't Code § 36503.5.



('81 Code, § 2.48.010)  (Ord. 884, passed  - -87)



§ 30.06  EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The City Manager may sign any contract that requires the
expenditure of city funds in the sum of $50,000 or less, or any contract not
requiring the expenditure of money.



   (B)   The Mayor is authorized to sign all contracts and agreements
on behalf of the city, except that the Mayor Pro Tem is authorized to sign
all contracts and agreements in the event of the Mayor's absence, disability
or inability to act.



   (C)   The City Council may, by resolution or minute action,
authorize the City Manager or any department head to execute any designated
contract or agreement on behalf of the city.



(Ord. 1020, passed 1-20-98; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section




City Manager




   31.01   Office created



   31.02   Appointment qualifications and terms



   31.03   Residence



   31.04   Eligibility



   31.05   Bond



   31.06   Acting City Manager



   31.07   Compensation



   31.08   Powers and duties



   31.09   Internal affairs



   31.10   Removal procedure



   31.11   Resignation of City Manager



   31.12   Agreements on employment




Director of Finance




   31.20   Office created



   31.21   Duties; bond




Superintendent of Streets




   31.30   Office created



   31.31   Ex officio Superintendent



   31.32   Duties




Bonds of Officers and Employees




   31.45   Bonds of Treasurer and Clerk



   31.46   Bonds of other officers and employees



   31.47   Deputies declared employees of city



   31.48   Blanket bond in lieu of separate bonds



   31.49   Coverage of bonds



   31.50   Premiums paid by city



Cross-reference:



   Mayor, see § 30.02



Statutory reference:



   Officers generally, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36501-36512.2 and
36516.1-36517



   Official bonds, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 1450 et seq. and §§ 36518 et
seq.



CITY MANAGER



§ 31.01  OFFICE CREATED.



   The office of the City Manager is hereby created and established. This
subchapter is enacted pursuant to and the office created by this section is
the office referred to in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 34850 to 34859 inclusive.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.02  APPOINTMENT QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM.



   The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the
basis of his/her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and
shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the City Council.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.03  RESIDENCE.



   Residence in the city at the time of appointment of the City Manager
shall not be required as a condition of appointment. The City Manager must,
however, establish residence in the city within one year after appointment
unless the City Council specifically waives this requirement.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.04  ELIGIBILITY.



   No member of the City Council shall be eligible for appointment as City
Manager until one year has elapsed after such Council member shall have
ceased to be a member of the City Council.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.05  BOND.



   The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved
by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by said City Council,
and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed
upon the City Manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall
be a proper charge against the city.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.06  ACTING CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager, by filing a written notice with the City Clerk, shall
designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the
duties of the City Manager during his/her temporary absence or disability. In
the event the City Manager's absence or disability extends over a two month
period, the City Council may, after the two month period, appoint an Acting
City Manager.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.07  COMPENSATION.



   The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council
shall from time to time determine. In addition, the City Manager shall be
reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him/her in the
performance of his/her official duties.



§ 31.08  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Manager shall be the executive and administrative
head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the
City Council except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.



   (B)   He/she shall be responsible for the efficient administration
of all affairs of the city which are under his/her control. In addition, to
his/her general powers as administrative and executive head, and not as a
limitation hereon, it shall be his/her duty and he/she shall have the powers
set forth as follows:



      (1)   Law enforcement.  It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all
franchises, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the City Council
are faithfully observed.



      (2)   Authority over employees. It shall be the duty of the
City Manager, and he/she shall have the authority to control, order, and give
directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and
employees of the city under his/her direction through their department heads.



      (3)   Power of appointment and removal.  It shall be the duty
of the City Manager to, and he/she shall appoint, remove, and demote any and
all officers and employees of the city, subject to all applicable personnel
ordinances, rules and regulations except the City Attorney and elected
officials.



      (4)   Administrative reorganization of officers.  It shall be
the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to conduct studies and effect
such administrative reorganization of offices, positions, or units under
his/her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective
and economical conduct of the city's business.



      (5)   Ordinances.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager
and he/she shall recommend to the City Council for adoption of such measures
and ordinances as he/she deems necessary.



      (6)   Attendance at Council meetings.  It shall be the duty
of the City Manager to attend all meetings of the City Council unless at
his/her request he/she is excused therefrom by the Mayor individually or the
City Council, except when his/her removal is under consideration.



      (7)   Financial reports.  It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to keep the City Council at all times fully informed as to the
financial condition and needs of the city.



      (8)   Annual budget and salary plan.  It shall be the duty of
the City Manager to prepare, submit and administer after adoption by the City
Council the annual budget and the annual salary plan.



      (9)   Expenditure control and purchasing.  It shall be the
duty of the City Manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or
recommended to the City Council except on approval of the City Manager or
his/her authorized representative. The City Manager or his/her authorized
representative, shall be responsible for the purchases of all supplies for
all departments or divisions of the city.



      (10)    Investigations and complaints.  It shall be the duty
of the City Manager to make investiga-tions into the affairs of the city and
any department or division thereof; and any contract or obligation of the
city. Further, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to investigate all
complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city
government.



      (11)    Public buildings.  It shall be the duty of the City
Manager and he/she shall exercise general supervision over all public
buildings, public parks, streets and all other public property which are
under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council.



      (12)    Additional duties.  It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be
delegated to him/her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other
official action of the City Council. The City Manager shall also be the
executive and administra-tive head of the Redevelopment Agency and Public
Finance Corporation of the city.



      (13)    Devotion of entire time and duties.  It shall be the
duty of the City Manager to devote his/her entire time to the duties and
interests of the city, except as may be otherwise specifically authorized by
the City Council.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.09  INTERNAL AFFAIRS.



   (A)   Council-Manager relations. The City Council and its members
shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the City
Manager, except for purposes of inquiry, and neither the City Council nor any
member thereof shall give orders or instruction to any subordinate of the
City Manager. The City Manager shall take his/her orders and instructions
from the City Council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the
City Council and no individual member shall give any orders or instructions
to the City Manager.



   (B)   Department cooperation.  It shall be the duty of all
subordinate officers, the City Attorney and elected department heads to
assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently,
economically and harmoniously.



   (C)   Attendance at Commission meetings.  The City Manager may
attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission and any other
commissions, boards or committees created by the City Council, upon his/her
own volition or upon the direction of the City Council. At such meetings
which the City Manager attends, he/she shall be heard by such commission,
board or committee as to all matters upon which he/she wishes to address the
members thereof, and he/she may inform said members as to the status of any
matter being considered by the City Council, and he/she shall cooperate to
the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards, or committees
appointed by the City Council.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.10  REMOVAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Removal of City Manager.  The removal of the City Manager
shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole City Council as then
constituted, convened in a regular City Council meeting, subject, however, to
the provisions of this section. In case of his/her intended removal by the
City Council, the City Manager shall be furnished with written notice stating
the Council's intention to remove him/her at least 30 days before the
effective date of his removal. If the City Manager so requests, the City
Council shall provide in writing reasons for the intended removal which shall
be provided the City Manager within seven days after such request from the
City Manager, and at least 15 days prior to the effective date of such
removal.



   (B)   Hearing.  Within seven days after the delivery of the City
Manager of such notice of intention to remove, he/she may, by written
notifica-tion to the City Clerk, request a hearing before the City Council.
Thereafter, the City Council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be
held at its usual meeting place but before the expiration of the 30 day
period at which the City Manager shall appear and be heard, with or without
Counsel.



   (C)   Suspension pending hearing.  After furnishing the City
Manager with written notice of intended removal, the City Council may suspend
him/her from duty, but his/her compensation shall continue until his/her
removal by action of the Council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing.



   (D)   Discretion of Council. In removing the City Manager, the City
Council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final
and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the
hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the City Manager to present to said
City Council his/her grounds of opposition to his/her removal prior to its
action.



   (E)   Limitation on removal.  Not withstanding the provisions of
this section, the City Manager shall not be removed from office, other than
for misconduct in office, during or within a period of 120 days next
succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election
a member of the City Council is elected or when a new Council member is
appointed; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or
appointed member of the City Council to observe the actions and ability of
the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his/her
office. After the expiration of said 120 day period aforementioned, the
provisions of this section as to the removal of said City Manager shall apply
and be effective.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.11  RESIGNATION OF CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager shall give a minimum of 30 day notice of his/her
intention to voluntarily terminate employment with the city, unless such
requirement is waived by the City Council.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



§ 31.12  AGREEMENTS ON EMPLOYMENT.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as a limitation on the
power and authority of the City Council to enter into any supplemental
agreement with the City Manager delineating additional terms and conditions
of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1008, passed 11-4-96)



DIRECTOR OF FINANCE



§ 31.20  OFFICE CREATED.



   The office of Director of Finance of the city is created.



('81 Code, § 2.12.010)



§ 31.21  DUTIES; BOND.



   (A)   The Director of Finance shall be the accounting officer of the
city and shall maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of
the city.



   (B)   The Director of Finance shall be responsible for the
performance of those financial and accounting duties set forth in Cal. Gov't
Code §§ 37200 et seq. and in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 40802 and 40805, and the
City Clerk is relieved of any responsibility for the performance of such
duties.



   (C)   The Director of Finance shall execute the bond required by
Cal. Gov't Code § 36518.



('81 Code, § 2.12.020)



SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS



§ 31.30  OFFICE CREATED.



   The office of Superintendent of Streets of the city is created and
established.



('81 Code, § 2.16.010)



§ 31.31  EX OFFICIO SUPERINTENDENT.



   The City Engineer shall be ex officio Superintendent of Streets.



('81 Code, § 2.16.020)



§ 31.32  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Superintendent of Streets shall have charge of all street
work and street improvement in the city and shall do all acts in that regard
as may be deemed necessary and proper by the Council.



   (B)   He shall do every act required of him in the laying out,
opening, extending, widening or straightening, in whole or in part, of public
streets, squares, lanes, alleys, courts and places and the calculation of all
assessments therefor that may be required by any law of the state or any
order, resolution or ordinance of the Council.



('81 Code, § 2.16.030)



Statutory reference:



   Duties, see Cal Sts. & High. Code §§ 5680 et seq.



BONDS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



§ 31.45  BONDS OF TREASURER AND CLERK.



   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 36518, the City Clerk and City
Treasurer shall each execute a bond in a reasonable amount to the city.



   (B)   The amount of the bond shall be recommended by the City
Attorney and fixed by resolution of the City Council.



('81 Code, § 2.28.010)



§ 31.46  BONDS OF OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Other officers and employees of the city, including members of the
various boards and commissions thereof, whether or not they receive
compensation for their services, shall execute to the city such bonds as the
Council may from time to time require pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 36519.



('81 Code, § 2.28.020)



§ 31.47  DEPUTIES DECLARED EMPLOYEES OF CITY.



   All deputies and employees lawfully appointed by any officer of the
city are declared to be officers and employees of the city.



('81 Code, § 2.28.030)



§ 31.48  BLANKET BOND IN LIEU OF SEPARATE BONDS.



   (A)   A blanket bond indemnifying the city against the acts of two
or more officers or employees shall excuse such officers or employees from
executing a separate official bond to the city to the extent such blanket
bond is in the penal sum for which such officer or employee is required to be
bonded.



   (B)   If such blanket bond is in less than the penal sum for which
such officer or employee is required to be bonded, then such officer or
employee shall execute a separate bond to the city for the difference between
the amount of the blanket bond and such penal sum.



('81 Code, § 2.28.040)



§ 31.49  COVERAGE OF BONDS.



   The bond of each officer or employee bonded under this subchapter shall
apply to and cover all of the duties performed by such officer or employee
for the city, whether or not appertaining to the principal duties of the
office or position to which such officer or employee was elected or appointed.



('81 Code, § 2.28.050)



§ 31.50  PREMIUMS PAID BY CITY.



   All official bond premiums shall be paid by the city.



('81 Code, § 2.28.060)



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AGENCIES



Section




Fire Department




   32.01   Created; composition




Housing Commission




   32.20   Findings of Council reaffirmed



   32.21   Composition; appointment, terms and removal of members



   32.22   Tenant members



   32.23   Qualifications



   32.24   Meetings; rules and procedures



   32.25   Functions



   32.26   Powers




Recreation Commission




   32.45   Created; membership



   32.46   Terms of members



   32.47   Advisory members



   32.48   Officers



   32.49   Committees



   32.50   Meetings, by-laws and quorum



   32.51   Powers and duties




Redevelopment Agency




   32.60   Establishment



   32.61   City Council to serve as Redevelopment Agency




Planning Agency




   32.70   Created; composition



   32.71   Functions



   32.72   Powers




Planning Commission




   32.80   Created; composition; appointment



   32.81   Organization



   32.82   Advisory and other functions



   32.83   Expenditures



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.01  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   A Fire Department is created for the city.



   (B)   The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief and such
additional personnel as the Council may determine by resolution.



('81 Code, § 2.24.010)  (Ord. 931, passed  - -90)



HOUSING COMMISSION



§ 32.20  FINDINGS OF COUNCIL REAFFIRMED.



   Pursuant to the Housing Authorities Law, being Cal. Health & Safety
Code §§ 34200 et seq., as amended, the City Council reaffirms the findings
made by its Resolution No. 2226 on April 21, 1969.



('81 Code, § 2.40.010)



§ 32.21  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT, TERMS AND REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Housing Commission will consist of seven members appointed
in conformance with this code.



   (B)  Commissioners may be removed for cause by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the City Council.



   (C)  Commissioners appointed to fill vacancies arising during a term
shall serve only for the remainder of the term of the replaced Commissioner.



('81 Code, § 2.40.020) (Am. Ord. 1029 , passed 7-19-99; Am. Ord. 1077,
passed 10-20-03)



§ 32.22  TENANT MEMBERS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Health & Safety Code §§
34270 and 34130, at least two members of the Housing Commission shall be
tenants of the housing authority.  One such tenant commissioner shall be
over the age of 62 years, if the housing authority has tenants of that age.



   (B)   The term of any tenant commissioner shall be two years from
the date of appointment.



   (C)   If a tenant commissioner ceases to be a tenant of the housing
authority, he shall be disqualified from serving as a commissioner and
another tenant of the housing authority shall be appointed to serve the
remainder of the unexpired term.



   (D)   A tenant commissioner shall have all the powers, duties,
privileges and immunities of any other commissioner.



('81 Code, § 2.40.030)



§ 32.23  QUALIFICATIONS.



   All members of the Housing Commission shall be electors of the city.



('81 Code, § 2.40.040)



§ 32.24  MEETINGS; RULES AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Housing Commission shall meet as often as necessary for
the transaction of business, but not less than once each month.



   (B)   The members of the Commission shall elect a chairman and
establish rules and procedures necessary for the conduct of business.



   (C)   Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. 
The affirmative vote of a majority of the Commissioners present, and not less
than three Commissioners shall be necessary for any action by the Commission.



('81 Code, § 2.40.050)



§ 32.25  FUNCTIONS.



   The Housing Commission shall carry on all necessary business pursuant
to the Housing Authorities Law, being Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 34200 et
seq., as amended.



('81 Code, § 2.40.060)



§ 32.26  POWERS.



   The Housing Commissioners are vested with all rights, powers, duties,
privileges and immunities vested in them pursuant to the Housing Authorities
Law, except as otherwise provided in Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 34290
through 34293 thereof.



('81 Code, § 2.40.070)



RECREATION COMMISSION



§ 32.45  CREATED; MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   A Recreation Commission is created for the city.  The
Commission will consist of five members appointed in conformance with this
code.



(‘81 Code, § 2.32.010)  (Am. Ord. 1007, passed 7-1-96; Am. Ord. 1077,
passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 1281, passed 5-1-19)



§ 32.46  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   All members appointed to the Recreation Commission shall serve
for terms of three (3) years, or until a successor has been duly qualified
and appointed.



   (B)   Members appointed to fill vacancies arising during a term
shall serve only for the remainder of the term of the member they replace.



(‘81 Code, § 2.32.020)



(Am. Ord. 1029, passed 7-19-99; Am. Ord. 1281, passed 5-1-19)



§ 32.47  ADVISORY MEMBERS.



   (A)   One member of the Council, the City Manager, the
Superintendent of the Santa Paula Union High School District, the
Superintendent of the Santa Paula School District, and the Community Services
Director shall be advisory members, without vote, on the Recreation
Commission.



   (B)   Advisory members shall not be counted in forming a quorum.



('81 Code, § 2.32.030)



§ 32.48  OFFICERS.



   (A)   The officers of the Recreation Commission shall be a
chairperson and vice-chairperson.  Their respective duties shall be as such
as are usually imposed upon such officers.



   (B)   Each officer shall hold office for one year or until his
successor is elected.



   (C)   A recording secretary shall be furnished for Commission
meetings by appropriate action of the City Manager as approved by the City
Council.



('81 Code, § 2.32.040)



§ 32.49  COMMITTEES.



   The Recreation Commission may create such committees as it deems
necessary to the performance of its duties and may delegate to such
committees such investigations, studies and duties as it deems advisable.



('81 Code, § 2.32.050)



§ 32.50  MEETINGS, BY-LAWS AND QUORUM.



   (A)   The Recreation Commission shall meet at least once each
calendar month, at a time and place determined by its members.



   (B)   The Commission shall adopt such by-laws and rules and
regulations as it finds necessary to the performance of its duties.



   (C)   A majority of members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business and the vote of a majority of a quorum shall be
necessary to any transaction or decision.



('81 Code, § 2.32.060)



§ 32.51  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Recreation Commission shall:



   (A)   Advise and assist the Council in all matters pertaining to
public recreation;



   (B)   Advise and aid the Community Services Director in making plans
for and in conducting recreational activities within the city;



   (C)   May submit recommendations to the City Council on all matters
relative to parks and parkways as may be appropriate or as requested by the
City Council;



   (D)   Formulate general policies for the conduct of the City
Recreation Department;



   (E)   Render to the Council annually and at such other times as the
Council may determine a public report of its activities and of the activities
and status of public recreation programs;



   (F)   Make such investigations or surveys in the field of recreation
as the Council may request and report its findings and recommendations to the
Council; and



   (G)   Submit to the Council, annually, and through the City Manager
at such time as may be designated, a proposed budget providing for the
conduct of recreational activities for the ensuing fiscal year.



('81 Code, § 2.32.070)



REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY



§ 32.60  ESTABLISHMENT.



   It is found and declared, pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code §
33101, that there is a need for the Redevelopment Agency created by Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 33100 to function in the city and said agency is
authorized to transact business and exercise its powers pursuant to and under
the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law, being Cal. Health & Safety
Code §§ 3300 et seq.



('81 Code, § 2.50.010)  (Ord. 917, passed  - -89)



§ 32.61  CITY COUNCIL TO SERVE AS REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY.



   (A)   The City Council, pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code §
33200, declares itself to be the Redevelopment Agency as provided in this
sub-chapter, and that all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities
vested by the Community Redevelop-ment Law in such agency shall be, and are,
vested in this body.  The City Council further finds that this action shall
serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an
effective manner.



   (B)   The City Clerk is authorized and directed to forward a
certified copy of the ordinance codified in this section to the Secretary of
State upon its adoption by the City Council.



('81 Code, § 2.50.020)  (Ord. 917, passed  - -89)



PLANNING AGENCY



§ 32.70  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   A City Planning Agency is created consisting of the City Planning
Department, which shall be headed by the Planning Director, the City Planning
Commission and the City Council.



('81 Code, § 2.20.010)



Statutory reference:



   Planning agencies, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65100 et seq.



§ 32.71  FUNCTIONS.



   The functions of the Planning Agency are as follows:



   (A)   It shall develop and maintain a general plan.



   (B)   It shall develop such specific plans as may be necessary or
desirable.



   (C)   It shall periodically review the capital improvement program
of the city.



   (D)   It shall perform such other functions as the Council shall
provide and as are imposed upon it by law.



('81 Code, § 2.20.020)



Statutory reference:



   Functions, see Cal. Gov't Code § 65103



§ 32.72  POWERS.



   The Planning Agency shall have the powers necessary to enable it to
fulfill and carry out its planning functions as provided by law.



('81 Code, § 2.20.030)



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 32.80  CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   A City Planning Commission is created and established and will
consist of five members appointed in conformance with this code.



   (B)  The members of the Planning Commission will serve four (4) year
terms at the pleasure of the Council, or until the successor has duly
qualified  and been appointed.



   (C)  Commissioners appointed to fill vacancies arising during a term
shall serve only for the remainder of the term of the Commissioner replaced.



   (D)  Each of the members of the Planning Commission shall be and
remain at all times during incumbency an actual resident of the City, and if
at any time they cease to be an actual resident their office shall be vacated.



('81 Code, § 2.20.040)



(Am. Ord. 1029, passed 7-19-99; Am. Ord. 1077, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord.
1124, passed 10-4-04)



Statutory reference:



   Planning Commissions, see Cal. Gov't Code § 65101



§ 32.81  ORGANIZATION.



   The Planning Commission is authorized to elect its own officers,
schedule its meetings and adopt rules and by-laws for the transaction of its
business.



('81 Code, § 2.20.050)



§ 32.82  ADVISORY AND OTHER FUNCTIONS.



   The Planning Commission shall advise the Council regarding all matters
relating to the development of the city, and shall perform other functions
and duties as the Council shall provide and as are imposed upon it by law.



('81 Code, § 2.20.060)



§ 32.83  EXPENDITURES.



   The Planning Commission shall not incur any expenses without first
obtaining the approval of the Council.



('81 Code, § 2.20.070)



CHAPTER 33:  PERSONNEL SYSTEM



Section



   33.01   Adoption; purpose



   33.02   Personnel Officer



   33.03   Applicability to officers and employees; exceptions



   33.04   Adoption of rules to govern certain procedures



   33.05   Manner of making appointments; provisional appointments



   33.06   Probationary period



   33.07   Status of employees in competitive service



   33.08   Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions



   33.09   Power to appoint and dismiss employees



   33.10   Disciplinary suspension



   33.11   Right to written statement of reasons for demotion or
dismissal and to request hearing



   33.12   Abolition of personnel positions by Council



   33.13   Political activities



   33.14   Right to contract for special services



   33.15   Appropriation of funds



Statutory reference:



   Personnel system, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 45000 et seq.



§ 33.01  ADOPTION; PURPOSE.



   In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing
with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the best and most
competent persons available, to assure that appointments and promotions of
employees will be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive
test, and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees,
the personnel system set forth in this chapter is adopted.



('81 Code, § 2.44.010)



§ 33.02  PERSONNEL OFFICER.



   (A)   The City Manager shall be the Personnel Officer.  With the
approval of the Council, the City Manager may delegate any of the powers and
duties conferred upon him as Personnel Officer under this chapter to any
other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and
duties be performed under contract as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   The City Manager shall:



      (1)   Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the
personnel rules not specifically reserved to the Council;



      (2)   Prepare and recommend to the Council revisions and
amendments to the personnel rules; the City Attorney shall approve the
legality of such revisions and amendments prior to their submission to the
Council;



      (3)   Prepare and maintain a position classification plan,
including class specifications; the plan shall become effective upon approval
by the Council;



      (4)   Prepare and maintain a plan of compensation covering all
classifications in the competitive service; the plan, and any revisions
thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the Council;



      (5)   Publish or post notices of examinations for positions in
the competitive service; receive applications therefor; conduct and score
examinations and prepare a list of all persons eligible for appointment in
the appropriate class in the competitive service.



('81 Code, § 2.44.020)



§ 33.03  APPLICABILITY TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions
and employments in the service of the city, except:



   (A)   Elective officers;



   (B)   Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;



   (C)   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional
or technical services for a definite period of time;



   (D)   Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firefighter;



   (E)   City Manager;



   (F)   City Attorney.



('81 Code, § 2.44.030)



§ 33.04  ADOPTION OF RULES TO GOVERN CERTAIN PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Personnel rules, prepared by the Personnel Officer subject to
this chapter and to revision by the Council, shall be adopted and may be
amended from time to time, by resolution of the Council.



   (B)   The rules shall establish specific procedures and regulations
governing the following phases of the personnel system:



      (1)   Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a
position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive
service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;



      (2)   Preparation, revision and administra-tion of a plan of
compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan,
providing a rate or range of pay for each class;



      (3)   Public announcement of all tests and the acceptance of
applications for employment;



      (4)   Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment
and the use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons
eligible for appoint-ment;



      (5)   Certification and appointment of persons from employment
lists, and making of temporary and emergency appointments;



      (6)   Evaluation of employees during the probationary period;



      (7)   Transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of
employees in the competitive service;



      (8)   Separation of employees from the city service through
layoff, suspension and dismissal;



      (9)   Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave
regulations, working conditions and the development of employees morale,
welfare and training;



      (10)    Suitable provision for orderly and equitable
presentations to the City Manager and to the Council by employees relating to
general conditions of employment;



      (11)    Content, maintenance and use of personnel records and
forms.



('81 Code, § 2.44.040)



§ 33.05  MANNER OF MAKING APPOINTMENTS; PROVISIONAL APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service
shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules.  Appointments and
promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as
practicable by competitive examinations.  Examinations shall be used and
conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees, and shall consist
of such recognized selection techniques as achieve-ment and aptitude tests,
and other written tests, personal interview, performance tests, evaluation of
daily work performance, work sampler, or any combination of these, which
will, in the opinion of the Personnel Officer, test fairly the qualifications
of candidates.  Physical and medical tests may be given as a part of any
examination.



   (B)   Appointments shall be made by the Council and the City Manager
in whom the power to make appointments is vested by law.  When appointment
is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive service, the Personnel Officer
shall transmit to the appointing power the names of all persons on the
appropriate certified employment or promotional list, in the order in which
they appear on the list.



   (C)   In the absence of appropriate employment lists, a provisional
appointment may be made by the appointing authority of the person meeting the
minimum training and experience qualifications for the position.  An
employment list shall be established within six months for any permanent
position filled by temporary appointment.  The City Manager, with the
approval of four-fifths of the Council, may extend the period for any
provisional appointment to a temporary position for not more than 30 days, by
any one action.  When a position is to be filled by provisional appointment,
or a provisional appointment is to be extended, the Council shall direct the
City Clerk to record such action in the minutes of the meeting of the Council.



   (D)   No special credit shall be allowed in meeting any
qualification or in the giving of any test or the establishment of any
employment or promotional lists, for service rendered under a provisional
appointment.



   (E)   During the period of suspension of an employee or pending
final action on proceedings to review suspension, demotion or dismissal of an
employee, such vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority subject to
the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.



('81 Code, § 2.44.050)



§ 33.06  PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   (A)   All regular appointments, including promotional appointments,
shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months, except that
as to any class of position the rules may provide for an extension of the
period for not more than an additional six months.  With respect to newly
employed police personnel, the minimum probationary period shall be not less
than one year.



   (B)   An employee rejected during the probationary period from a
position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to the position
from which he was promoted, unless he is dismissed from the city service as
provided in this chapter and the rules.



   (C)   An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred
to a position not included in the competitive service shall be reinstated to
the position from which he was promoted or transferred if, within six months
after such promotion or transfer, action is taken to reject or dismiss him,
unless he is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and the
personnel rules for positions in the competitive service.



('81 Code, § 2.44.060)



§ 33.07  STATUS OF EMPLOYEES IN COMPETITIVE SERVICE.



   (A)   Any person holding a position included in the competitive
service who, on the effective date of this chapter, shall have served
continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive
service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the
rules for his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service
in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and
shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter
and the personnel rules.



   (B)   Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service
shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their
probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular
status.  The probationary period shall be computed from the date of
appointment or employment.



('81 Code, § 2.44.070)



§ 33.08  APPLICABILITY OF RULES TO CERTAIN EXEMPT POSITIONS.



   The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves
shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions.



('81 Code, § 2.44.080)



§ 33.09  POWER TO APPOINT AND DISMISS EMPLOYEES.



   The Council, the City Manager and any other officer in whom is vested
the power to appoint, make transfers, promotions, demotions, reinstatements
and layoffs, and to suspend or dismiss employees shall retain such power,
subject to the provision of this chapter and the personnel rules.



('81 Code, § 2.44.090)



§ 33.10  DISCIPLINARY SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Any person holding a position or employment in the competitive
service shall be subject to disciplinary suspension without pay by the
appointing power, but such suspensions shall not exceed a total of 30
calendar days in any fiscal year.



   (B)   A department head not having power of appointment may make
disciplinary suspensions in accordance with the rules.



('81 Code, § 2.44.100)



§ 33.11  RIGHT TO WRITTEN STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR DEMOTION OR DISMISSAL
AND TO REQUEST HEARING.



   (A)   Any permanent employee in the competitive service who has been
demoted, dismissed or reduced in pay may request a written statement of the
reasons for such action within three working days following the action. 
Within 10 days after the action taken to demote, dismiss or reduce the pay of
the employee, he may file a written request with the Personnel Officer
requesting a hearing in executive session with the City Council.  The City
Council shall then investigate the case and conduct the hearing as provided
in this chapter and by the city's personnel system rules and regulations.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions
in pay which are part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages.



('81 Code, § 2.44.110)



§ 33.12  ABOLITION OF PERSONNEL POSITIONS BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   When the City Council finds it necessary in the interest of
economy or because the necessity for the position or employment no longer
exists, the Council may, after consultation with the affected bargaining
units, abolish any position or employment in the competitive service and lay
off, demote or transfer an employee holding such position or employment.



   (B)   The City Manager or designee is authorized to promulgate
administrative policies and procedures to implement this section.



('81 Code, § 2.44.120) (Am. Ord. 1221, passed 4-19-10)



§ 33.13  POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Soliciting political funds.  An officer or an employee of the
city shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit or receive political funds or
contributions, knowingly, from other officers or employees of the city or
from persons on the employment lists of the city, except as otherwise
provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 3205.



('81 Code, § 2.44.130)



   (B)   Activities not prohibited; violation grounds for dismissal.



      (1)   This chapter does not prevent any officer or employee
from:



         (a)   Becoming or continuing to be a member of a
political club or organization;



         (b)   Attendance at a political meeting;



         (c)   Enjoying entire freedom from all interference in
casting his vote;



         (d)   Seeking or accepting election or appointment to
public office while on leave of absence;



         (e)   Seeking signatures to any initiative or referendum
petition directly affecting his rates of pay, hours of work, retirement,
civil service or other working conditions;



         (f)   Distributing badges, pamphlets, dodgers or
handbills or other participation in any campaign in connection with such
petition, if the activity is not carried on during hours of work, or when he
is dressed in the uniform required in any department of the city government.



      (2)   The violation of any provision of division (A) of this
section is ground for discharge of any officer or employee.



('81 Code, § 2.44.140)



   (C)   Improper activities; exemptions.



      (1)   Every person or employee of the city shall prohibit the
entry into any place under his control, occupied and used for the
governmental purposes of the city, of any person, for the purpose of making
or giving notice of any political assessment, subscription or contribution.



      (2)   No person shall enter or remain in any place described
in subdivision (1) of this division for the purpose of making, demanding or
giving notice of any political assessment, subscription or contribution.



      (3)   This division shall not apply to any auditorium or other
place used for the conduct of public or political rallies or similar events,
nor to any park, street, public land or other place not being used for the
governmental purposes of the city.



      (4)   No officer or employee of the city shall participate in
political activities of any kind while in uniform.



      (5)   No one who holds, or who is seeking election or
appointment to, any office or employment in the city shall, directly or
indirectly, use, promise, threaten or attempt to use any office, authority or
influence, whether actually possessed or merely anticipated, to confer upon
or secure for any person, or to aid or obstruct any person in securing, or to
prevent any person from securing any position, nomination, confirmation,
promotion or change in composition or position within the city, upon
consideration or condition that the vote or political influence or action of
the person or another shall be given or used in behalf of, or withheld from,
any candidate, officer or party, or upon any other corrupt condition or
consideration.



      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, this
division does not prevent an officer or employee of this city from soliciting
or receiving political funds or contributions to promote the passage or
defeat of a ballot measure which would affect the rate of pay, hours of work,
retirement, civil service or other working conditions of officers or
employees of this city, so long as such activity is confined to off-duty or
nonworking hours and is conducted somewhere other than in the governmental
offices of this city.



('81 Code, § 2.44.150)



§ 33.14  RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL SERVICES.



   (A)   The City Manager shall consider and make recommendations to
the Council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the
performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or
operation of the personnel system.



   (B)   The Council may contract with any qualified person or agency
for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and
duties imposed by this chapter:



      (1)   The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent
revisions and amendments thereof;



      (2)   The preparation of a position classifica-tion plan, and
subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;



      (3)   The preparation of a plan of compensa-tion, and
subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;



      (4)   The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive
tests;



      (5)   Special and technical services of advisory or
informational character on matters relating to personnel administration.



('81 Code, § 2.44.160)



§ 33.15  APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.



   The Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out
the provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 2.44.170)



CHAPTER 34:  CIVIL DEFENSE



Section



   34.01   Purpose



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Civil Defense and Disaster Council; creation and membership



   34.04   Powers and duties of Disaster Council; meetings



   34.05   Office of Director created; powers and duties generally



   34.06   Powers and duties of Director during emergency



   34.07   Composition of Civil Defense and Disaster Organization



   34.08   Distribution of functions and duties; form of organization



   34.09   Unlawful acts



   34.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Local emergencies, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 8630 et seq.



§ 34.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the
preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and
property within this city in the event of a disaster, and to provide for the
coordination of the civil defense and disaster functions of this city with
all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and
organizations.



   (B)   Any expenditures made in connection with such civil defense
and disaster activities, including mutual aid activities and disaster
preparedness services provided this city under contract or agreement, shall
be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the
inhabitants and property of the city.



('81 Code, § 8.12.020)



§ 34.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL DEFENSE.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters.  It does not include, nor does any provision of
this chapter apply to, any condition relating to a labor controversy.



   DISASTER.  Actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary
fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar public
calamity.



('81 Code, § 8.12.010)



§ 34.03  CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER COUNCIL; CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   The Civil Defense and Disaster Council is created and shall consist of
the following:



   (A)   The Mayor, who shall be chairman;



   (B)   The Director of Civil Defense and Disaster, who shall be
vice-chairman;



   (C)   The Assistant Director, appointed by the City Manager with the
advice and consent of the City Council, who, under the supervision of the
Director, shall develop civil defense and disaster plans and organize the
civil defense and disaster program of this city and shall have such other
duties as may be assigned by the Director;



   (D)   Such deputy directors and chiefs of operating civil defense
and disaster departments, services or divisions as are provided for by
resolution pursuant to this chapter; and



   (E)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans,
professional or other organizations having an official group or organization
with civil defense and disaster responsibility, as may be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.



('81 Code, § 8.12.030)



§ 34.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DISASTER COUNCIL; MEETINGS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Civil Defense and Disaster
Council, and it is empowered, to review and recommend for adoption by the
City Council civil defense and disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements
and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are
necessary to implement such plans and agreements.



   (B)   The Civil Defense and Disaster Council shall meet upon call of
the chairman; or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such a
meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman.



('81 Code, § 8.12.040)



§ 34.05  OFFICE OF DIRECTOR CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   There is created the office of the Director of Civil Defense
and Disaster.  The City Manager shall be the Director of Civil Defense and
Disaster.



   (B)   The Director is empowered:



      (1)   To request the City Council to proclaim the existence or
threatened existence of a disaster or an emergency and the termination
thereof, if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if
the City Council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the City
Council at the earliest practicable time, but in no case shall such
proclamation remain in effect for a period in excess of seven days unless it
has been ratified by the City Council;



      (2)   To request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency
when, in the opinion of the Director, the resources of the area or region are
inadequate to cope with the disaster;



      (3)   To control and direct the effort of the Civil Defense
and Disaster Organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes
of this chapter;



      (4)   To direct coordination and cooperation between
divisions, services and staff of the Civil Defense and Disaster Organization
of this duty, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that
may arise between them; and



      (5)   To represent the Civil Defense and Disaster Organization
of this city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to
civil defense and disaster.



('81 Code, § 8.12.050)



§ 34.06  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR DURING EMERGENCY.



   In the event of the proclamation of a local disaster or an emergency as
provided in this chapter, or the proclamation of a state of emergency by the
Governor or the Director of the California Disaster Office or during a
“state of war emergency,” which condition exists immediately, with or
without a proclamation thereof by the Governor whenever this state or nation
is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of
a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is
probable or imminent, the Director is empowered:



   (A)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster;
provided, however, that such rules and regulations be confirmed at the
earliest practicable time by the Council;



   (B)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the
people and to bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required
immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;



   (C)   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee
and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of disaster or state of
emergency by the Governor in the region in which this city is located, to
command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he thinks necessary
in the execution of his duties.  Such persons shall be entitled to all
privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for
registered civil defense and disaster service volunteers;



   (D)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city
department or agency; and



   (E)   To execute all of his ordinary power as City Manager, all of
the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution
adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him by any statute,
agreement approved by the City Council, or by any other lawful authority, and
in conformity with Cal. Gov't Code § 38791, to exercise complete authority
over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the
Constitution and the general laws.



('81 Code, § 8.12.060)



§ 34.07  COMPOSITION OF CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER ORGANIZATION.



   All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations
and persons pressed into service under the provisions of § 34.06(C), who may
be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in
this city during such disaster, shall constitute the Civil Defense and
Disaster Organization of the city.



('81 Code, § 8.12.070)



§ 34.08  DISTRIBUTION OF FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES; FORM OF ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The functions and duties of the Civil Defense and Disaster
Organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special
staff as the City Council shall prescribe by resolution.



   (B)   The City Council shall, concurrently with the adoption of this
chapter, adopt a resolution setting forth the form of organization, the
establishment and designation of divisions and services, the assignment of
functions, duties and powers and the designation of officers and employees. 
Insofar as possible the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the civil defense and disaster agencies of
the federal government and the state.



('81 Code, § 8.12.080)



§ 34.09  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   It is unlawful for any person during a disaster:



   (A)   To wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Civil
Defense and Disaster Organiza-tion in the enforcement of any lawful rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty
imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;



   (B)   To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations
issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give
or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or
property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the
defense or protection thereof; or



   (C)   To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the Civil Defense and Disaster Agency of the
state.



('81 Code, § 8.12.090)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of § 34.09 of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not to exceed
$1,000, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.



('81 Code, § 8.12.090)



CHAPTER 35:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 36:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section




Funds




   36.01   Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund



   36.02   Capital Outlay Fund




Fee and Service Charge Revenue/Cost Comparison System




   36.15   Intent



   36.16   Establishment of system



   36.17   Definitions



   36.18   Establish annual update of costs



   36.19   Schedule of fees and service charges



Cross-reference:



   Public Sewer Extension and Connection Trust Fund, see § 51.002



   Water Fund, see § 52.005



Statutory reference:



   Financial powers, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 37200 et seq.



FUNDS



§ 36.01  SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND.



   (A)   Established.  To comply with the provisions of Cal. Sts. &
High. Code §§ 180 et seq., with particular reference to Cal. Sts. & High.
Code § 2113, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be
known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.”



('81 Code, § 3.28.010)



   (B)   Moneys paid into fund.  All moneys received by the city from
the state under the provisions of the California Streets and Highways Code
for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for the
construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways, other than
state highways, shall be paid into the fund established by division (A) of
this section.



('81 Code, § 3.28.020)



   (C)   Expenditure of moneys in fund.  All moneys in the fund
established by this section shall be expended exclusively for the purposes
authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code
Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§ 180 et seq.



('81 Code, § 3.28.030)



Statutory reference:



   Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund, see Cal. Sts. & High. Code
§§ 2106 et seq. and § 2113



§ 36.02  CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND.



   (A)   Established.  A Capital Outlay Fund is created pursuant to
the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 53730.5 et seq., as amended.



('81 Code, § 3.32.010)



   (B)   Source of fund.  The moneys constituting the fund established
by this section shall consist of such taxes as the Council may from time to
time levy and collect for the purposes of the fund and of such surplus funds
as the Council may from time to time by resolution transfer to the fund.



('81 Code, § 3.32.020)



   (C)   Conditions for disbursements and appropria-tions. 
Disbursements from and appropriations to the fund established by this section
shall be made for the purposes and subject to the conditions prescribed by
the provisions of the Statutes of 1937, as now written and as hereafter
amended.



('81 Code, § 3.32.030)



FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM



§ 36.15  INTENT.



   In accordance with Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, the
City Council intends that the city recover all costs allowed by law for
providing municipal services.



(Ord. 1236, passed 6-20-11)



§ 36.16  ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   To implement the City Council’s intent for adopting this
chapter, a fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system is
established for the city.



   (B)   The City Manager, or designee, must administer such system and
recommend to the City Council such appropriate adjustments to fees and
charges for recovering the percentage of costs reasonably borne in providing
municipal services.



   (C)   In proposing fees and charges, the City Manager acts in an
administrative and ministerial capacity and should consider all appropriate
standards and criteria including those established by this Chapter.



(Ord. 1236, passed 6-20-11)



§ 36.17  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.



   COSTS REASONABLY BORNE includes the following elements:



      (1)   All applicable direct costs including, without
limitation, salaries, wages, fringe benefits, services and supplies,
operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other
direct expense incurred;



      (2)   All applicable indirect costs including, without
limitation, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance,
communications, printing and reproduction, and like distributed expenses;



      (3)   Fixed assets recovery expenses consisting of
depreciation on fixed assets, and additional charges, calculated on the
current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life
expectancy of the fixed asset, together with further additional charges to
make up the depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash for
the purpose of recovering such unrecovered depreciation over the remaining
life of the asset;



      (4)   General overhead, expressed as a percentage,
distributing and charging the expenses of the City Council and the offices
and departments of the City Manager, Finance, City Clerk, City Attorney,
Public Services, Housing and Community Development, Human Services, Fire,
Police, and all other staff and support services.



   STUDY means a comprehensive fee study prepared by a third party
financial expert for the purpose of establishing administrative overhead;
recovering 100% of costs associated with municipal services; and providing a
mechanism for automatically adjusting such fees on an annual basis using
objective criteria.



(Ord. 1236, passed 6-20-11)



§ 36.18  ESTABLISH ANNUAL UPDATE OF COSTS.



   (A)   To ensure that the city recovers all costs associated with
providing municipal services, the City Manager must take appropriate action
to commission a study every three years. A study must be presented to the
City Council for consideration not later than the second regular City Council
meeting in May. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the City Manager
from providing the City Council with a study at any time the City Manager
finds it necessary to ensure full cost recovery; it is only intended to
establish a regular schedule for such action.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by City Council resolution, the
City Council intends to recover 100% of all costs associated with providing
services. Consequently, the annual budget resolution must include a mechanism
that allows all fees charged by the city for services to be adjusted based
upon appropriate objective criteria such as, without limitation, the consumer
price index.



   (C)   In years that do not include a study, the City Manager must
recommend increases in fees based upon the United States Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index for the Los Angeles area or
the percent increase of labor costs as reflected in Council approved labor
agreements, whichever best reflects the actual changes in city costs.



(Ord. 1236, passed 6-20-11)



§ 36.19  SCHEDULE OF FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES.



   In accordance with applicable law, the city may charge reasonable fees
and charges for certain municipal services. Except as otherwise provided by
applicable law including, without limitation, this code, the City Council
will adopt a schedule of fees and charges by resolution. As reflected in this
chapter, the city council intends to recover 100% of all costs associated
with providing municipal services.



(Ord. 1236, passed 6-20-11)



CHAPTER 37:  TAXATION



Section




Transfer of Tax Functions




   37.01   Assessment and tax collection duties transferred from city
to county



   37.02   Certain collection duties retained by city



   37.03   City Assessor's duties transferred to Director of Finance



   37.04   City Tax Collector's duties transferred to License Collector



   37.05   Compensation of county for performance of services




Local Transactions and Use Tax




   37.15   Title



   37.16   Operative date; expiration



   37.17   Purpose



   37.18   Contract with state



   37.19   Transactions tax rate



   37.20   Place of sale



   37.21   Use tax rate



   37.22   Adoption of provisions of state law



   37.23   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use
taxes



   37.24   Permit not required



   37.25   Exemptions and exclusions



   37.26   Amendments to state law



   37.27   Enjoining collection forbidden




Real Property Transfer Tax




   37.50   Title



   37.51   Imposition of tax; payment



   37.52   Exemptions from tax



   37.53   Administration



   37.54   Refunds




Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax




   37.65   Title



   37.66   Definitions



   37.67   Imposition of tax; amount; debt to city; exemptions



   37.68   Payment of tax simultaneous with rent payment



   37.69   Collection; receipt for payment; certain advertising
prohibited



   37.70   Preservation of records



   37.71   Transient occupancy registration certificate



   37.72   Reporting period



   37.73   Remittance of tax required



   37.74   Collected taxes held in trust for city until remittance



   37.75   Failure to remit; fraud; interest



   37.76   Determination of tax by Tax Collector upon failure of
operator to collect and report tax



   37.77   Notice of amount assessed



   37.78   Application for hearing



   37.79   Hearing



   37.80   Appeal from determination



   37.81   Refund or credit for overpayment



   37.82   Conditions for approval of claim



   37.83   Refund to operator or transient



   37.84   Consideration of evidence supporting claim



   37.85   Tax deemed debt



   37.86   Action to collect tax



   37.87   Violations



   37.88   Change of ownership; tax clearance certificate



Cross-reference:



   Business license taxes, see Ch. 110



TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS



§ 37.01  ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TRANSFERRED FROM CITY TO
COUNTY.



   The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of
assessment levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the Assessor
and the Tax Collector of the city, are transferred to the Assessor and the
Tax Collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of
and for ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after the adoption of
this subchapter, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements
becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1962.



('81 Code, § 3.04.010)



Statutory reference:



   Transfer of tax function to county, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51500 et
seq.



§ 37.02  CERTAIN COLLECTION DUTIES RETAINED BY CITY.



   All taxes of the city that shall have been levied prior to September 1,
1961, including delinquent taxes, shall be collected and the payment thereof
enforced in the same manner and upon the same penalties, and property sold
for the nonpayment thereof and redeemed from such sale in the same manner and
under the same conditions as provided by the laws in force in the city on
September 1, 1961, and the officers of the city shall collect and enforce the
payment of such taxes, including delinquent taxes, and do any and all things
that may become necessary in the sale of property for nonpayment of such
taxes and in the redemption thereof from such sale. 



('81 Code, § 3.04.020)



§ 37.03  CITY ASSESSOR'S DUTIES TRANSFERRED TO DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.



   All duties performed by the City Assessor, other than the assessing of
the city property, are transferred to, and shall be performed by the Director
of Finance.



('81 Code, § 3.04.030)  (Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 37.04  CITY TAX COLLECTOR'S DUTIES TRANSFERRED TO LICENSE COLLECTOR.



   All duties performed by the City Tax Collector, other than the
collection of taxes, are transferred to, and shall be performed by the
License Collector.



('81 Code, § 3.04.040)  (Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 37.05  COMPENSATION OF COUNTY FOR PERFORMANCE OF SERVICES.



   The amount of compensation to be charged by and paid to the county for
the performance of services contemplated in this subchapter shall be fixed by
agreement between the Board of Supervisors of the county and the Council;
provided, however, that such compensation shall in no event exceed one
percent for collecting the first $25,000, and not more than one-fourth of one
percent for all sums over that amount collected for the city as provided in
this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 3.04.050)



LOCAL TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX



§ 37.15  TITLE.



   This subchapter is entitled the "Santa Paula Local Transactions and Use
Tax Ordinance." The term "city," as used within this subchapter, is the city
of Santa Paula. This subchapter is applicable in the incorporated territory
of the city.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.010) (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



Statutory reference:



   Sales and use tax, see Cal. Gov’t Code § 37101 and Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code §§ 7200 et seq.



§ 37.16  OPERATIVE DATE; EXPIRATION.



   OPERATIVE DATE means the first day of the first calendar quarter
commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this subchapter. The
Santa Paula Local Transactions and Use Tax will expire 20 years after the
operative date.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.020) (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.17  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other
purposes, and directs that its provisions be interpreted in order to
accomplish those purposes:



   (A)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with
the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251) of Division 2 of the
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code and § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which
authorizes the city to adopt this subchapter which becomes operative if more
than 50% of the electors voting on the ballot measure vote to approve the
imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.



   (B)   To adopt retail transactions and use tax regulations that
incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of
the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with
the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code.



   (C)   To adopt retail transactions and use tax regulations that
imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and
collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself
as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from,
the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State
Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State
Sales and Use Taxes.



   (D)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can
be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes,
and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.040) (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.18  CONTRACT WITH STATE.



   Before the operative date, the city must contract with the State Board
of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this transactions and use tax chapter; provided, that if the
city cannot have contracted with the State Board of Equalization before the
operative date, it must nevertheless so contract and in such a case the
operative date is the first day of the first calendar quarter following the
execution of such a contract.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.050) (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.19  TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.



   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a
tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the
city at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of
all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after
the operative date of this subchapter.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.060) (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.20  PLACE OF SALE.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales are consummated
at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal
property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an
out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an
out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales include delivery
charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax,
regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer
has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated is
determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the
State Board of Equalization.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.070) (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.21  USE TAX RATE.



   An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and
after the operative date of this subchapter for storage, use or other
consumption in said territory at the rate of 1% of the sales price of the
property. The sales price includes delivery charges when such charges are
subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery
is made.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.080) (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.22  ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with §
6001) of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code are adopted and made a part
of this subchapter as though fully set forth.



(Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.23  LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.



   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code:



   (A)   The city is substituted wherever the State of California is
named or referred to as the taxing agency. However, the substitution is not
made when:



      (1)   The word STATE is used as a part of the title of the
State Controller, State Treasurer, Victim Compensation and Government Claims
Board of Equalization, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the
Constitution of the State of California;



      (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to
be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof
rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this subchapter.



      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily
limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of
California, where the result of the substitution would be to:



         (a)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to
certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales,
storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under
the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code; or



         (b)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would
not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.



      (4)   In §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code.



   (B)   The word “City” is substituted for the word "State" in the
phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in § 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in § 6203 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code.



(Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.24  PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under § 6067 of
the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, an additional transactor’s permit is not
required by this subchapter.



(Ord. 1267, 12-2-16)



§ 37.25  EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   There is excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the
Bradley-Bums Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any
state-administered transactions or use tax.



   (B)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of
transactions tax the gross receipts from:



      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or
petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed
principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and
exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or
property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or
any foreign government.



      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is
shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by
delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by
the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the
purposes of this section, delivery to a point outside the city is satisfied:



         (a)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial
vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with §
4000) of Division 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance
with § 21411 of the Cal. Pub. Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels
registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840) of the Cal. Vehicle
Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under
penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in
fact, his or her principal place of residence; and



         (b)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by
registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty
of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that
address.



      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is
obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract
entered into before the operative date of this subchapter.



      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a
continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor
is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease before
the operative date of this subchapter.



      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (3) and (4) of this
section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property is deemed not to be
obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which
any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate
the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.



   (C)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this
subchapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible
personal property:



      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been
subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and
use tax ordinance.



      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by
operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and
exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or
property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience
and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States,
or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions
provided in §§ 6366 and 6366.1 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code.



      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property
for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into before the operative
date of this subchapter.



      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or
power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a
continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the
lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease
before the operative date of this subchapter.



      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (C)(3) and (4) of this
section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of
any right or power over, tangible personal property is deemed not to be
obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which
any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate
the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.



      (6)   Except as provided in division (C)(7), a retailer
engaged in business in the city is not required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or
delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making
the sale of the property, including, without limitation, soliciting or
receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of
the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser,
solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the
retailer.



      (7)   "A retailer engaged in business in the City" also
includes any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to
registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Division 3 of
the Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the
Cal. Pub. Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division
3.5 (commencing with § 9840) of the Cal. Vehicle Code. That retailer is
required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the
vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.



   (D)   Any person subject to use tax under this subchapter may credit
against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax
paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax
pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code with respect
to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other
consumption of which is subject to the use tax.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.140)  (Ord. 796, passed  - -83; Am. Ord. 1267, passed
12-2-16)



§ 37.26  AMENDMENTS TO STATE LAW.



   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter to Part
1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code relating to sales and use taxes
and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of
the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of
Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, automatically become a part of this
subchapter, provided however, that no such amendment operates so as to affect
the rate of tax imposed by this subchapter.



(Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



§ 37.27  ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.



   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process
shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state
or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or
enjoin the collection under this subchapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part
1.6 of Division 2, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.



(‘81 Code, § 3.08.160) (Am. Ord. 1267, passed 12-2-16)



REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX



§ 37.50  TITLE.



   (A)   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known as
the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the city.”



   (B)   It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Rev.
& Tax. Code §§ 11901 et seq.



('81 Code, § 3.16.010)



Statutory reference:



   Real property transfer tax, see Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 11901 et seq.



§ 37.51  IMPOSITION OF TAX; PAYMENT.



   (A)   There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which
any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted,
assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when
the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds $100, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500 or fractional part
thereof.



('81 Code, § 3.16.020)



   (B)   Any tax imposed pursuant to division (A) of this section shall
be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument
subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or
issued.



('81 Code, § 3.16.030)



§ 37.52  EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX.



   (A)   Instruments to secure debts.  Any tax imposed pursuant to
this subchapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure
a debt.



('81 Code, § 3.16.040)



   (B)   Public agencies.  The United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision
thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed
pursuant to this subchapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing
to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any
other party liable therefor.



('81 Code, § 3.16.050)



   (C)   Plans of reorganization or adjustment.



      (1)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall not
apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective
any plan or reorganization or adjustment:



         (a)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as
amended;



         (b)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a
court involving a railroad corpora-tion, as defined in subdivision (m) of §
205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;



         (c)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a
court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of § 506 of
Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or



         (d)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place
of organization is effected.



      (2)   Subdivisions (a) through (d) of sub-division (1) shall
only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or
conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation,
approval or change.



('81 Code, § 3.16.060)



   (D)   Orders of Securities and Exchange Commission.  Any tax
imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall not apply to the making or delivery
of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange
Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of § 1083 of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1954; but only if:



      (1)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in
obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 USC 79k relating
to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;



      (2)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be
conveyed;



      (3)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.



('81 Code, § 3.16.070)



   (E)   Partnership.



      (1)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy
shall be imposed pursuant to this subchapter by reason of any transfer of an
interest in a partnership or otherwise, if such partnership (or another
partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of §
708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.  For purposes of this subchapter,
such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby
there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien
or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the
time of such termination.



      (2)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this
subchapter by reason of a termination described in subdivision (1) of this
division, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held
by such partnership at the time of such termination.



('81 Code, § 3.16.080)



   (F)   Other exemptions.  The exemptions set forth in Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code §§ 11921 through 11929 shall apply.



§ 37.53  ADMINISTRATION.



   The County Recorder shall administer this subchapter in conformity with
the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 11901 et seq. and the provisions
of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.



('81 Code, § 3.16.090)



§ 37.54  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, claims for refund
of taxes imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall be governed by the
provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 5096 et seq.



('81 Code, § 3.16.100)



   (B)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been
overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as
provided in divisions (B), (C) and (D) provided a claim in writing therefor,
stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is
founded, is filed with the tax collector within one year of the date of
payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax collector.



   (C)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or
erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a
manner prescribed by the tax collector that the person from whom the tax has
been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund
nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has
either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently
payable by the transient to the operator.



   (D)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more
than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by
filing a claim in the manner provided in division (A), but only when the tax
was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the
transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the
satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to
obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.



   (E)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his or her  right thereto by written records
showing entitlement thereto.



(Am. Ord. 1049, passed 4-9-02)



UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX



§ 37.65  TITLE.



   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known as the
“Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the city.”



('81 Code, § 3.20.010)



Statutory reference:



   Transient occupancy tax, see Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7280 and 7281



§ 37.66  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOTEL.  Any commercial establishment or any portion of any commercial
establishment which provides for the occupancy of transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, whether by the day, week or month and includes
any hotel, inn, motel or commercial establishment of similar nature; and
shall further include any space, lot, area or site in any trailer court,
recreational vehicle park, mobile home park, camp, park or lot where a
trailer, tent, recreational vehicle, mobile home, motor home, or other
similar habitation is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by
transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.



   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession or the right to the use or
possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, and shall further include any space, lot, area
or site in any trailer court, recreational vehicle park, mobile home park,
camp, park or lot where a trailer, tent, recreational vehicle, mobile home,
motor home or other similar habitation is occupied or intended or designed
for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.



   OPERATOR.  The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or
any other capacity.  Whether the operator performs his functions through a
managing agent or of any type or character other than an employee, the
managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this
subchapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. 
Compliance with the provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or
the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or
any other group or combination acting as a unit.



   RENT.  The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the
occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in
money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and
property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.



   TAX COLLECTOR.  The Tax and License Collector and his deputies and
authorized employees of the city.



   TRANSIENT.  Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting
portions of calendar days as full days.  Any such person so occupying space
in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has
expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the
occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy.  In determining whether
a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior
and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
subchapter may be considered.



('81 Code, § 3.20.020)  (Ord. 841, passed  - -85)



§ 37.67  IMPOSITION OF TAX; AMOUNT; DEBT TO CITY; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel in the
incorporated area of the city, each transient is subject to and shall pay a
tax in the amount of 10% of the rent charged by the operator.



   (B)   This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city
which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city.



   (C)   No tax is due or may be collected pursuant to this section in
the following cases:



      (1)   When the transient exercised occupancy or was entitled
to occupancy for 30 days or more;



      (2)   When the transient is by treaty, or federal law, or
state law exempt from payment of transient occupancy taxes. Such transients
include, without limitation, a federally chartered credit union; insurance
companies pursuant to the California Constitution; and the American Red
Cross; or



      (3)   When hotel rent is directly paid by the United States
Government or the State of California or their respective instrumentalities.
This exemption does not exempt a transient who is employed by an exempt
entity from payment of the tax when the payment is later to be reimbursed by
the entity.



   (D)   The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to create a
standard form, in accordance with applicable law, for persons claiming an
exemption under this section.



('81 Code, § 3.20.030)  (Ord. 794, passed  - -83; Am. Ord. 1175, passed
7-16-07)



§ 37.68  PAYMENT OF TAX SIMULTANEOUS WITH RENT PAYMENT.



   (A)   The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel
at the time the rent is paid.



   (B)   If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of
the tax shall be paid with each installment.



   (C)   The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to
occupy space in the hotel.



   (D)   If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid to the operator of
the hotel, the Tax Collector may require the transient to pay such tax
directly to the Tax Collector.



('81 Code, § 3.20.040)  (Ord. 984, passed  - -94)



§ 37.69  COLLECTION; RECEIPT FOR PAYMENT; CERTAIN ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this subchapter
to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every
transient.



   (B)   The amount of the tax shall be separately stated from the
amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for
payment from the operator.



   (C)   The operator of a hotel shall not advertise or state in any
manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will
be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the
rent or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner
provided in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 3.20.050)



§ 37.70  PRESERVATION OF RECORDS.



   Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any
tax imposed by this subchapter must keep and preserve, for not less than four
years, all records of the operator which may be necessary, in the Tax
Collector's judgment, to determine the amount of such tax.



('81 Code, § 3.20.060)  (Ord. 1175, passed 7-16-07)



§ 37.71  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   Certificate required.



      (1)   Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter or within 30 days after commencing business,
whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to
transients shall register the hotel with the Tax Collector.



      (2)   Upon such registration the Tax Collector shall issue to
such operator a transient occupancy registration certificate.



('81 Code, § 3.20.070)



   (B)   Posting of certificate.  The operator shall post and at all
times keep posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the hotel the
transient occupancy registration certificate.



('81 Code, § 3.20.080)



   (C)   Contents.  The transient occupancy registration certificate
shall, among other things, state the following:



      (1)   The name of the operator;



      (2)   The address of the hotel;



      (3)   The date upon which the certificate was issued;



      (4)   The following notice:



This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person
named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform
Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Collector for
the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and
remitting said tax to the Tax Collector.  This certificate does not
authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any
lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without
strictly complying with all applicable laws.  This certificate does not
constitute a permit.



('81 Code, § 3.20.090)



§ 37.72  REPORTING PERIOD.



   Each operator shall make a return to the Tax Collector, postmarked on
or before the last day of the month following the close of the calendar
quarter, or at the close of any other reporting period which may be
established by the Tax Collector, on forms provided by him, of the total
rents charged and received and the amount of the tax collected for transient
occupants.



('81 Code, § 3.20.100)  (Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 37.73  REMITTANCE OF TAX REQUIRED.



   (A)   At the time the return is filed, the operator shall remit the
full amount of the tax collected to the Tax Collector.



   (B)   The Tax Collector may establish shorter, longer or other
reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary or
expedient in order to issue collection of the tax.



   (C)   The Tax Collector may require further information in the
return.



   (D)   Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of
business for any reason.



('81 Code, § 3.20.110)



§ 37.74  COLLECTED TAXES HELD IN TRUST FOR CITY UNTIL REMITTANCE.



   Every operator shall hold in trust for the account of the city until
payment thereof is made to the Tax Collector all taxes collected by such
operator.



('81 Code, § 3.20.120)



§ 37.75  FAILURE TO REMIT; FRAUD; INTEREST.



   (A)   Original delinquency.  Any operator who fails to remit any
tax imposed by this subchapter within the time required shall pay a penalty
of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.



('81 Code, § 3.20.130)



   (B)   Continued delinquency.  Any operator who fails to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax
and the 10% penalty first imposed.



('81 Code, § 3.20.140)



   (C)   Fraud.  If the Tax Collector determines that the nonpayment
of any remittance due under this subchapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25%
of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties
stated in divisions (A) and (B) of this section.



('81 Code, § 3.20.150)



   (D)   Interest.  In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator
who fails to remit any tax imposed by this subchapter, shall pay interest at
the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the
amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent until paid.



('81 Code, § 3.20.160)



   (E)   Penalties and interest merged with tax.  Every penalty
imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this subchapter
shall become a part of the tax required to be paid in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 3.20.170)



§ 37.76  DETERMINATION OF TAX BY TAX COLLECTOR UPON FAILURE OF OPERATOR TO
COLLECT AND REPORT TAX.



   (A)   If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to
make, within the time provided in this subchapter, any report and remittance
of the tax or any portion thereof required by this subchapter, the Tax
Collector shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts
and information upon which to base his estimate of the tax due.



   (B)   As soon as the Tax Collector procures such fact and
information, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator
the tax, interest and penalties provided for in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 3.20.180)



§ 37.77  NOTICE OF AMOUNT ASSESSED.



   If the Tax Collector makes a determination pursuant to this subchapter,
he shall give notice of the amount so assessed, either by serving such notice
personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of business.



('81 Code, § 3.20.190)



§ 37.78  APPLICATION FOR HEARING.



   (A)   Within 10 days after the serving upon any operator of such
notice, such operator may apply in writing to the Tax Collector for a hearing
on the amount assessed.



   (B)   If application by the operator for a hearing is not made
within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any,
determined by the Tax Collector shall become final and conclusive and
immediately due and payable.



('81 Code, § 3.20.200)



§ 37.79  HEARING.



   (A)   If such application is made, the Tax Collector shall give not
less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed in this
subchapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the
notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax,
interest and penalties.



   (B)   At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence
why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed.



   (C)   After such hearing, the Tax Collector shall determine the
proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the
person in the manner prescribed in this subchapter of such determination and
the amount of such tax, interest and penalties.



   (D)   The amount determined to be due shall be paid within 15 days
unless an appeal is taken as provided in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 3.20.210)



§ 37.80  APPEAL FROM DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Time for appeal.  Any operator deeming himself aggrieved by
any decision of the Tax Collector with respect to the amount of the tax,
interest and penalties found to be due may appeal to the City Council by
filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the serving
or mailing of the determination of the tax due.



('81 Code, § 3.20.220)



   (B)   Notice of hearing.  Upon the filing of a notice of appeal,
the City Clerk shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and he
shall give not less than five days notice in writing, either personally or by
United States mail, postage prepaid.



('81 Code, § 3.20.230)



   (C)   Decision of appeal.  The City Council shall hear and consider
all evidence produced by the appellant and other witnesses, and written
findings thereon, which shall be final, shall be served upon the appellant in
the manner prescribed in division (B) of this section.



('81 Code, § 3.20.240)



§ 37.81  REFUND OR CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT.



   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city under this subchapter, the operator may request such
amount be credited to subsequent taxes, or the amount may be refunded as
provided in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 3.20.250)



§ 37.82  CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL OF CLAIM.



   Refund or credit in the amount overpaid, paid more than once or
erroneously or illegally collected or received shall be approved by the city
only when it is established to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that the
person from whom the tax was collected was not a transient and that the
amount of the tax so collected has in fact been refunded to the transient or
credited to the account of the transient.



('81 Code, § 3.20.260)



§ 37.83  REFUND TO OPERATOR OR TRANSIENT.



   (A)   When an operator shows to the satisfaction of the Tax
Collector that he no longer is operating a hotel in the incorporated area of
the city or will cease such operation before the credit can be applied and
files a proper claim therefor, in lieu of such credit, the Tax Collector
shall refund to such operator the amount overpaid, paid more than once or
erroneously or illegally collected or received.



('81 Code, § 3.20.270)



   (B)   A transient or other guest of a hotel may obtain a refund of
taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected
or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in § 37.81
if the tax was paid by the transient or other guest directly to the Tax
Collector or if the transient or other guest has paid the tax to the operator
and established to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that the transient
or other guest has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who
collected the tax.



('81 Code, § 3.20.280)



§ 37.84  CONSIDERATION OF EVIDENCE SUPPORTING CLAIM.



   The Tax Collector shall consider all competent evidence in support of
any claim for refund.



('81 Code, § 3.20.290)



§ 37.85  TAX DEEMED DEBT.



   (A)   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to
the city.



   (B)   Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid
to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city.



('81 Code, § 3.20.300)



§ 37.86  ACTION TO COLLECT TAX.



   Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be subject to an action brought in the name of the city for
the recovery of such amount.



('81 Code, § 3.20.310)



§ 37.87  VIOLATIONS.



   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:



   (A)   Fails or refuses to register as required by this subchapter;



   (B)   Fails or refuses to furnish any return required to be made, or
fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by
the Tax Collector;



   (C)   Renders a false or fraudulent return;



   (D)   If required by this subchapter to make, render, sign or verify
any report or claim, makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with
intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due;



   (E)   Collects the tax due pursuant to this subchapter from any
transient and fails to pay the same to the city;



   (F)   Violates in any way any other provisions of this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 3.20.320)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 37.88  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP; TAX CLEARANCE CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7283.5, and as that
section may from time to time be amended, a purchaser, transferee, or other
person attempting to obtain ownership of a transient occupancy facility, may
submit a written request to the city that the Tax Collector issue a tax
clearance certificate stating the amount of tax and any accrued penalties and
interest due and owing, if any.



   (B)   The Tax Collector must, within 90 days after receiving the
written request for a tax clearance certificate, issue the tax clearance
certificate or may conduct an audit of the subject transient occupancy
facility. Any such audit must be completed within 90 days after the date the
records of the subject transient occupancy facility were made available to
the Tax Collector and a tax clearance certificate issued within 30 days after
the audit is complete.



   (C)   If, following an audit, the Tax Collector determines that the
current operator's records are insufficient to assess the amount of tax due
and owing, the Tax Collector must, within 30 days after making that
determination, notify the prospective purchaser, transferee or other person
that a tax clearance certificate cannot be issued.



   (D)   If the Tax Collector does not comply with the request for a
tax clearance certificate, the purchaser, transferee or other person that
obtains ownership of the transient occupancy facility is not liable for any
transient occupancy tax obligation incurred before the date of the purchase
or transfer of the property.



   (E)   The tax clearance certificate must state the following:



      (1)   The amount of tax, interest and penalties then due an
owing;



      (2)   The period of time for which the tax clearance
certificate is valid; and



      (3)   That the purchaser, transferee, or other person may rely
upon the tax clearance certificate as conclusive evidence of the tax
liability associated with the property as of the date specified on the
certificate.



   (F)   Any purchaser, transferee, or other person who does not obtain
a tax clearance certificate under this section, or who obtains a tax
clearance certificate that indicates that tax is due and owing and fails to
withhold, for the benefit of the county, sufficient funds in the escrow
account for the purchase of the property to satisfy the transient tax
liability, is liable for the amount of tax due and owing.



(Ord. 1175, passed 7-16-07)



CHAPTER 38:  CITY POLICIES



Section




General Provisions




   38.01   Labor on public property or public works



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.01  LABOR ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 36904,
the Chief of Police may require all persons imprisoned for any violation of
this code or any other ordinance of the city to labor on public property or
public works within the city.



   (B)   In accordance with the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 1203.1
and Cal. Gov't Code § 25359, all persons granted summary probation may be
compelled to perform labor under the direction of the probation officer, or
such other person as the court may direct, on the public works or ways,
public grounds, roads, streets, alleys, highways, fire-breaks, fire roads,
riding or hiking trails, public buildings or in such other places in the
county as deemed advisable for the benefit of the public; provided, however,
that no probationer shall be compelled to perform labor who may be physically
unable to do so or whose safekeeping may be endangered thereby.



   (C)   No probationer engaged in the performance of labor pursuant to
the provisions of this section shall be considered an employee of or to be
employed by the city or any department thereof.  Furthermore no such person
shall come under any of the provisions of the Worker's Compensation Law,
being Cal. Labor Code §§ 3201 et seq. and the Occupa-tional Safety and
Health Act, being Cal. Labor Code §§ 6300 et seq., or be entitled to any
benefits thereunder on behalf of himself or any other person.



('81 Code, § 1.16.010)



TITLE IV:  CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES



   Chapter



      40.   EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS



      41.   PURCHASING



      42.   DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY



CHAPTER 40:  EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS



Section



   40.01   Purpose



   40.02   Binding contracts



   40.03   City Council authority



   40.04   Emergency contracting



   40.05   Signature authority



   40.06   Employment contracts



§ 40.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's general and specific
contracting powers and, without limitation, Cal. Gov't Code § 40602 for the
purpose of setting forth the requirements to bind the city by contract.



(Ord. 1078, passed 11-17-03)



§ 40.02  BINDING CONTRACTS.



   The city is not bound by any contract unless the contract is in
writing, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and signed on behalf of
the city by an officer or officers as set forth in this chapter.  Any
officer must sign a contract on the city's behalf when directed to do so by
the City Council.



(Ord. 1078, passed 11-17-03)



§ 40.03  CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY.



   Unless otherwise provided in this code, a resolution, or ordinance, the
City Council must approve all contracts and direct the Mayor, or other
officer, to sign a contract on the city's behalf.



(Ord. 1078, passed 11-17-03)



§ 40.04  EMERGENCY CONTRACTING.



   In the event of a declared state of emergency, the City Manager may
bind the city, with or without a written contract, for the acquisition of
equipment, materials, supplies, labor, services or other items.



(Ord. 1078, passed 11-17-03)



§ 40.05  SIGNATURE AUTHORITY.



   In accordance with Cal. Gov't Code § 40602, the following officers are
authorized to sign contracts on the city's behalf:



   (A)   The Mayor;



   (B)   The City Manager when directed to do so by the City Council,
resolution, ordinance, or any provision of this code;



   (C)   The City Manager for contracts of $50,000 or less;



   (D)   Department directors or their designees for contracts less
than $5,000.



(Ord. 1078, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 40.06  EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS.



   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the employment of any
person by the city at a regular salary.



(Ord. 1078, passed 11-17-03)



CHAPTER 41:  PURCHASING



Section



   41.01   Purpose



   41.02   Definitions



   41.03   Purchasing Officer designated



   41.04   Purchasing Agent’s powers and duties



   41.05   Encumbering funds



   41.06   Requisitions



   41.07   Purchases less than $5,000



   41.08   Purchases between $5,000 and $50,000 – Informal bid process



   41.09   Purchases above $50,000 – Formal bid process



   41.10   Waiver



   41.11   Cooperative purchasing



   41.12   Emergency purchasing



   41.13   Segmentation prohibited



   41.14   Inspection



   41.15   Professional services



   41.16   Local preference



§ 41.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s general and specific
contracting powers and, without limitation, Cal. Gov’t Code § 40602 for
the purpose of setting forth the requirements to bind the city by contract.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:



   CONTRACT may include a purchase order, contract, or professional
services contract as the context may dictate.



   GENERAL SERVICES mean services that are manual or routine in nature.
Examples include janitorial services, landscape maintenance and general
administrative services.



   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES are predominately intellectual and require
specialized knowledge, education, technical ability, licenses and/or
certification. Examples include legal services, engineering services, banking
services, auditing and software development/implementation.



   SUPPLIES include consumables, materials and durable equipment.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.03  PURCHASING OFFICER DESIGNATED.



   The City Manager is designated as the city’s Purchasing Officer. By
written designation, the City Manager may delegate Purchasing Officer
responsibilities to the city’s Purchasing Agent, or another appointed
officer. Supplies and general services for city departments must be purchased
in accordance with this code, administrative policy and procedures approved
by the City Manager, and such additional regulations that the City Council
may adopt.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.04  PURCHASING AGENT’S POWERS AND DUTIES.



   In addition to those powers granted by applicable law, the Purchasing
Agent has the authority and duty to:



   (A)   Purchase or contract for supplies and general services;



   (B)   Promulgate administrative rules and regulations to implement
the purposes of this chapter and as approved by the City Manager;



   (C)   Prescribe and maintain the documentation as necessary for the
proper operation of this purchasing system;



   (D)   Supervise the inspection of all supplies and general services
purchased under this chapter, in order to ensure conformance with city
specifications;



   (E)   Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on
all purchases and sales;



   (F)   Perform such other tasks as may be necessary for the proper
conduct of a centralized, cost-effective purchasing system.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.05  ENCUMBERING FUNDS.



   Except as otherwise provided, the Purchasing Agent may not purchase
supplies and general services unless there is an unencumbered appropriation
in the fund account against which the purchase would be charged.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.06  REQUISITIONS.



   All city departments must submit requisitions for supplies and general
services to the Purchasing Agent, unless otherwise allowed in the
administrative policy and procedures.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.07  PURCHASES LESS THAN $5,000.



   Purchases made for supplies with an estimated value of less than $5,000
may be purchased on the open market without bidding requirements. However,
multiple bids are encouraged and written quotes shall be required for
purchases exceeding $500.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.08  PURCHASES BETWEEN $5,000 AND $50,000 – INFORMAL BID PROCESS.



   Purchases made for supplies and general services with an estimated
value of between $5,000 and $50,000 require the following:



   (A)   Purchases must, whenever possible, be based upon at least
three bids and be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder;



   (B)   Bids must be written;



   (C)   The Purchasing Agent must solicit and award such bids.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.09  PURCHASES ABOVE $50,000 – FORMAL BID PROCESS.



   Purchases made for supplies and general services with an estimated
value of more than $50,000 require the following:



   (A)   Notice inviting formal bids must be solicited at least ten
days before the deadline for submitting bids by the Purchasing Agent through
advertisement and/or posting on the City of Santa Paula’s official website.



   (B)   The notice soliciting bids must describe the supplies or
general services needed in general and generic terms, identify security
required for the bid, how bid specifications can be obtained, and designate
the deadline and place for submitting bids.



   (C)   The Purchasing Agent may require bidders to secure bids and
performance in a manner approved by the Purchasing Agent and in a form
approved by the City Attorney. Unsuccessful bidders are entitled to the
return of bid security within 60 days after the date of the award.



   (D)   (1)   Bids must be submitted to the City Clerk’s office
in a sealed envelope and be clearly marked as a bid along with the bidder’s
name and bid number written on the outside of the envelope. The Purchasing
Agent will open properly submitted bids at the time and place stated in the
notice inviting bids. A written record and tabulation must be made at the
time all bids are received and then opened.



      (2)   A secure, web-based system or other appropriate media
may be used in lieu of sealed bids opened in public, provided that the
Purchasing Agent has approved the system for accuracy, confidentiality and
reliability.



   (E)   Bids may be evaluated based upon bid amount, compliance with
bid specifications, responsibility of the bidder, and any other reasonable
matter identified in the notice soliciting bids, this code, or any other rule
or regulation promulgated to implement this chapter.



   (F)   The Purchasing Agent, or department seeking the supplies or
general services, will make a recommendation to the City Council regarding
the award of a contract based upon the Purchasing Agent’s concurrence. The
City Council has sole authority in award of bids exceeding $50,000.



   (G)   If the city does not receive any bids, the Purchasing Agent
may:



      (1)   Abandon the purchase;



      (2)   Rebid the purchase to an extended supplier base;



      (3)   Rebid the purchase under revised specifications.



   (H)   If the City Council determines bids are unacceptably high, or
specifications were misleading, the Purchasing Agent may reject any bids
presented and the item may be re-bid.



   (I)   The City Council may reject all bids or award the purchase
contract to the best qualified bidder whose bid or proposal fulfills the
purpose intended according to criteria designated in the solicitation,
provided that the contract award amount is within the unencumbered
appropriation for that item. The City Council may waive any minor bid
irregularities.



   (J)   If a successful bidder refuses to comply with, or fails to
execute, a contract issued by the city within ten days after being awarded
the contract, the city may cancel the award and retain any bid security.
Compliance with contract requirements includes, without limitation,
submission of insurance documentation. Should this occur, the City Council
may award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.10  WAIVER.



   The City Council may waive the purchasing procedures otherwise required
by this chapter when required or desirable and in conformance with state
law.  For purposes of example, and not limitation, the City Council may
waive bidding requirements for obtaining supplies and general services that
are available from only one vendor as supported by appropriate documentation.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.11  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.



   The procedures set forth above need not be followed where the
Purchasing Agent identifies a cooperative purchasing program administered by
a government-oriented entity, or; a local, state, or federal governmental
agency. When in the city’s best overall interests, the Purchasing Agent may
enter into a contract for the purchase of supplies and general services
awarded through such a cooperative purchasing program. City Council consent
is required for such arrangements where the estimated value of the supplies
or general services exceed $50,000.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.12  EMERGENCY PURCHASING.



   The City Manager or acting City Manager may authorize emergency
purchases without observing the bidding procedures set forth in this chapter
upon a finding that such purchases are required for the immediate protection
of public health, safety, or welfare and that there is an immediate or
imminent emergency. A declaration of emergency as set forth in this code is
conclusive evidence of such an event. The City Manager or acting City Manager
must provide a report to the City Council at its next special or regular
meeting regarding such emergency purchases, which set forth the circumstances
requiring the action.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.13  SEGMENTATION PROHIBITED.



   It is a violation of this chapter to knowingly take action to separate
purchases into smaller units or segments solely for the purpose of evading
the competitive formal or informal bidding requirements set forth in this
chapter.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)  Penalty, see
Ch. 13



§ 41.14  INSPECTION.



   The Purchasing Agent or department requesting the item shall inspect
all deliveries of supplies and equipment to assure conformance with the
contract or order specifications prior to authorizing payment.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.15  PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.



   The City Manager may contract for professional services in an amount
not to exceed $50,000. The manner by which professional services are selected
and contracted shall be prescribed by administrative policy and procedures.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 41.16  LOCAL PREFERENCE.



   The city will provide a 1% preference to businesses within the City of
Santa Paula submitting bids to the city in order to overcome any competitive
disadvantage relating to local sales taxes.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



CHAPTER 42:  DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY



Section



   42.01   Authority



   42.02   Property without salvage value



   42.03   Property valued over $50,000



   42.04   Records



   42.05   Donations



   42.06   Proceeds of sale



§ 42.01  AUTHORITY.



   The Purchasing Officer, as defined in Chapter 41, is authorized to sell
or dispose of surplus personal property having a salvage value in the open
market.  Property disposition may occur by public auction, competitive
sealed bids, or exchange or trade in for new goods.  The sale or lease of
surplus personal property to a governmental, public, or quasi-public agency
may be without advertisement for or receipt of bids.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 42.02  PROPERTY WITHOUT SALVAGE VALUE.



   Surplus personal property without salvage value, as determined by the
Purchasing Officer, or designee, should be disposed of in a manner that
salvages recyclable components.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 42.03  PROPERTY VALUED OVER $50,000.



   The City Council must direct disposition of surplus personal property
with a value estimated at $50,000 or greater based upon a recommendation from
the Purchasing Officer.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 42.04  RECORDS.



   The Purchasing Officer, or designee, must keep regular logs showing
surplus personal property disposed of, the method of disposal, and the
amounts recovered from its disposal and maintain records for public
inspection relative to the disposal of surplus personal property for a period
of time in compliance with state law and the city’s records retention
schedule.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 42.05  DONATIONS.



   Upon the advance written approval of the City Manager, surplus personal
property may be donated to governmental, public or quasi-public agencies,
charities, or non-profit organizations.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 42.06  PROCEEDS OF SALE.



   Proceeds from the sale of surplus personal property must be deposited
into the appropriate city fund.



(Ord. 1079, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT



      51.   SEWER SYSTEM AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



      52.   WATER



      53.   UNDERGROUND UTILITIES



      54.   STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT



      55.   UTILITY BILLING



      56.   PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS



      57.   WATER SOFTENERS



      58.   WATER CONSERVATION



      59.   LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS



CHAPTER 50:  INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions





   50.001   Purpose





   50.002   Definitions





   50.003   Prohibited acts





   50.004   Categories





Collection Regulations





   50.015   Collection required





   50.016   Containers; use





   50.017   Limitations on placement and removal of solid waste





   50.018   Frequency of collection and removal





   50.019   Special collections





   50.020   Collection equipment





   50.021   Collection trucks; noise





   50.022   Self-haulers





   50.023   Self-haul permits





   50.024   Ownership of recyclable solid waste placed for collection





   50.025   Cleanup responsibility





   50.026   Recyclable material





   50.027   Green waste





   50.028   Unlawful entry





Fees and Charges





   50.040   Fees





   50.041   Service charges





   50.042   Franchise and customer fees





   50.043   Fee waiver





   50.044   Collecting fees and charges





   50.045   Liability for fees





   50.046   Special assessment





   50.047   Interest on unpaid assessments





   50.048   Penalties generally





   50.049   Service termination





   50.050   Service restoration





   50.051   Liability for fines





Solid Waste Franchises





   50.065   Franchise requirement





   50.066   Grant of solid waste franchises





   50.067   Scope of solid waste franchises





   50.068   Solid waste franchise characteristics





   50.069   Franchisee subject to applicable law, police power





   50.070   Acts at franchisee's expense





Franchise Requirements





   50.080   Form





   50.081   Franchise fee





   50.082   Indemnification





   50.083   Liability insurance





   50.084   Business licenses





   50.085   Continued collection services





Applications for Grant, Renewal or Termination of Franchise





   50.095   Application required





   50.096   Application form





   50.097   Application content





   50.098   Application fees





   50.099   Legal qualifications





   50.100   Review of application





   50.101   City's approval or denial





   50.102   City approval required for transfer





   50.103   Transfers without consent





   50.104   Exceptions





   50.105   Approval does not constitute waiver





Access to Records





   50.115   Open books and records





   50.116   Proprietary information





   50.117   Voluminous materials





Additional Remedies





   50.130   Revocation and suspension of solid waste franchises





   50.131   Termination of solid waste franchises





Construction and Demolition Diversion





   50.140   Deconstruction and salvage and recovery





   50.141   Diversion requirements





   50.142   Information required before issuance of permit





   50.143   Deposit required





   50.144   Administrative fee





   50.145   On-site practices





   50.146   Reporting





Enforcement





   50.155   Enforcement





   50.156   City Attorney enforcement authority





   50.157   Civil action by authorized recycling agent




GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.001  PURPOSE.




   This chapter is adopted in accordance with Article XI, § 7 of the
California Constitution and Cal. Public Resources Code § 40059 in order to
protect public health, safety and well-being, to control the spread of
vectors, and to limit sources of air pollution, noise and traffic within the
city.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.002  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.  Words and phrases not given a meaning by this chapter have
the meaning set forth in the Act and  the regulations promulgated to
implement the Act, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions found
in RCRA and the regulations promulgated to implement RCRA, as amended.



   AB 939 or ACT means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of
1989 codified in part at Cal. Public Resources Code, §§ 40000 et seq., as
amended.



   BULKY WASTE or BULKY GOODS means and includes, without limitation,
large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses, white
goods, tires and oversized yard waste such as tree trunks and large branches
not larger than two feet in diameter and four feet in length, discarded from
residential premises in the city.



   CCR means the California Code of Regulations.



   CERCLA means the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act as set forth at 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., as amended.



   CITY MANAGER means the City Manager or designee.



   CIVIC LITTER CONTAINERS means city- owned receptacles located in public
areas for disposal of waste generated by the public, which meet the standards
of 14 CCR §§ 17830 et seq.



   COLLECTION means the act of collecting solid waste, at or near the
place of generation or accumulation, by the city or a franchisee which
arranged with a responsible person for collection of solid waste.



   COMMERCIAL BINS means bins provided by the city or a franchisee,
generally having a volume of three cubic yards designed for the deposit of
solid waste, placed at commercial premises for collection of commercial solid
waste and charged at commercial rates.  COMMERCIAL BINS do not include
construction and demolition bins, roll-offs or low-boys placed at residential
premises.



   COMMERCIAL PREMISES means all premises in the city, other than
residential premises, where solid wastes are generated or accumulated. 
COMMERCIAL PREMISES refers to location and not ownership.  The term
includes, without limitation, stores; offices; federal, state, county and
local governmental institutions; schools; restaurants; hotels; motels;
manufacturing, processing, or assembling shops or plants; hospitals; clinics;
nursing homes; convalescent centers; and dormitories.



   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE means all types of solid waste, including green
waste and recyclable solid waste, generated or accumulated at commercial
premises.  COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTES does not include residential solid waste
or recyclable material.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS means used or discarded
construction materials removed from any premises during the construction,
renovation, or razing of a structure.



   CONTAINER means any commercial bin, residential solid waste container,
vessel, can or other receptacle used for the temporary accumulation,
collection and removal of solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes and
green waste.



   CONTRACTOR means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a
contractor’s license of any type under the laws of the State of California,
or who performs any construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping
service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the city.



   CONSTRUCTION means all building, landscaping, remodeling, addition,
removal or destruction involving the use or disposal of designated recyclable
and reusable materials.



   CUSTOMER means persons, including responsible persons, who obtain
collection services from the city or its franchisee.



   DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS means:



      (1)   Discarded materials generally considered to be not water
soluble and non-hazardous in nature, including, without limitation, steel,
glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, and lumber
from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction
or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or
landscaping, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other
vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and
development operations for a construction project.



      (2)   Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps
from any construction and/or landscape project.



      (3)   Non-construction and demolition debris wood scraps.



      (4)   De minimis amounts of other non- hazardous wastes that
are generated at construction or demolition projects, provided such amounts
are consistent with best management practices of the industry.



   DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE AND REUSABLE MATERIALS means:



      (1)   Masonry building materials including all products
generally used in construction including, without limitation, asphalt,
concrete, rock, stone and brick.



      (2)   Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber,
fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA
pressure treated, contaminated or painted.



      (3)   Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts,
shrubs, stumps, logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from
a site for construction or other use.



      (4)   Metals including all metal scrap such as, without
limitation, pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences.



      (5)   Roofing materials including wood shingles as well as
asphalt, stone and slate based roofing material.



      (6)   Salvageable materials includes all salvageable materials
and structures including, without limitation, wallboard, doors, windows,
fixtures, toilets, sinks, bath tubs and appliances.



   DROP BOX means and includes low-boy bins and roll-off bins.



   ELECTRONIC WASTE has the same meaning as 22 CCR § 66273.9 for consumer
electronic devices that exhibit the characteristic of toxicity.



   FRANCHISE or SOLID WASTE FRANCHISE means the right and privilege
granted by the city:



      (1)   To arrange for collecting solid waste;



      (2)   To transport solid waste to landfills, transformation
facilities or other licensed solid waste management facilities; and/or



      (3)   To recycle solid waste collected within the city.



   FRANCHISEE means a solid waste enterprise, as defined by Cal. Public
Resources Code § 40193, holding a valid solid waste franchise issued
pursuant to this chapter.



   FRANCHISE FEE means the fee or assessment imposed by the city on a
franchisee which was granted a solid waste franchise in accordance with this
chapter.



   GARDENERS means persons who possess a city license or permit for
gardening and landscaping maintenance services for hire.



   GENERATOR means any person which produces solid waste.



   GREEN MATERIAL COMPOSTING FACILITY has the same definition as set forth
in 14 CCR § 17852.



   GREEN WASTE (also sometimes referred to as YARD WASTE) means a form of
solid waste composed of leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other
forms of organic matter generated from landscapes and gardens, separated from
other forms of solid waste.  GREEN WASTE includes trees and bushes but does
not include stumps or branches exceeding four inches in diameter or four feet
in length, dirt, palm fronds, yucca or cactus.



   GROSS REVENUES means any and all revenue or compensation in any form
derived directly or indirectly by a franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries,
parents and any person or entity in which a franchisee has a financial
interest, from the collection, transportation, processing, disposal and other
services with respect to solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes and
green waste, collected within the city, in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, pursuant to a solid waste franchise, permit, or
license.  GROSS REVENUES include, without limitation, monthly customer fees
for collection of solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes, special
pickup fees, commercial bin and drop box rental and collection fees, fees for
redelivery of commercial bins and drop boxes and revenue from the sale of
recyclable solid wastes, without subtracting franchise fees or any other cost
of doing business.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE means any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined
as a “hazardous substance” or “hazardous waste” pursuant to RCRA and
CERCLA, or HSAA, or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management
Board.  HAZARDOUS WASTE may also include electronic waste when it enters the
waste stream.  Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two
or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term
HAZARDOUS WASTE will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing
definition.



   HSAA means the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous Substance Account Act
as set forth at Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 25300 et seq., as amended.



   IWMB means the California Integrated Waste Management Board.



   MONTHLY BASIS means a billing period not exceeding 30 days.



   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL means multi- family residences, including
apartments and condominiums (in which each unit has separate cooking and
bathing facilities) of two or more units at which commercial bins, not
residential solid waste containers, are used for the temporary accumulation
of solid waste.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY means any city street, sidewalk, pedestrian path,
bike path or any other “public way,” as defined by Cal. Streets &
Highways Code § 18609, and any successor statute.



   RCRA means the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act as set forth at
42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., as amended.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL means an item (or items) which has commercial value
and which is sold for compensation or donated to an entity other than a
franchisee.  RECYCLABLE MATERIALS are not part of the waste stream. 
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS lose their character as recyclable materials when placed
into the waste stream, thereby becoming solid waste subject to this chapter.



   RECYCLABLE SOLID WASTE means a form of solid waste designated as a
recyclable solid waste by the city, or a franchisee and which is separated by
a customer from non-recyclable solid waste.  RECYCLABLE SOLID WASTE is a
part of the solid waste stream which can be reused or processed into a form
suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture, consistent with the
requirements of the Act.  The term RECYCLABLE SOLID WASTE includes both
mixed recyclables which are separated from other solid waste and
source-separated single- category recyclable solid waste.  RECYCLABLE SOLID
WASTE does not include those potentially recoverable items which are
commingled with non-recyclable solid waste, for example, commingled solid
waste and potentially recyclable articles or materials, or recyclable
materials.



   RESIDENTIAL or RESIDENTIAL PREMISES includes single-family residences.
The terms do not include hotels, motels, rooming houses, hospitals, nursing
homes, convalescent centers, dormitories or barracks or other group living
places, or multifamily units of two or more units, using commercial bins for
the temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste.  RESIDENTIAL or
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES refers to location and not ownership or an interest in
property.



   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINER means a container (a trash can,
barrel or cart) provided by a customer or a franchisee, used and intended for
accumulating and collection residential solid waste.  The term does not
include multi-family residential bins placed at multi-family units of two or
more units, nor those commercial bins used by commercial customers.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON means the person responsible for daily operations of
every residential or commercial premises located within the city’s
jurisdiction including, without limitation, the property owner.



   SELF-HAULER  means persons disposing of solid waste which they, or
occupants of premises for which they are responsible, generated who possess a
self-hauler permit issued pursuant to this chapter.



   WHITE GOODS means discarded enameled household appliances, such as
refrigerators, freezers, stoves, washer/dryers, water heaters, dishwashers,
trash compactors and similar items.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)




§ 50.003  PROHIBITED ACTS.




   (A)   Unapproved containers.  It is unlawful for any person to keep
solid waste in containers or commercial bins other than those approved by the
city or a franchisee.





   (B)   Unlawful accumulation.  It is unlawful for any person to
accumulate solid waste for more than seven consecutive days.





   (C)   Unlawful storage. It is unlawful for any person keep upon any
premises in the city any solid waste which is offensive, obnoxious or
unsanitary.





   (D)   Unlawful use of containers.  It is unlawful for any person,
other than the responsible person or a franchisee authorized by the
responsible person, to remove any container from the location where the
container was placed for storage or collection, or remove any solid waste
from any container, or move the container from the location in which it was
placed for storage or collection, or apply any paint or markings (commonly
known as "graffiti" or "tagging") to any solid waste container without the
container owner's prior written approval.





   (E)   Unlawful bulky goods disposal.  It is unlawful for any person
to place bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way without
first having made arrangements with the city or a franchisee for the pickup
of the bulky goods.





   (F)   Unlawful disposal in civic litter container. It is unlawful
for any person to place or deposit institutional, commercial, industrial,
special, or hazardous waste in any civic litter container.





   (G)   Unlawful burning.  It is unlawful for any person to burn
solid waste within the city, except in an approved incinerator or
transformation facility or other device for which a permit was issued and
which complies with all applicable permit and other regulations of air
pollution control authorities and provided any such act of burning in all
respects complies with all other laws, rules and regulations.





   (H)   Unlawful disposal.  It is unlawful for any person to place
solid waste in, or otherwise use the solid waste or recyclable solid waste or
green waste containers of another, without the permission of the other person.





   (I)   Failure to clean is unlawful.  It is unlawful for any person
transporting solid waste, including recyclable solid waste or green waste
within the city, to fail to immediately clean up, or arrange for the
immediate cleanup, of any solid waste released, spilled or dumped into the
environment during removal or transport within the city by such person.





   (J)   Unlawful dumping prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
dump, deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge,
inject, bury or dispose into the environment (including by abandonment or
discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or
liquid waste of any kind whatsoever) any solid or liquid waste upon any
premises within the city, or to cause, suffer, or permit any solid or liquid
waste to come to be located upon any premises in the city, except in an
authorized or permitted solid waste container or at an authorized or
permitted solid waste facility.





   (K)   Solid waste facilities.  It is unlawful for any person to
construct or operate a solid waste management facility, including, without
limitation, a materials recovery facility, solid waste transfer or processing
station, composting facility, a buy-back or drop-off center, disposal
facility or a recycling center without first satisfying all city requirements
for land use, environmental and other approvals.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.004  CATEGORIES.




   The City Council may establish waste management collection categories,
including, without limitation, residential, multifamily residential,
commercial, industrial, special, special event, household hazardous waste,
recyclable solid waste, green waste and others, and may make or impose solid
waste franchise, license, contract or permit requirements which vary for the
categories.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



COLLECTION REGULATIONS



§ 50.015  COLLECTION REQUIRED.




   Responsible persons must arrange with the city or a franchisee for
collection services as set forth in this chapter except that responsible
persons may instead self-haul solid waste generated or accumulated on
premises of which they are in charge after first obtaining a self-haul permit
from the city pursuant to this chapter.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.016  CONTAINERS; USE.




   (A)   Responsible persons must keep in a suitable place one or more
containers capable of holding, without spilling, leaking, or emitting odors,
all solid waste that would ordinarily accumulate on the premises between the
time of two successive collections.





   (B)   Responsible persons must deposit or cause to be deposited in
containers or commercial bins provided or approved by the city or a
franchisee all solid waste generated or accumulated on those premises.





   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to place ashes which are not
cold and free from fire in any container.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.017  LIMITATIONS ON PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL OF SOLID WASTE.




   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place for collection any
residential solid waste container or commercial bin not conforming with the
residential solid waste container or commercial bin designated by the city or
franchisee.





   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to place a residential solid
waste container adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection if
the container and its contents weigh more than 50 pounds, unless automated
collection is used.





   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to place a container or any
bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection
service before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the regularly scheduled
collection day.  Bulky goods may not be set out for collection unless the
responsible person made prior arrangements with the city or a franchisee for
pick up of the bulky goods.





   (D)   During the hours for collection, residential solid waste
containers must be placed at the location designated by the franchisee
holding the residential solid waste franchise and be accessible for
mechanized pick-up, if mechanized pick-up methods are utilized by the
franchisee.  Except during the time a container is placed for curbside
collection, residential solid waste containers must not be visible from the
public right of way.  Commercial bins must be accessible to the franchisee
providing solid waste services at that location.





   (E)   Solid waste containers must be removed from any location
adjacent to a street or right-of-way not later than 8:00 p.m. on the day
following the regularly-scheduled collection day.





   (F)   No container or bin may be stored in any front yard or side
yard that is visible from a public street.





   (G)   A franchisee which was notified by a commercial customer or
the city that commercial solid waste service is to be discontinued at a
particular premises must remove all of its commercial bins from the premises
of the customer who is discontinuing commercial solid waste service within
one week after receiving notification that service is to be discontinued.





   (H)   No franchisee may place a commercial bin at any location
within the city unless the bin is clearly marked with the name, address and
telephone number of the owner of the bin, and the person responsible for
collection from the bin.  The identification must be waterproof and legible.





   (I)   Each franchisee must maintain its commercial bins within the
city in a manner to protect public health and safety and prevent the spread
of vectors.  Each franchisee must maintain its commercial bins in the city
free from any exterior paint or markings commonly referred to as "graffiti"
or "tagging."





   (J)   Each franchisee must post each of its commercial bins in the
city with conspicuous notices on each side of the commercial bin that the
commercial bin is not to be used for the disposal of hazardous waste.





   (K)   It is unlawful to schedule solid waste collection services
within 100 feet of a school between 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and 15 minutes
before and after school is scheduled to be dismissed.





   (L)   Violations of this section are punishable as infractions in
accordance with this code.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.018  FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION AND REMOVAL.




   (A)   Responsible persons must arrange to have all solid waste on
the premises (other than construction and demolition debris) collected and
removed at least once a week.





   (B)   Each franchisee must collect the contents of each commercial
bin (except construction and demolition bins) placed, located or maintained
in the city by that franchisee not less frequently than once per week.





   (C)   Subject to the requirements for minimum removals per week
responsible persons for commercial premises may specify the frequency of
collection of solid waste from the premises and the size and number of
commercial or multi-family residential bins required.





   (D)   In order to protect residents' quiet enjoyment of their
residential premises, collection from residential premises, both single
family and multifamily, may not be made between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. of any day.  Collection from commercial premises at locations more
than 600 feet from any residential zone and/or use within the city may not be
made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.  Collection from
commercial premises at locations less than 600 feet from any residential zone
and/or use within the city may not be made between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.  Subject to the foregoing requirements, collections may be made by
arrangement between the responsible person for commercial premises and the
franchisee.





   (E)   Franchisees must design their routes and times for collection
in a manner which minimizes air pollution, traffic, noise and wear and tear
on public and private streets and other problems with the potential to
adversely affect public health, safety, or the environment.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.019  SPECIAL COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   Customers may order special collections of such things as
bulky waste and drop boxes.  The responsible person must make arrangements
with the city or franchisee for the collection and disposal of bulky waste
which has accumulated on the premises.



   (B)   Drop boxes can be placed within the public right-of-way
pursuant to a valid encroachment permit issued pursuant to this code.  No
fee will be charged for encroachment permits issued pursuant to this section.



   (C)   In addition to any other restriction required by this code,
encroachment permits allowing drop boxes pursuant to this section will limit
placement of drop boxes to not more than three weeks.  In addition, the
encroachment permit will designate the location of any drop box as determined
in the sole discretion of the City Engineer.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 1158, passed 6-5-06)  Penalty, see Ch. 13




§ 50.020  COLLECTION EQUIPMENT.




   (A)   Vehicles used for collecting or transporting solid waste
within the city must be leak proof and equipped with a close-fitting cover
which is affixed in a manner that will prevent spilling, dropping or blowing
of any solid waste upon the public right-of-way during collection or
transportation.





   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to park, or cause to be parked
within the city any vehicle containing solid waste unless the vehicle is free
from odor and in a sanitary condition.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.021  COLLECTION TRUCKS; NOISE.




   It is unlawful for the noise level of collection vehicles during the
stationary compaction process to exceed 75 dB(A) at a distance of 25 feet
from the collection vehicle and at an elevation of five feet from the
horizontal base of such vehicles.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.022  SELF-HAULERS.




   Self-haulers and gardeners must deposit solid waste and green waste
only at lawfully permitted solid waste facilities or a compostable materials
handling facility or a green material composting facility (as defined in 14
CCR § 17852, as amended) or other site permitted (or exempt from permitting)
by the IWMB.  Each self-hauler and each gardener must report to the city, at
a frequency and in a manner determined by the city manager, the type,
quantity, volume, weight and destination of solid waste, including green
waste and recyclable solid wastes, collected in the city and transported from
the city, and present gate tickets or receipts to substantiate its disposal
reports.  Failure to submit required reports to the city is a basis for
revocation of a "self-haul" permit.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.023  SELF-HAUL PERMITS.




   Before collecting or transporting solid waste, including recyclable
solid wastes or green waste, each self-hauler and each gardener must obtain a
self-haul permit from the city.  The City Manager is authorized to
promulgate administrative policies and procedures for issuing the permits.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.024  OWNERSHIP OF RECYCLABLE SOLID WASTE PLACED FOR COLLECTION.




   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Public Resources Code § 41950(c), recyclable
solid waste and recyclable materials become the property of the authorized
recycling agent upon being placed at a designated recycling collection
location or in a container provided for collection of recyclable solid wastes.





   (B)   Recycling or disposal of any recyclable solid waste which has
become part of the solid waste stream by having been discarded must be in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.025  CLEANUP RESPONSIBILITY.




   (A)   Until solid waste is collected by the city or a franchisee,
the responsible person is responsible for cleaning up of solid waste
generated, deposited, released, spilled, leaked, pumped, poured, emitted,
emptied, discharged, injected, dumped or disposed into the environment, or
which otherwise is located outside an authorized container on, at, or in the
premises of which the person is in charge.  This cleanup responsibility
includes the cleanup of solid waste, including recyclable solid waste and
green waste which is located outside an authorized container notwithstanding
human or animal interference with commercial bins or containers, wind or
other natural forces and whether during storage, collection, removal, or
transfer.  For purposes of this section, the term DISPOSED INTO THE
ENVIRONMENT includes, without limitation, abandoning or discarding of
barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of
any kind whatsoever.





   (B)   Each franchisee must clean up any solid waste spilled or
otherwise released or discharged into the environment during its collection,
removal, or transfer.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.026  RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.




   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, nothing in this chapter limits
the right of any person, organization, or other entity to sell recyclable
material owned by that person, organization or other entity or to donate
recyclable material to a charity or any entity other than a franchisee.





   (B)   Recyclable material which is mixed with solid waste is
considered to have been discarded and to have become recyclable solid waste.





   (C)   If the seller or donor of recyclable material pays the buyer
or the donee any consideration for collecting, processing, recycling,
transporting or disposing of the recyclable material, or providing
consultation services which exceed the selling price of the recyclable
material, the transaction is not be regarded as a sale or donation of
recyclable material, but as an arrangement for the disposal of solid waste
and is subject to this chapter.





   (D)   A person receiving a discount or reduction in the collection,
disposal and/or recycling service rates for unsegregated or segregated solid
waste is not be deemed to be selling or donating recyclable material and does
not fall within this "donate or sell" exception.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.027  GREEN WASTE.




   Green waste must be placed in containers designated for the collection
of green waste, or tied securely in bundles not exceeding 80 pounds and may
not be contaminated with other forms of solid waste or with hazardous
substances.  It is unlawful for any person to mix green waste with other
forms of solid waste, nor may green waste be contaminated with any other
substance.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.028  UNLAWFUL ENTRY.



   It is unlawful for any person, except the owner or someone with the
owner's consent or authorized city, county, state or federal personnel, or
employees of the solid waste company that owns the waste container in the
performance of their duties, to rummage, explore, tamper with, move, remove,
tip, deface, destroy, scavenge or otherwise search a waste container.



(Ord. 1185, passed 2-4-08)



FEES AND CHARGES



§ 50.040  FEES.




   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by federal, state, or local laws,
this chapter or other City Council authorized restrictions, all fees
applicable to this chapter will be established by City Council resolution.





   (B)   Upon a franchisee's request, the City Council may, but is not
required to, waive fees.  Fees may be waived for franchisees collecting
green wastes.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.041  SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   The city may impose charges and fees, and set limits on the
charges and fees imposed by franchisees, for collecting, inspecting,
auditing, recycling, transferring and disposing solid waste and planning for
and responding to hazardous materials releases and spills. Rates for charges
and fees must be set by ordinance in accordance with Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 5471.



   (B)   Basic solid waste collection service includes the following:



      (1)   Refuse collection: one cart of refuse collected at
curbside weekly.



      (2)   Recyclables collection: one cart of recyclables
collected at curbside on alternate weeks.



      (3)   Yard waste collection: one cart yard waste collected at
curbside on alternate weeks.



      (4)   Christmas tree collection: Christmas trees collected at
curbside for two weeks after Christmas.



      (5)   Large item and special waste drop-off events: quarterly
events for drop-off of large items such as furniture or appliances and
special waste items such as televisions, computer monitors, electronic
equipment, and tires, delivered by the customer to the event site.



      (6)   Household hazardous waste drop-off events: periodic
regional events for drop-off of household hazardous wastes such as
pesticides, oil, paint, chemicals and auto batteries delivered by the
customer to the event site.



      (7)   New customer moving materials special pick-up: cardboard
and paper packing materials collected at curbside by appointment. Limit one
collection per new customer.



      (8)   Large item special pick-up: up to three large items such
as furniture or appliances: Limit one collection per customer per year.



      (9)   One free go back: the city will provide one free go back
per calendar year. Thereafter, the city may collect an additional charge in
an amount determined by ordinance.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 1114, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1130,
passed 12-20-04; Am. Ord. 1139, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 6-16-08;
Am. Ord. 1238, passed 8-15-11)




§ 50.042  FRANCHISE AND CUSTOMER FEES.




   Pursuant to Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 41900 et seq., the city may
levy fees upon franchisees and customers for planning and program development
and administration regarding solid and household hazardous waste, recyclable
solid wastes and/or green waste planning, and for access to collection
service, for collection service, inspection, auditing, transfer and disposal
and the planning for and response to releases and spills of solid wastes
which have the characteristics of hazardous substances.  The fees may
include charges for the use of disposal facilities and may include costs of
preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements, household
hazardous waste elements and integrated waste management plans.  The city
may collect such charges by such means as determined by City Council
resolution or ordinance.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.043  FEE WAIVER.




   By City Council resolution, the city may waive permit fees for
collectors of green wastes which transport such green wastes to a compostable
materials handling facility; a green material composting facility; or other
site permitted (or exempt from permitting) by the IWMB and report amounts
delivered to the facilities to the city.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.044  COLLECTING FEES AND CHARGES.




   (A)   Customers must pay the fees and charges imposed by this
chapter on a monthly basis.





   (B)   Upon delinquency, the city or, if applicable, its franchisee
may give written notice to the delinquent customer that the bill is now
overdue and payable in full and attempt to collect payment through all legal
means.





   (C)   If billing is performed by the franchisee, the city is not
responsible for collecting any sums due to the franchisee in providing
collection services nor does the city guarantee or warrant payment to the
franchisee for collection services except the city will assist the franchisee
in placing an assessment against the property for the unpaid fees in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.045  LIABILITY FOR FEES.




   (A)   Every customer and responsible person, including, without
limitation, corporate and government entities, is jointly and severably
liable for fees and charges of solid waste collection services.  All
charges, fees, penalties, and interest imposed pursuant to this chapter are
civil debts owed to the city (or, if applicable, the franchisee) by the
customer.





   (B)   The responsible person must arrange for collection, recycling
and disposal of solid wastes generated or accumulated on those premises in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.  The fees and charges
(plus any interest or penalties) are due and payable on the date stated on
the bill. The responsible person is liable for the payment of all charges
(plus any interest or penalties) for solid waste services, including any
recycling charges.





   (C)   If solid waste and recycling service fees and charges (and any
applicable interest or penalties) are not paid within 30 days of the date
payment was due, solid waste, including recycling service may be discontinued
and collection of the unpaid amount may be undertaken by any lawful means
available to the city or to a franchisee providing solid waste services.





   (D)   Upon receiving written notice from a responsible person to
discontinue solid waste collection services because the responsible person
obtained a self-haul permit in accordance with this chapter, or because the
premises are vacant, the franchisee providing solid waste service must refund
any advance collection fees.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.046  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.




   The city may initiate proceedings to make delinquent collection service
fees and charges a special assessment against properties owned by a customer
indebted to the city in accordance with Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 5470
et seq.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.047  INTEREST ON UNPAID ASSESSMENTS.




   All assessments remaining unpaid after 30 days from the date of
confirmation of the assessment by the City Council bear interest at the rate
of 7% per year from and after that date.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.048  PENALTIES GENERALLY.




   Penalties will be imposed upon all delinquent charges as follows:





   (A)   Basic penalty. A basic penalty of 10% of total delinquent
charges will be imposed as of the date of the delinquency; and





   (B)   Additional penalties.  An additional penalty of 10% will be
imposed on the total delinquent charges on each billing date upon which the
charges remain unpaid.





   (C)   Limit of penalty. The total penalty imposed may not exceed one
hundred percent of the total of any delinquent account.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.049  SERVICE TERMINATION.




   Should a customer fail or refuse to pay the fee assessed for the
collection of solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials in accordance
with this chapter, then the franchisee must notify the City Manager of the
refusal.  Failure to pay may, except as otherwise stated, result in the
noncollection of solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials, which
condition the City Council may determine and may declare to be a threat to
the public health, safety and welfare, and which condition may be declared to
be, if permitted to exist, a public nuisance.  The franchisee will continue
to collect solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials when directed to
do so by the City Manager.  In such cases, a franchisee may seek
reimbursement from the city and the city will recoup its costs from the
responsible person.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.050  SERVICE RESTORATION.




   Where collection service is discontinued, service will not be restored
until all required payments (including, without limitation, arrearage,
penalties, and service charges) are paid in full.  The city or franchisee
may also require a customer to pay a deposit to guarantee payment for future
collection service in an amount determined by the City Council.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.051  LIABILITY FOR FINES.




   All fines, fees, penalties, and interest imposed pursuant to this
chapter are civil debts owed to the city by the person fined.  In the event
that judicial action is necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the
city, the person or persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs
of suit and attorney's fees incurred by the city to collect the fine.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



SOLID WASTE FRANCHISES



§ 50.065  FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS.




   It is unlawful for any person, other than a franchisee or the city, to
collect residential or commercial solid waste or place a commercial bin for
the accumulation of solid waste in the city.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.066  GRANT OF SOLID WASTE FRANCHISES.




   The City Council may award one or more non-exclusive solid waste
franchises to one or more franchisees for collecting, transferring,
recycling, composting, and disposing solid wastes, including recyclable solid
wastes and/or green waste, from all or a portion of residential and/or
commercial premises in the city.  Nothing in this chapter requires the City
Council to award any solid waste franchise and the city may collect solid
wastes itself. 




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.067  SCOPE OF SOLID WASTE FRANCHISES.




   A solid waste franchise may authorize collecting, transferring,
recycling, composting, and disposing solid wastes, including recyclable solid
wastes and/or green waste, from all or a portion of residential and/or
commercial premises in the city as specified by the franchise.  A solid
waste franchise does not authorize providing any other service.  A
franchisee that wishes to provide other services must apply for such
authorizations as may be required, and comply with all local laws pertaining
to the provision of the services.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.068  SOLID WASTE FRANCHISE CHARACTERISTICS.




   (A)   A solid waste franchise is non-exclusive and does not
explicitly or implicitly preclude the city from granting other solid waste
franchises or affect the city's right to provide its own solid waste
collection services.





   (B)   All privileges prescribed by a solid waste franchise are
subordinate to any prior lawful use and occupancy of public right-of-ways.





   (C)   A solid waste franchise is a privilege held in public trust
and personal to the original franchisee.  A solid waste franchise cannot be
validly transferred without obtaining the city's prior consent pursuant to
this chapter.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.069  FRANCHISEE SUBJECT TO APPLICABLE LAW, POLICE POWER.




   (A)   Except as specified in the solid waste franchise, the
franchisee is subject to all applicable laws.





   (B)   The city retains every right and power that it has under
applicable laws.





   (C)   Nothing in any solid waste franchise may be construed to waive
any of the city's governmental rights or police powers.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.070  ACTS AT FRANCHISEE'S EXPENSE.




   Any act permitted by a solid waste franchise or applicable law requires
or allows a franchisee to perform, must be performed at the franchisee's own
expense, unless expressly provided otherwise in the solid waste franchise or
applicable law.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS



§ 50.080  FORM.




   Solid waste franchises must be in writing, be approved by the City
Council, and obligate the franchisee to the following:





   (A)   To comply with this chapter and all other applicable laws;





   (B)   To cooperate with the city in solid waste disposal
characterization studies or other waste stream audits;





   (C)   To submit information required by city to meet the reporting
requirements of the Act and implement measures consistent with the city's
source reduction and recycling element in order for the city to reach the
diversion goals mandated by the Act, to the extent authorized by law; and





   (D)   To comply with such additional terms and conditions as the
City Council may require in its sole discretion to protect public health,
safety, and welfare.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.081  FRANCHISE FEE.




   (A)   A franchisee must pay the city a franchise fee in an amount
equal to a percentage of gross revenues as set forth in a solid waste
franchise for the privilege of operating a solid waste collection service
within the city.





   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in a solid waste franchise, a
franchisee must pay the franchise fee due to the city on a monthly basis. 
Payment for each month will be made to the city not later than 45 days after
the end of each month.





   (C)   The city's acceptance of any franchise fee payment may not be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount,
nor will such acceptance of such franchise fee payment be construed as a
release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable.





   (D)   The franchise fee is, not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee,
or other assessment of general applicability.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.082  INDEMNIFICATION.




   Solid waste franchises must include a hold harmless provision which
will, in part, cause franchisees to indemnify the city, its officers,
employees, and agents, from any liability arising from the franchisee's
activities.  The provision must be in a form approved by the City Attorney's
office and include protections from liability under RCRA, CERCLA, and HSAA.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.083  LIABILITY INSURANCE.




   (A)   Franchisees must obtain liability insurance from an insurance
company licensed to do business in the state of California and having a
financial rating in Best's Insurance Guide of not less than "A VII."  The
insurance will provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for death,
personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way connected
with the franchisee's activities.  The insurance will be based upon the
nature of the franchisee's activities, the risks foreseeably involved, and
will be in the amount prescribed by city council resolution or city policy. 
Insurance will name the city and the city's elected and appointed officials,
officers, and employees as additional insureds under the coverage afforded. 
In addition, such insurance will be primary and noncontributing with respect
to any other insurance available to the city and will include a severability
of interest (cross-liability) clause.





   (B)   A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with
all necessary endorsements, in a form approved by the city attorney, must be
filed with the City Manager before a solid waste franchise becomes effective.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.084  BUSINESS LICENSES.




   (A)   Nothing in this chapter waives the requirement for franchisees
to obtain a business license as mandated by this code.





   (B)   Every franchisee claiming a right to continue to provide solid
waste services in the city pursuant to Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 49520
et seq. or other law must pay any applicable business tax.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.085  CONTINUED COLLECTION SERVICES.




   (A)   Franchisees claiming a right to continue to provide solid
waste services in the city pursuant to Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 49520
et seq. or other law, must adhere to the same standards for service
(including waste stream diversion goals), charge comparable rates for
service, and pay the same franchise fee as those standards, rates and
franchise fees are specified in an exclusive solid waste franchise entered
into by the city with another franchisee.





   (B)   In accordance with Cal. Public Resources Code § 49521(b)
"rates that are comparable to those established by the local agency" cannot
vary more than 5% above or below those rates set in any exclusive solid waste
franchise entered into by the city and made applicable to all continuation
franchisees by this division.





   (C)   If a franchisee claiming a right to continue to provide solid
waste handling services in the city pursuant to Cal. Public Resources Code
§§ 49520 et seq. or other law, fails to adhere to the same material
standards, charge comparable rates for service, pay business taxes, and pay
franchise fees required by the city of other franchisees with an exclusive
solid waste franchise as provided in this chapter, the franchisee will
forfeit whatever, if any continuation rights it may have had.  The following
standards are deemed by the city to be material: all insurance, bonding and
indemnification requirements, rates of service, franchise fee payment,
business tax payment, and all service standards set in an exclusive solid
waste franchise granted by the city.





   (D)   A business license issued pursuant to this code is not a solid
waste franchise and does not confer any continuation rights under Cal. Public
Resources Code § 49520 et seq. or other law.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



APPLICATIONS FOR GRANT, RENEWAL OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE



§ 50.095  APPLICATION REQUIRED.




   Persons seeking to begin providing, or continuing to provide, solid
waste collection services, must file an application with the city for:





   (A)   Grant of an initial solid waste franchise;





   (B)   Renewal of a solid waste franchise; or





   (C)   Transfer of a solid waste franchise.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.096  APPLICATION FORM.




   Applications will be in a form prescribed by the City Manager and
applicable law.  A person or franchisee must file a signed application with
the City Manager.  All applications accepted for filing are available for
public inspection unless otherwise provided by applicable law.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.097  APPLICATION CONTENT.




   Applications for an initial solid waste franchise or a renewal solid
waste franchise must contain all of the following:





   (A)   The names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf
of the applicant with respect to the application.





   (B)   The name and address of the applicant and identification of
applicant's ownership and control;





   (C)   A demonstration of the applicant's ability to provide solid
waste collection services;





   (D)   A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to
provide solid waste collection services;





   (E)   A description of the applicant's previous experience in
providing solid waste collection service;





   (F)   Identification of California cities and counties where the
applicant hold a solid waste franchise.  If an applicant does not have a
solid waste franchise in California, it will provide the information for its
operations in other states;





   (G)   Identification of whether the applicant seeks to provide
residential, commercial, or other solid waste services and what area of the
city would be served by the applicant;





   (H)   Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this code or applicable law;
and





   (I)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or its authorized
officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and
certifying that the application meets all requirements of applicable law.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.098  APPLICATION FEES.




   Applicants seeking an initial solid waste franchise, renewal of a solid
waste franchise, or approval of the transfer of a solid waste franchise must
pay to the city a sum of money equal to the sum of money sufficient to
reimburse the city for all expenses incurred by it in connection with
granting the franchise, renewing the franchise or approving a transfer of the
franchise pursuant to the provisions of this code including, without
limitation, legal fees, administrative costs, and staff time.  A franchise
may establish the timing and procedures for making the payments required by
this section.  Unless a franchise provides otherwise, such payment must be
made within 30 days after the city furnishes the applicant with a written
statement of the expenses.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.099  LEGAL QUALIFICATIONS.




   In order to be legally qualified to obtain an initial or renewal solid
waste franchise or a transfer of a solid waste franchise:





   (A)   The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of
this code, applicable law, and all requirements of a solid waste franchise.





   (B)   The applicant must not have had any solid waste franchise
validly revoked by any franchising authority within three years preceding the
submission of the application.





   (C)   The city will not grant a solid waste franchise if an
applicant, during the ten years before submitting the application, was
convicted of a crime impugning its truthfulness and/or ability to abide with
its legal obligations.





   (D)   The city will not grant a solid waste franchise if the
applicant files materially misleading information in its application or
intentionally withholds information that the applicant lawfully is required
to provide.





   (E)   An applicant that otherwise would not be qualified to hold a
solid waste franchise under this code may include additional information
demonstrating to the city that the particular circumstances surrounding its
act or omission; the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing
therefrom and prevent their recurrence; the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals; and/or the remoteness of the matter from providing
solid waste collection services would make it inappropriate for the city to
deny it a solid waste franchise.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.100  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.




   When evaluating an application, the city may consider the following and
such matters as it is required or entitled to consider under this code or
applicable law:





   (A)   Whether the applicant substantially complied with this
chapter, applicable law, and the material terms of any existing city solid
waste franchise;





   (B)   Whether the quality of the applicant's service under any
existing city solid waste franchise is reasonable in light of community needs
and interests;





   (C)   Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to hold a solid waste franchise;





   (D)   Whether issuing a solid waste franchise is in the public
interest considering the immediate and future effect on public
rights-of-ways; and





   (E)   Whether approving the application would eliminate or reduce
competition of solid waste collection services.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.101  CITY'S APPROVAL OR DENIAL.




   (A)   Before deciding whether to grant a solid waste franchise, the
city may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures for
obtaining public input.





   (B)   The city also may grant or deny a solid waste franchise based
on its review of an application without further proceedings and may reject
any application that is incomplete.





   (C)   If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue a
solid waste franchise, an ordinance will be adopted granting a solid waste
franchise to the applicant, and the applicant will be entitled to exercise
all of the franchise rights provided for therein upon its acceptance of the
terms and conditions of such ordinance in writing.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.102  CITY APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR TRANSFER.




   (A)   Transfers may not occur without the city's prior written
approval.  Transfers without the city's prior written approval will be
considered to impair the city's assurance of due performance.  The granting
of approval for a transfer in one instance will not render unnecessary
approval of any subsequent transfer.





   (B)   Franchisees must promptly notify the city of any proposed
transfer.  If any transfer should take place without prior notice to the
city, the franchisee will promptly notify the city that such a transfer
occurred.





   (C)   At least 120 calendar days before the contemplated effective
date of a transfer, the franchisee must submit an application to the city to
approve the transfer.  The application must provide complete information on
the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial,
technical, and other qualifications of the transferee.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.103  TRANSFERS WITHOUT CONSENT.




   Any transfer without the city's prior written approval is ineffective,
will make a solid waste franchise subject to revocation and to any other
remedies available under this chapter.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.104  EXCEPTIONS.




   The city's prior consent is not necessary for:





   (A)   Pledges in trust or mortgages to secure the operational needs
of the franchisee to provide solid waste collection services;





   (B)   A solid waste franchise may allow transfers to a franchisee's
affiliate where:





      (1)   The transferor notifies the city of the transfer at
least 60 days before it occurs and describes the nature of the transfer, and
submits complete information describing who will have direct and indirect
ownership and control of the solid waste franchise after the transfer;





      (2)   The transferee warrants that it has read, accepts and
agrees to be bound by each and every term of the solid waste franchise and
related amendments, regulations, ordinances and resolutions then in effect;





      (3)   The transferee agrees to assume all responsibility for
all liabilities, acts and omissions known and unknown of its predecessor
franchisees for all purposes, including renewal;





      (4)   The transferee agrees that the transfer will not permit
it take any position or exercise any right which could not have been
exercised by its predecessor franchisees;





      (5)   Both the transferor and transferee warrant that the
transfer will not in any way adversely affect the city or customers
(including by increasing rates); and





      (6)   The transferor notifies the city that the transfer is
complete within 30 business days after the date the transfer is complete.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.105  APPROVAL DOES NOT CONSTITUTE WAIVER.




   Approval by the city of a transfer of a solid waste franchise does not
constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under a solid
waste franchise, this code, or other applicable law, whether arising before
or after the date of the transfer.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



ACCESS TO RECORDS



§ 50.115  OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS.




   (A)   The city may inspect and copy at any time during normal
business hours at a franchisee's nearest office or at such location within
the city as the city may designate, all books and records reasonably
necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this code, a solid waste
franchise, the requirements of any applicable law, or when reasonably
necessary for the exercise of any right or duty of the city under the same.





   (B)   Each franchisee is responsible for collecting the information
and producing it.  For purposes of this chapter, the terms BOOKS AND RECORDS
will be read expansively to include information in whatever format stored,
including, without limitation, information stored in electronic form. 
Financial books and records must be maintained in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.116  PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.




   Franchisees will not deny the city access to books and records on the
basis that the books and records contain proprietary information.  However,
all proprietary information received by the city from a franchisee and
clearly marked as such will be treated as follows:





   (A)   The city will notify franchisee if any third party seeks
release of any document marked confidential and the city determines that the
document cannot be protected consistent with California law, and will
withhold release for the maximum period permitted by law so that the
franchisee has the opportunity to seek court protection against the release
of the requested documents.





   (B)   The city will notify a franchisee if it determines that the
document can be withheld pursuant to California law, and that determination
is appealed to a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, so that
franchisee may intervene to defend the city's determination.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.117  VOLUMINOUS MATERIALS.




   If any books and records requested pursuant to this chapter or a solid
waste franchise are too voluminous, or for security reasons or because the
requested records contain trade secrets, cannot be copied and moved, then a
franchisee may request that city inspection of such records take place at
some other location mutually agreed to by the city and the franchisee,
provided that:





   (A)   The franchisee must make necessary arrangements for copying
documents selected by the city after its review; and





   (B)   The franchisee must pay all reasonable travel and additional
copying expenses incurred by the city (above those that would have been
incurred had the documents been produced in the city) in inspecting those
documents or having those documents inspected by its designee.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



ADDITIONAL REMEDIES



§ 50.130  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF SOLID WASTE FRANCHISES.




   (A)   Any solid waste franchise issued under this chapter is subject
to revocation or suspension for cause.





   (B)   No franchisee which engages in any act or conduct which falls
in any one or more of the following may collect solid waste in the city:





      (1)   The operations of the franchisee are contrary to the
public health, safety, well-being, peace, welfare or morals, or found to
constitute a public nuisance;





      (2)   The franchisee violates any material federal or state
law, regulation of the IWMB, a local enforcement agency, this code, or any
material condition of a solid waste franchise affecting public health and
safety in the city;





      (3)   The franchisee practices, or attempts to practice, any
fraud or deceit upon the city, or makes or uses any false, fictitious or
fraudulent statements or representations, or practiced any fraud or deceit or
made any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations in
connection with the issuance or renewal of the solid waste franchise;





      (4)   The franchisee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to
pay its debts, or a receiver or trustee is appointed to take over and conduct
the business of the franchisee whether in a receivership, reorganization or
bankruptcy proceeding;





      (5)   The franchisee fails to provide or maintain in full
force and effect the workers compensation, liability and indemnification
coverages or cash bond as required;





      (6)   The franchisee violates any order or ruling of any
regulatory body with respect to solid waste collected within the city, except
that such order or ruling may be contested by appropriate proceedings
conducted in good faith, in which case no violation is deemed to have
occurred until a final decision adverse to the franchisee is entered; or





      (7)   A franchisee claiming a right to continue to provide
solid waste services in the city pursuant to Cal. Public Resources Code §§
49520 et seq. or other law fails to adhere to the same material standards
required by the city of other franchisees with an exclusive solid waste
franchise.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.131  TERMINATION OF SOLID WASTE FRANCHISES.




   (A)   If the city's AB 939 coordinator determines that a
franchisee's performance does not conform with reasonable industry standards
in Southern California or as required by the Act including, without
limitation, requirements for implementing diversion, source reduction and
recycling, or any other applicable federal, state or local law or regulation,
including without limitation, the laws governing transfer, storage or
disposal of solid and hazardous waste, or this chapter, the AB 939
coordinator will advise the franchisee in writing of such suspected
deficiencies.  In any written notification of deficiencies, the AB 939
coordinator will set a reasonable time within which the franchisee is to
correct the deficiencies and respond.  Unless otherwise specified, a
reasonable time for response and correction of deficiencies is 30 days from
the receipt of such written notice by the franchisee.





   (B)   At the expiration of the time set for response from the
franchisee, the city's AB 939 coordinator will review the record, including
any written response from the franchisee to the notice of deficiencies and
resolve the matter in favor of the franchisee, or order remedial action to
cure any breach, and inform the franchisee in writing of the resolution.  A
decision or order of the city's AB 939 coordinator is final and conclusive
unless the franchisee files a "Notice of Appeal" with the City Clerk (with
copy to the City Manager and City Attorney) within 20 days after receiving
the city's AB 939 coordinator's decision or order.  A "Notice of Appeal"
must state the legal basis and all legal and factual contentions of the
franchisee and include all evidence, including affidavits, documents,
photographs and videotapes.  A "Notice of Appeal" will not be accepted by
the Clerk for filing unless accompanied by a "Notice of Appeal Filing Fee" in
an amount to be set by city council resolution.





   (C)   Within 30 business days after the City Clerk receives a Notice
of Appeal, the City Manager must decide the matter in a manner most favorable
to the franchisee, order remedial actions to cure any breach, terminate the
solid waste franchise, order the franchisee to cease operations in the city
or refer the matter to the City Council and inform the franchisee, in
writing, of the resolution and the basis for the resolution.  The decision
or order of the City Manager is final and conclusive unless the franchisee
files a "Notice of Appeal to the City Council" with the City Clerk (and
serves a copy, by mail, on the city manager and the City Attorney) within 30
days after receiving the City Manager's decision or order.  A "Notice of
Appeal to the City Council" must state the legal basis and all factual and
legal contentions of the appellant and include all evidence, including
affidavits, documents, photographs and videotapes. A "Notice of Appeal to the
City Council" will not be accepted by the clerk for filing unless accompanied
by a "Notice of Appeal Filing Fee" in an amount set by City Council
resolution.





   (D)   If a matter is referred by the City Manager to the City
Council, or a "Notice of Appeal to the City Council" is timely filed, the
City Council may set the matter for a public hearing and act on the matter or
decline to hear the matter.  If the City Council elects to hear the matter,
the City Clerk will give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing.  At the hearing, the City Council will consider the administrative
record, including the notice of deficiency, the franchisee's response, the
statement of resolution by the City Manager and the franchisee's "Notice of
Appeal to the City Council" and give the franchisee, or its representatives
and any other interested person, a reasonable opportunity to be heard.  The
proceedings before the Council will be an informal administrative hearing and
the rules of evidence, as generally applied in judicial proceedings, are not
applicable.





   (E)   Based on the administrative record, the Council will determine
by resolution whether the decision or order of the City Manager or AB 939
coordinator should be upheld.  A tie vote of the City Council is regarded as
upholding the action of the City Manager or AB 939 coordinator.  If, based
upon the record, the City Council determines that the performance of the
franchisee is in breach of any material provision of any applicable federal,
state or local statute or regulation, or other cause for termination of the
solid waste franchise, or decides to order the franchisee to cease operations
in the city, the city council, in the exercise of its sole discretion, may
order remedial actions to cure the breach, or terminate forthwith the solid
waste franchise or order operations in the city to cease.  The decision of
the City Council is final and conclusive.





   (F)   Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from exercising any
other remedy, including criminal prosecution or seeking equitable relief.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DIVERSION



§ 50.140  DECONSTRUCTION AND SALVAGE AND RECOVERY.




   Every structure planned for demolition must be prepared for
deconstruction, salvage and recovery before demolition. It is the owner's,
general contractor's, and each subcontractor's responsibility to recover the
maximum feasible amount of salvageable designated recyclable and reusable
materials before demolition.  Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable
and reusable materials from the deconstruction phase must qualify to be
counted in meeting the diversion requirements of this chapter.  Recovered or
salvaged materials may be given or sold on the premises or may be removed to
reuse warehouse facilities for storage or sale.  Title to recyclable
materials transfers to the transporter when materials leave the construction
the site.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.141  DIVERSION REQUIREMENTS.




   (A)   It is required that at least the following specified
percentages of the waste tonnage of demolition and construction debris
generated from every demolition, remodeling and construction project shall be
diverted from going to land fill by using recycling, reuse and diversion
programs:





      (1)   Demolition:  50% of waste tonnage including concrete
and asphalt, and 15% of waste tonnage excluding concrete and asphalt.





      (2)   Reroofing of homes with shingles or shakes as a separate
project:  50% of waste tonnage.





      (3)   Construction and Remodeling:  50% of waste tonnage.





   (B)   Separate calculations and reports are required for the
demolition and for the construction portion of projects involving both
demolition and construction.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 50.142  INFORMATION REQUIRED BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.




   Every applicant must submit a properly completed "Recycling and Waste
Reduction Form," on a form prescribed by the Building and Safety Department,
to the city as a portion of the building or demolition permit process.  The
form must contain an accurate estimate of the tonnage or other specified
units of construction and/or demolition debris to be generated from
construction and demolition on the site.  Approval of the form as complete
and accurate is a condition precedent to issuance of any building or
demolition permit.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.143  DEPOSIT REQUIRED.




   Before the city issues any building or demolition permit involving
production of solid waste destined to be delivered to a landfill, the
applicant must post a cash deposit in an amount set by City Council
resolution, but not less than $5,000.  The deposit or cash bond will be
returned, without interest, in total or in proportion, upon proof to the
satisfaction of the building official, that not less than the required
percentages or proven proportion of those percentages of the tons of debris
generated by the demolition and/or construction project were diverted from
landfills and were recycled or reused.  If a lesser percentage of tons or
cubic yards than required is diverted, a proportionate share of the deposit
will be returned.  The deposit is entirely forfeit to the extent that there
is a failure to comply with the requirements of this subchapter.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.144  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.




   Before the city issues any building or demolition permit involving
production of solid waste destined to be delivered to a landfill, the
applicant must pay the city a fee in an amount specified by resolution
sufficient to compensate the city for all expenses incurred in administering
the permit.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.145  ON-SITE PRACTICES.




   During the term of the demolition or construction project, the
contractor must recycle or divert the required percentages of materials, and
keep records thereof in tonnage or in other measurements approved by the city
that can be converted to tonnage.  The city will evaluate and monitor each
project to gauge the percentage of materials recycled, salvaged and disposed
from the project.  The required diversion of a minimum of the required
percentages of the demolition and construction debris will be measured
separately with respect to the demolition segment and the construction
segment of a project where both demolition and construction are involved. 
To the maximum extent feasible, on-site separation of scrap wood and clean
green waste in a designated debris box or boxes must be arranged in order to
allow chipping and mulching for soil enhancement or land cover purposes.  In
order to protect chipping and grinding machinery, metal and other materials
which cannot be chipped or ground must not be placed in such boxes.  On-site
separation must be undertaken for wallboard to the extent feasible on new
construction.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.146  REPORTING.




   Within 60 days after a construction or demolition project is complete,
the contractor must, as a condition precedent to final inspection and for the
city to issue a certificate of occupancy, submit documentation to the city
which showing compliance with this subchapter.  The documentation must
include a final completed "Recycling and Waste Reduction Form" showing actual
data of tonnage of materials recycled and diverted, supported by originals or
certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of
measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors and/or
landfill and disposal companies.  Receipts and weight tags will be used to
verify whether materials generated from the site have been or are to be
recycled, reused, salvaged or otherwise disposed of.  If a project involves
both demolition and construction, the report and documentation for the
demolition project must be submitted and approved by the city before it
issues a building permit for the construction project.  In the alternative,
the permitee may submit a letter stating that no waste or recyclable
materials were generated from project, in which case this statement may be
verified by the city.  Any deposit posted pursuant to this article will be
forfeited if the permitee does not meet the timely reporting requirements of
this section.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 50.155  ENFORCEMENT.




   (A)   In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter,
violations of this chapter or a solid waste franchise may be enforced as
follows:





      (1)   Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the City
Attorney's discretion or as specified by this chapter.





      (2)   Abated as public nuisances.





      (3)   Enjoined as unfair business practices that are presumed
to nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the
franchisee operates.





   (B)   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to any other criminal or civil remedies.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.156  CITY ATTORNEY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.




   In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to
the City Attorney by this code or California law, the City Attorney is
authorized to:





   (A)   Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases
for violations of this chapter including, without limitation, administrative
or judicial nuisance abatement and suits for injunctive relief;





   (B)   Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties,
forfeitures, and other money accruing to the city under this chapter.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



§ 50.157  CIVIL ACTION BY AUTHORIZED RECYCLING AGENT.




   Nothing in this chapter limits the right of any franchisee to bring a
civil action against any person who violates Cal. Public Resources Code §§
41950-41951, nor will a conviction for a violation exempt any person from a
civil action.




(Ord. 1091, passed 1-5-04)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWER SYSTEM AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



Section




Construction of Sewers





   51.001   Purpose





   51.002   Public Sewer Extension and Connection Trust Fund





   51.003   Application for extension to sewer system





   51.004   Preparation and approval of cost distribution; written
statement of applicant





   51.005   Excess or deficiencies in cash deposits





   51.006   Preparation and filing of benefit map





   51.007   Payment required before connection





   51.008   Contributions of owners of private sewer lines receiving
benefits from extensions





   51.009   Refunds





   51.010   Termination





Sewer Connections





   51.020   Compliance required





   51.021   Construction standards





   51.022   Connection fee





   51.023   Annexation fee





   51.024   Extension of sewer at applicant's expense when property not
adjacent to public sewer





   51.025   Title to materials to vest in city after acceptance of work
by Council





   51.026   Refunds to person installing sewer extension





Wastewater Disposal





Part 1.  General Provisions





   51.035   Purpose





   51.036   Policy





   51.037   Definitions





Part 2.  Administration of System





   51.050   Administration and enforcement





   51.051   Administrative regulations





   51.052   Inspection and sampling





   51.053   Connections to mains to be maintained by owner





   51.054   Availability of facilities; restriction of discharge rate





   51.055   Sewer maintenance expense





   51.056   Damage to city's sewer system; creation of other liability





   51.057   Confidential information





   51.058   Right of administrative review





   51.059   Time for administrative review





   51.060   Commencement of administrative review





   51.061   Administrative review





   51.062   City Council appeal





   51.063   Public notification





Part 3.  Wastewater Discharged Into City Sewer System





   51.075   Wastewater discharge policy





   51.076   Specific discharge prohibitions





   51.077   Specific discharge limitations for industrial users





   51.078   Limitations on the use of garbage grinders





   51.079   Variance from specific discharge limitations





   51.080   Dilution of discharge





   51.081   State requirements





   51.082   Federal requirements





   51.083   Right of revision





Part 4.  Pretreatment Requirements





   51.095   Regulatory actions





   51.096   Pretreatment facilities and operation





   51.097   Prevention of accidental discharge





   51.098   Discharges of wastes or wastewater into the city's sewer
system from vehicles





   51.099   Grease interceptors and gravity separating devices





   51.100   Maintenance of grease interceptors and gravity separating
devices





Part 5.  Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit System





   51.110   Industrial wastewater discharge permits





   51.111   Permit application





   51.112   Permit conditions





   51.113   Compliance schedules





   51.114   Duration and revision of permits





   51.115   Transfer of permit





   51.116   Violation of permit





   51.117   Suspension of permit





   51.118   Revocation of permit





   51.119   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste





Part 6.  Industrial Wastewater Monitoring and Reporting





   51.130   Records and monitoring





   51.131   Sampling well





   51.132   Sampling and analysis





   51.133   Self-monitoring reports





   51.134   Report of changed conditions





   51.135   Publication of users in significant non-compliance





Part 7.  Fees, Charges and Computations





   51.145   Schedule of charges





   51.146   Estimated quantities and values





   51.147   Specific fees





   51.148   Determination of total flow





   51.149   Charges for unusual or excessive strength wastewaters





   51.150   Low-income senior rate





Part 8.  Special Restrictions as to Discharges with Mineral Content
Exceeding that of Water Supply





   51.165   Registration of water-treating apparatus





   51.166   Apparatus producing wastewater with mineral content higher
than that of water supply





   51.167   Applicability of certain sections to soft-water
establishments and water softeners





   51.168   Maintenance or use of illegal apparatus





   51.169   Permit to install or alter apparatus





   51.170   Accessibility of apparatus and report as to operation





   51.171   Exemptions; definitions





   51.172   Certification





Part 9.  Enforcement





   51.185   Declaration of public nuisance





   51.186   Enforcement provisions





   51.187   Administrative orders





   51.188   Unlawful discharges; damages and liability





   51.189   False statements





   51.999   Penalty




CONSTRUCTION OF SEWERS



§ 51.001  PURPOSE.




   (A)   Among other things, this chapter provides a legal framework
for financing sewer construction in cases in which the property owner does
not desire to proceed under the Improvement Act of 1911, Cal. Streets &
Highways Code §§ 5000 et seq., or where the property owner does not desire
other financing, and provides equitable prorating of cost within a reasonable
period of time among the parcels of real property benefitted.





   (B)   Proceedings under this chapter for the original contributors
are purely voluntary, but are compulsory when sewer connections are made to
the properties benefitted for which there was no initial contribution.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.002  PUBLIC SEWER EXTENSION AND CONNECTION TRUST FUND.




   There is established and created a special trust fund in the office of
the City Treasurer which known and designated as the Public Sewer Extension
and Connection Trust Fund.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.003  APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION TO SEWER SYSTEM.




   (A)   Required. Owners of real property within the city desiring to
have the city sewer system extended in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter must apply to the Public Works Director for the extensions.





   (B)   Plans, map, deposit and letter to accompany. Applications for
sewer system extensions must be accompanied by the following:





      (1)   Completed plans and specifications and proposal
agreement for the construction of the sewer prepared by a registered civil
engineer;





      (2)   A map showing the sewer extension and all properties
directly benefitted by the sewer extension.  Those properties which can
connect thereto with a side sewer not exceeding 225 feet in length, and which
cannot be more readily served with other existing sewers, must be considered
as benefitting properties;





      (3)   A total deposit in an amount equal to the total cost of
the sewer extension as estimated by the Public Works Director, plus the
estimated cost of plan checking, processing and inspection; and





      (4)   A letter of participation, signed by the applicant and
any other contributors to the project, which gives a description of all
property benefitted by the sewer extension that are contributing to the cost
of constructing the sewer.





   (C)   Processing.





      (1)   The Public Works Director, after receiving the
application, plans, specifications, proposal agreement, map, deposit and
letter of participation, and after approving the plans, specifications,
proposal agreement and application, must submit a written report to the City
Manager concerning the feasibility and practicality of the proposed sewer
extension, and the estimated cost of the project, including all incidental
expenses.  Upon receiving report from the Public Works Director, the City
Manager must make recommendations to the Council for its consideration.





      (2)   The Public Works Director, before the hearing by the
Council, must notify each and every owner of property to be benefitted by the
sewer extension that an application was filed to extend the sewer under the
provisions of this chapter and must notify each of the time and date of the
hearing.  If the Council approves the sewer extension application, an
appropriate resolution must be adopted authorizing the construction of the
sewer extension to be financed from the money deposited by the applicant. 
If the Council does not approve the sewer extension application, the total
deposit made by the applicant must be returned to the applicant.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.004  PREPARATION AND APPROVAL OF COST DISTRIBUTION; WRITTEN STATEMENT
OF APPLICANT.




   (A)   Upon completion and acceptance of the sewer extension by the
Council, the Public Works Director must prepare a cost distribution, which
includes the final costs of the sewer construction, and the prorated
distribution of that cost to the various parcels of property benefitted by
the sewer extension.  The distribution of costs must be made either on the
basis of area or building sites, or both, as may be determined by the Public
Works Director to be the most equitable method.  Upon completion of the cost
distribution, the Public Works Director must submit a report to the City
Manager for approval and recommendation to the Council.  If the Council
approves the cost distribution, the Public Works Director must prepare a
written statement to be sent to the applicant, which includes the amount of
the original deposit, the final costs of the sewer construction, the cost of
plan checking, processing and inspection, the cost distribution and any
excess or deficiency in the original deposit, and must deliver the statement
together with any excess money or demand for deficiency to the applicant.





   (B)   The actual cost of plan checking, processing and inspection
means the cost of the salary of the employee performing the necessary
checking, processing or inspection, plus a 15% administrative fee.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.005  EXCESS OR DEFICIENCIES IN CASH DEPOSITS.




   (A)   If the final cost of the sewer extension is less than the
amount of the deposit, the excess of money deposited with the city must be
refunded to the applicant.





   (B)   If the final cost exceeds the amount of the cash deposit, the
applicant, upon notice and demand, must forthwith pay to the city the amount
of the deficiency of the cash deposit.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.006  PREPARATION AND FILING OF BENEFIT MAP.




   Upon approval of the cost distribution by the Council, the Public Works
Director must record upon the map showing the properties benefitting from the
sewer extension, all properties which participated in the cost of the sewer
extension and the prorated cost distribution to each benefitted property, and
file with the City Clerk a copy of the map, together with a written
statement, which includes the final cost and cost distribution.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.007  PAYMENT REQUIRED BEFORE CONNECTION.




   (A)   Whenever the sewer system of the city is extended in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, those owners of property
benefitted by the extension, or their successors in interest, who have not
previously contributed their proportionate share of the cost of the sewer
extension to the amount set forth in the approved cost distribution are
prohibited from connecting with the sewer, until they have paid into the
Public Sewer Extension and Connection Trust Fund the amount in cash as
recorded on the benefit map.





   (B)   All payments must be in addition to all other fees required by
this code and applicable law.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.008  CONTRIBUTIONS OF OWNERS OF PRIVATE SEWER LINES RECEIVING BENEFITS
FROM EXTENSIONS.




   (A)   Any property owner in a public sewer extension district who,
before sewer extension, constructed a private sewer line to or from the
property owner's property, at the property owner's own expense, is not
required to contribute to the cost of the public sewer extension, except
where the property derives increased benefits as determined by the Public
Works Director and approved by the Council in the resolution granting the
sewer extension application.





   (B)   The property owner must pay the amount so determined before
connecting the property owner's property to the public sewer extension.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.009  REFUNDS.




   Refunds to original contributors to extensions.





   (A)   Periodically, but not more than twice a year, the City
Treasurer must pay and refund out of the Public Sewer Extension and
Connection Trust Fund to the person originally paying for the sewer, or the
property owner's heirs and assigns, the property owner's proportionate share
of the money paid into the trust fund by subsequent property owners who did
not participate in the original cost and who were given permits to connect to
the extended sewer and who paid as provided in the approved cost distribution.





   (B)   Payments under this section by the city must be made to the
person originally paying for the sewer at the property owner's address
appearing in the records of the engineering office, and must constitute a
discharge of its duty under this chapter to pay as to all sums so paid,
unless the city has received and consented to an assignment of the right to
another, giving assignee's name and payment address.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.010  TERMINATION.




   (A)   Any claim by a contributing property owner or the assignee
thereof for a refund which is payable out of the Public Sewer Extension and
Connection Trust Fund must be made within a period of ten years from the date
of the original contribution.





   (B)   All monies remaining in the fund after ten years may be
escheated into the general fund of the city.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



SEWER CONNECTIONS



§ 51.020  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.




   All sewer connections must be made pursuant to this chapter.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.021  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.




   Sewer connections and extensions must be properly designed and
constructed.  The Director is authorized and empowered to adopt rules,
regulations and standards as may be necessary to provide for the proper
design and construction of improvements to the sewer system.  The
publication entitled "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction,"
latest edition, as published by Building News, Inc., is the basis for
standards adopted.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.022  CONNECTION FEE.




   A connection fee must be paid to cover the cost of a fair and
proportionate share of those facilities such as intercepting sewers, sewage
treatment plants and similar facilities that are in place and which will
benefit the property to be connected.  The connection fee will be in an
amount established by the City Council.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.023  ANNEXATION FEE.




   (A)   The sewer annexation fee for real property annexed to the city
after May 20, 1964 and before December 31, 1977, or filed for annexation
before December 31, 1977 and subsequently annexed to the city, and otherwise
entitled to be connected to the public sewer, and for which a sewer
annexation fee has not been paid, is the sum of $1,025 per gross acre,
provided that the fee is paid on or before June 30, 1981.  After June 30,
1981, the sewer annexation fee must be as described in divisions (B), (C) or
(D) of this section and must be paid before connection to the public sewer.





   (B)   Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section,
the sewer annexation fee for real property to be annexed to the city, and
otherwise entitled to be connected to the public sewer, and for which a sewer
annexation fee has not been paid, will be an amount established by the City
Council, payable before completion of annexation.





   (C)   The sewer annexation fee for real property to be annexed to
the city and to be located within the Hillside Planned Development Zone, and
otherwise entitled to be connected to the public sewer and for which a sewer
annexation fee has not been paid, must be an amount established by the City
Council, payable before completion of annexation.





   (D)   The sewer annexation fee for real property to be annexed to
the city and to be located in any zone other than the Hillside Planned
Development Zone and for which a residential development is proposed, and
otherwise entitled to be connected to the public sewer, and for which a sewer
connection fee has not been paid, will be an amount established by the City
Council, provided that the fee is paid before completion of annexation and
the lesser fee must be refunded by the city to the person who originally paid
the fee upon completion of the residential development, provided the
development is completed and a request for the refund is filed with the city
upon completion and within five years of the date of annexation to the
city.  In the event the development constructed is different from that
proposed before annexation, or all or a portion of the land annexed to the
city remains undeveloped or is developed to nonresidential use, the sewer
annexation fee must be re-computed based upon the actual development before
payment of any refund.  The re-computed sewer annexation fee for vacant land
or for land developed to nonresidential use must be an amount established by
the City Council per gross acre of land annexed including a pro rata share of
the area of any public street dedicated to the city after annexation for
which an annexation fee was paid.  The residential development, for which
the lesser fee is paid, must be such that, in the opinion of the City
Council, future additional development is unlikely.





   (E)   The owners of real property which is to be annexed to the
city, and for which a sewer annexation fee is required, and for which sewage
collection service is not available as determined by the City Council, may at
the property owner's option, pay the sewer annexation fee in effect at any
time at or before the time sewage collection service becomes available and
connection is to be made to the public sewer, in which event the fee must be
paid before connection to the public sewer.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.024  EXTENSION OF SEWER AT APPLICANT'S EXPENSE WHEN PROPERTY NOT
ADJACENT TO PUBLIC SEWER.




   (A)   In addition to the connection fee and the annexation fee, an
applicant requesting sewer service to real property which is not adjacent to
a public sewer must install a sewer main extension or extensions in public
streets, alleys or sewer easements acceptable to the City Council.





   (B)   All sewer main extensions must conform to plans and
specifications adopted by the City Council.





   (C)   Each sewer main extension must be constructed at the sole cost
of the applicant.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.025  TITLE TO MATERIALS TO VEST IN CITY AFTER ACCEPTANCE OF WORK BY
COUNCIL.




   (A)   Nothing in this chapter conveys title to the city until the
time as the City Council accepts the property or completed improvement by
resolution.





   (B)   Upon acceptance thereof, all work and materials becomes the
city's property, subject, however, to the right of the applicant to receive a
refund.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.026  REFUNDS TO PERSON INSTALLING SEWER EXTENSION.




   (A)   The City Council may determine that subsequently filed
applications for annexation and the use of the extension sewers may be
granted upon condition that a proportionate share of the cost of existing
sewer extensions is borne by each subsequent applicant.





   (B)   The City Council must determine the amount to be paid by the
applicant for the use of each sewer extension and the amount so collected
must be paid to the applicant first installing the sewer extension or
extensions as partial reimbursement of the cost of the installation.





   (C)   Each applicant so constructing a sewer extension and
requesting reimbursement on a proportionate basis by subsequent applicants
must file with the City Engineer a complete and detailed cost statement of
the cost of the subject sewer extension in a form acceptable to the City
Engineer so as to permit an equitable proportionate cost determination for
subsequent applicants.





   (D)   The right to receive such refund will cease and terminate
within a period established by the City Council but in no case, greater than
ten  years from and after the date of acceptance of each sewer extension by
the city.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



WASTEWATER DISPOSAL



Part 1.  General Provisions



§ 51.035  PURPOSE.




   The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate sewage, liquid
waste and industrial waste discharges directly or indirectly into the city's
sewer system.  This chapter enables the city to comply with applicable
federal and state laws required by the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq., as amended, and the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing
and New Sources of Pollution (the "General Pretreatment Regulations") (40 CFR
Part 403) and the requirements of any National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System ("NPDES") permit or "Waste Discharge Requirement" issued
to the city by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board or other
agency.  This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's authority under
Article XI, § 7 of the California Constitution, the California Health &
Safety Code and the California Water Code, and any successor statutes or
regulations.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.036  POLICY.




   (A)   The city protects the health, welfare and safety of the local
residents by constructing, operating and maintaining a system of local
sewers, trunk sewers and interceptor sewers, and liquid waste treatment and
disposal facilities to service the homes, industries and commercial
establishments throughout the city and surrounding environs as required by
state and federal law.





   (B)   The following basic policies apply to sewage, liquid waste,
and industrial waste discharged directly or indirectly into the sewer system
of the city.





      (1)   The highest and best use of the city sewer system is the
collection, treatment and reclamation or disposal of domestic sewage;





      (2)   Industrial users are urged to seek recovery and reuse
procedures to meet the limitations set on industrial waste discharges rather
than those procedures designed solely to meet discharge limitations;





      (3)   The city is committed to a policy of wastewater
renovation and reuse in order to provide an alternate source of water supply
and to reduce overall costs of wastewater treatment and disposal.  The
renovation of wastewater through wastewater treatment processes may
necessitate more stringent quality requirements on industrial waste
discharges as the demand for reclaimed water increases;





      (4)   Optimum use of city facilities may require the discharge
of waste waters during periods of low flow in the sewer system as established
by the Director;





      (5)   Provisions are made in this chapter to regulate
industrial waste discharges to comply with the state and federal government
requirements and policies and to meet increasingly higher standards of
treatment plant effluent quality and environmental conditions.  This chapter
establishes quantity and quality limitations on sewage, liquid waste and
industrial waste discharges where such discharges may adversely affect the
sewer system or the effluent quality.  Methods of cost recovery are
established to equitably distribute the costs of sewer service.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.037  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires or indicates a different meaning.  Words
and phrases not defined by this chapter will have the meanings stated
elsewhere in this code, or under the California Water Code, if defined there,
and if not, by the Clean Water Act and the regulations implementing the Clean
Water Act.  If the application of any definition to a specific situation is
without utility or creates ambiguity, reference may be made to the
definitions of the California Plumbing Code, or in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, to resolve the
issues created.





   ABBREVIATIONS and ACRONYMS.




 



BOD
 
=   Biochemical oxygen demand, 5 Day


CFR
 
=   Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
=   Chemical oxygen demand


EPA
 
=   Environmental Protection Agency


L
 
=   Liter


Mg
 
=   Milligrams


Mg/l
 
=   Milligrams per liter


Lb/d
 
=   Pounds per day


Klb
 
=   Thousand of pounds


Klb/day
 
=   Thousands of pounds per day


SS
 
=   Suspended solids


O & G
 
=   Oil and Grease




 




   ACT or CLEAN WATER ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.





   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The California Regional Water Quality Control
Board - Los Angeles Region.





   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.  As defined in 40 CFR §
403.12(1), means a responsible corporate officer or a duly authorized
representative of that person from which the sewage discharge originates.





   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD.  The quantity of oxygen, expressed
in milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in "Standard
Methods."





   BUILDING SEWER.  A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a
user to the public sewer.





   CFR.  Code of Federal Regulations.





   CESSPOOL.  A lined excavation in the ground, which receives wastewater
and so constructed that the solid matter is retained and the liquid portion
is permitted to seep away.





   CLEAN WATER ACT or CWA.  The federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC §§
1345, et seq.





   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR COD.  The measurement of wastewater strength
in terms of the total quantity of oxygen required for oxidation of organic
matter as determined by the appropriate procedure set forth in "Standard
Methods."





   CHLORINE DEMAND.  The difference between the amount of chlorine added
to a sample of wastewater and the amount remaining at the end of a 39-minute
period, as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in "Standard
Methods."





   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT.  The amount of chlorine, in parts per million by
weight, which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual
chlorine content, or to meet the requirements of some other objective, in
accordance with the appropriate procedure.





   CITY.  The City of Santa Paula, California.





   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), organic
carbon, suspended solids, ammonia-nitrogen, and total coliform bacteria, plus
additional pollutants identified in the city's wastewater treatment plant
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit if the city's
wastewater treatment plant was designed to treat the pollutants and if the
pollutants do not interfere with the operations of the wastewater treatment
plant and if in fact the wastewater treatment plant does remove the
pollutants to a substantial degree.





   COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE.  The time period allowed by the Director in which
an industrial user is to comply with permit conditions, or prohibitions,
limitations, and/or requirements of this chapter or any other order issued by
the Director.





   CONNECTION.  That part of any sewer extending from a sewer main in a
public easement or right-of-way to private property for exclusive use of the
property (also known as a sewer lateral).





   CONTAMINATED WATER.  Any water impaired in quality by waste to a
degree which creates a hazard to the public health.





   CONTAMINATION.  Any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of
industrial waste.





   CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The City of Santa Paula.  See 40 CFR 403.12(a).





   COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.





   CUSTOMER.  A person who is or who has agreed to be responsible for the
payment of sewer service charges as defined or levied by the city.





   DIRECTOR.  The Public Works Director of the city or the Director's
duly authorized representative.





   DISCHARGE.  The release or introduction of a pollutant into the city's
sewer system by a person.





   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.  The liquid and waterborne waste, free from
industrial wastewater, discharged from residential, commercial and industrial
premises and susceptible to satisfactory disposal without special treatment
into the public sewer or by means of a private wastewater disposal system 
The Director has on file the parameters and concentration of constituents
that, for the purpose of this chapter, define domestic wastewater.





   EFFLUENT.  The liquid overflow from any treatment plant or facility
designated to treat, convey, or store wastewater.





   FEE.  Any charge assessed to a person for the use, or continued use,
of any portion of the city's sewer system fee includes without limitation a
charge(s) for connection or tap for new customers' monthly sewer service;
industrial wastewater discharge permit; excess capacity connection;
industrial wastewater treatment; excessive industrial wastewater treatment
capacity; laboratory testing; waste hauler's permit; oversize sewer and
noncompliance penalty.





   FLOATABLE OIL AND GREASE.  The oil and grease floating on the surface
of a sample of water as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in
"Standard Methods."





   FORMULA USERS.  Those users who are regulated under the industrial
wastewater discharge permit system and billed according to a city formula
based on the measured or set strength and/or volume of their wastewater
discharged.





   GARBAGE.  The putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation and consumption of foods.  See 14 CCR § 17225.30.





   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.





   GRAVITY SEPARATION DEVICE.  A device designed, constructed, and
operated for the purpose of retaining sand, silt, grit, mineral material and
oil and grease by gravity-differential separation from wastewater.





   GREASE.  The definition as set forth in "Standard Methods," and
includes waxes, fats, oils and other nonvolatile materials tested as
determined by appropriate procedures set forth in "Standard Methods."  See
40 CFR Part 136.





   GREASE INTERCEPTOR or INTERCEPTOR or GREASE TRAP.  A device designed,
constructed, and operated to separate and retain grease, hazardous or
undesirable matter from normal wastes while permitting the wastewater to be
discharged into the city's sewer system.





   GROUND GARBAGE.  The residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.





   INDUSTRIAL CONNECTION SEWER.  The sewer connecting a building sewer or
building wastewater drainage system to a city sewer for the purpose of
conveying industrial wastewater.





   INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any producing, manufacturing, processing,
institutional, commercial, agricultural or similar person (as defined herein)
that discharges, directly or indirectly, wastewater into the city's sewer
system of which the solid, liquid or gaseous waste discharge has pollutants
different than or stronger than or with constituents other than those defined
for domestic wastewater or any categorical industrial user as defined in 40
CFR Parts 401-471.





   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any solid, liquid, gaseous or radioactive substance
that is discharged, flowing or permitted to escape from any producing,
manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural or similar
operation from the development, recovery or processing of any material
resource which will enter the city's sewer system.





   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.  The liquid and water-carried industrial waste,
whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter
the city's sewer system.





   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A conditionally written
authorization required to allow an industrial user to utilize the city's
sewer system for the discharge of industrial wastewater.





   INSPECTOR.  The person authorized by the Director to inspect any raw
material, waste or wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, storage
and/or disposal facilities within the city's jurisdiction.





   INTERCEPTOR MAIN.  A sewer main which is ten inches or greater in size
and is intended to collect wastewater from a large area.





   INTERCEPTOR SEWER.  A closed conduit the primary purpose of which is
to transport rather than collect wastewater and to perform one or more of the
following functions as its primary purpose:





      (1)   Intercept wastewater from a final point in a collection
system and conveys the wastewater directly to the wastewater treatment plant;





      (2)   Serves in place of a potential treatment plant and
transports the collected wastewater to an adjoining collection system or
interceptor and thence to treatment;





      (3)   Transports the wastewater from one or more municipal
collection systems to another municipality or to the wastewater treatment
plant for treatment; or





      (4)   Intercepts an existing major discharge of raw or
inadequately treated wastewater for transport directly to another interceptor
or to the wastewater treatment plant.





   INTERFERENCE.  The discharge by an industrial user which, alone or in
conjunction with discharge by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the city's
wastewater treatment plant, its treatment processes or operations, or its
sludge processes, use or disposal and which is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city's wastewater treatment plant NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention
of sludge use or disposal by the city's wastewater treatment plant in
accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):





      (1)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1345;





      (2)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II,
more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., and including state regulations
contained in any state's sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle
D or the SWDA);





      (3)   The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.);





      (4)   The Toxic Substance Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et
seq.;





      (5)   The Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act, 16
U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq. and 33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq.; and





      (6)   40 CFR § 403.3(i).





   MASS EMISSION RATE.  The weight of material discharged to the city's
sewer system during a given time interval unless otherwise specified, the
mass fission rate must mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or
combination of constituents.





   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits applying to a specific category of industrial
users which is promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 40 CFR Chapter 1,
Chapter N, Parts 401-471 and, specifically, in accordance with Sections
307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317.





   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES PERMIT.  A
permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §
1342.





   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, PRETREATMENT STANDARDS, OR STANDARD.
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which
applies to industrial users.  This term includes prohibitive discharge
limits established pursuant to 40 CFR Parts 405-471.





   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) and 40 CFR § 403.5.





   NEW SOURCE.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
is commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317, and as further
defined in 40 CFR § 403.3(k)(1).





   NON-COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant, which is not a compatible
pollutant, as defined in this section.





   NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to health or is indecent or
offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.





   PASS-THROUGH.  A discharge of effluent from the POTW into waters of
the United States or the state in quantities or concentration which alone, or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause
of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).  See 40 CFR §
403.3(n).





   PEAK FLOW RATE.  Maximum discharge rate over a 30-minute period
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and determined by averaging a
maximum of ten substantiated peak flow rate measurements of the accrual
period in gallons per minute; in the absence of actual peak flow rate data,
peak flow rate may be computed in the manner set forth in the city's
specifications.





   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns the masculine
gender must include the feminine, the singular must include the plural where
indicated by the context.





   pH.  The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter as determined by the appropriate
procedures set forth in "Standard Methods."





   POLLUTANT.  Any dredged soil, spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, domestic wastewater, garbage, sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal,
agricultural and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.





   POLLUTED WATER.  Any water altered in quality by waste to a degree,
which unreasonably affects the water for beneficial use or the facilities,
which serve the beneficial use.





   POLLUTION.  The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.  The term
POLLUTION may include "contamination."





   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state before or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing the pollutants into the city's
wastewater treatment system.  The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR § 403.6(d).





   PRETREATMENT FACILITY.  Any works or device for the treatment or flow
limitation of sewage, liquid waste or industrial waste before discharge into
a public sewer.





   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed
on an industrial discharger.





   PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the
Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317(b) and (c), which applies to industrial
users.  These include "categorical standards" which establish specific
concentration limits for certain pollutants and total prohibitions of other
pollutants as specified in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.





   PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  A septic tank, and appurtenant
piping, cesspool, seepage pit, leach fields or other facilities.





   PRIVATE SEWER.  A sewer, other than a connection, laid by a private
party to serve one or more buildings which are not immediately adjacent to a
public sewer, so as to connect a building to a public sewer and irrespective
of whether the sewer is constructed on public or private property.





   PUBLIC SEWER.  Any sewer dedicated to public use and which is
controlled by a public authority.  See "Sewer System and Wastewater
Treatment Plant" below.





   RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL.  Material containing chemical elements that
spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays
or energy forms in excess of normal background radiation.





   RECLAIMED WATER.  Water, which, as a result of treatment of waste, is
suitable for a direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not
otherwise occur.





   REGIONAL USERS.  Those users of the city's sewer system with a written
agreement with the city, other than an industrial wastewater discharge
permit, wherein the city guarantees treatment and disposal of their
wastewater at an agreed upon reimbursement.





   RESPONSIBLE CORPORATE OFFICER OF INDUSTRIAL USER means (a) president,
secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function, or any other person that performs that function,
or any person who performs similar policy or decision making functions of the
corporation, or (b) the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000, if authority to sign documents
has been assigned to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures
(Federal General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403.12(I)(1-3)).





   SAMPLING WELL.  An approved opening to a building sewer for the
purpose of inspection, sampling and/or flow measurement.





   SANITARY SEWER.  A conduit that conveys wastewater or industrial
wastes, or a combination of both, and into which storm waters, surface and
groundwater and unpolluted waters are not admitted.





   SEEPAGE PIT.  A lined excavation in the ground that receives the
discharge of a septic tank and designed to permit the effluent from the
septic tank to seep through its bottom and side.





   SEPTIC TANK.  A water-tight receptacle which receives the domestic
wastewater discharge of a building and is designed and constructed to
separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of
detention and allow the liquid to discharge into the soil outside of the tank
through a system of open joint or perforated piping or a seepage pit.





   SETTLEABLE SOLIDS.  Any solids that will settle out of a liquid in a
specified interval of time as determined by appropriate procedures set forth
in "Standard Methods."  See 40 CFR Part 136.





   SEWAGE.  The wastewater of the community derived from domestic,
agricultural, commercial, institutional or industrial sources, together with
such surface water, groundwater and storm water as may be present.





   SEWER SYSTEM or CITY SEWER SYSTEM or POTW.  All the facilities used
for collection, pumping, transportation, treatment and final disposal of
wastewater.  For the purposes of this chapter, includes any sewer that
conveys wastewater from persons outside the city who are, by contract or
agreement with the city, users of the city's sewer system.  See 33 U.S.C. §
1292(2)(A).  See "Public Sewer" above and "Wastewater Treatment Plant" below.





   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit together with appurtenances for carrying
wastewater.





   SEWER MAIN.  The same as "Interceptor Main."





   SIGNATORY/CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.  Signatory requirements for
industrial user reports.  The reports required in this chapter must include
the certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR § 403.6(a)(2)(ii), and
must be signed as follows:





      (1)   By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial
user submitting the reports is a corporation.  For the purpose of this
definition, a RESPONSIBLE CORPORATE OFFICER means a president, secretary,
treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or
decision-making functions for the corporation, or the manager of one or more
manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250
persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million
(in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.





      (2)   By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial
user submitting the reports required is a partnership or sole proprietorship
respectively.





      (3)   By a duly authorized representative of the individual
designated if the authorization is made in writing by the individual
described in paragraph 40 CFR § 403.12(l); the authorization specifies
either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates,
such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and the written
authorization is submitted to the control authority.





      (4)   If an authorization under 40 CFR § 403.12 is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for
the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
requirements of this definition must be submitted to the control authority
before or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.





   SIGNIFICANT CHANGE.  Plus or minus 25% in a user's typical discharge
pattern: flow rate, peak flow rate, constituents, concentration of
constituents or characteristics.





   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER USER.  Any industrial user of the
city's sewer system who is:





      (1)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 CFR § 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, Chapter N; or





      (2)   A user that:





         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of processed wastewater to the sewer system (excluding sanitary,
non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or





         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant; or





         (c)   Is designated as such by the control authority as
defined in 40 CFR § 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement in accordance with 40 CFR
§ 403.8(f)(6).





      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
division (2) above, has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
wastewater treatment plant's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from a user (and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(6)) determine that the user
should not be considered a significant industrial user.





   SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.  Any of the following:





      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for
the same pollutant parameter by any amount;





      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six month period equals or exceeds the product
of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);





      (3)   Any other discharge violation that the Director believes
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through, including endangering the health of city personnel or the
general public;





      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;





      (5)   Failure, within 90 days of the scheduled date, to meet a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;





      (6)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;





      (7)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or





      (8)   Any other violation(s) which the Director determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.





   SLUG LOAD.  Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could
cause a violation of the discharge standards of this chapter, or any
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including without limitation, an
accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.





   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION or SIC.  A classification pursuant
to the standard industrial classification manual (latest edition) issued by
the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.





   STANDARD METHODS .  The current edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Water Works
Association, the Water Environment Association and the American Public Health
Association.  All tests must be conducted in accordance with these
procedures except where the Director a pproves other procedures necessary for
unusual wastes.





   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.  The current edition of standards and
requirements relating to size, quality, quantity and performance, including
standard drawings, as detailed and made available by the city.





   STATE.  The State of California.




   STORM DRAIN.  The municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), a
conveyance structure, which carries storm water and surface waters and
drainage water, but excludes sewage, other than unpolluted cooling water or
irrigation water.




   STORM WATER.  Any flow of water occurring during or following any form
of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.





   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The solid matter suspended in wastewater as
determined by appropriate procedures set forth in "Standard Methods."





   TOTAL DISSOLVED SOLIDS or TDS.  The solid matter in solution in
wastewater, as determined by evaporation of a wastewater sample from which
all suspended matter has been removed by filtration as determined by the
appropriate procedures set forth in "Standard Methods."




   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS or TTO.  The summation of all quantifiable values
greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for those toxic organics listed in 40
CFR § 413.02(i).




   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA, 40 CFR §
401.15 under the provision of § 307(a) of the Act, 33 USC § 1317, or other
federal acts or designated toxic by either the state or city.





   TRUNK SEWER.  A sewer constructed, maintained and operated by the city
that conveys wastewater to city's wastewater treatment plant and into which
the interceptor, lateral and collecting sewers discharge.





   UNCONTAMINATED WATER.  Any wastewater not contaminated or polluted
with sewage and which is suitable for discharge into the storm drain system,
excluding unlined natural watercourses.





   UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The United
States EPA, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation
for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the EPA.





   USER.  Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge or
contribution of industrial and/or domestic wastewater to the city's sewer
system.





   WASTE.  All materials, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive,
associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from or
related to any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever
nature, including such materials placed within containers of whatever nature
before, and for purposes of, disposal.





   WASTEWATER.  The liquid and water-carried waste, whether treated or
untreated which is contributed into or permitted to enter the city's sewer
system.





   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or POTW.  An assemblage of devices,
structures and equipment for treatment of wastewater, including sewers.  See
33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A).





   WATER RECLAMATION SYSTEM.  The various facilities used for the purpose
of processing wastewater, which, as a result of treatment, is made suitable
for a direct beneficial reuse or a controlled use that would not otherwise
occur.  Treatment facilities include land and those buildings or portions of
buildings necessary to house personnel and equipment involved and used in the
direct operation and maintenance of the treatment facilities, the necessary
pumping power, laboratory and other equipment and their appurtenances.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 10-2-06)



Part 2.  Administration of System



§ 51.050  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.




   The Director is authorized to administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.  Any ministerial powers granted to or duties
imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the Director to persons acting
in the employ of or under contract to the city.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.051  ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.




   (A)   The Director is authorized to promulgate regulations and
standards reasonably necessary to protect the city's sewer system, to comply
with all applicable federal and state laws required by the Clean Water Act,
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended, and the General Pretreatment
Regulations, 40 CFR Part 403, to control and regulate the proper use thereof,
to prevent overflow, and to provide for the issuance, suspension or
revocation of industrial wastewater discharge permits; provided, however, the
regulations must be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and
formulated to result in the uniform control of the total sewer system within
the city.





   (B)   The Director, as the Director deems necessary, is authorized
to promulgate reasonable regulations relating to the rate of flow and the
quality and quantity of wastewater discharges to the sewer system of the
city, which must be consistent with and implement the purposes of this
chapter.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.052  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.




   The Director, through a program of inspection and sampling will ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the user's industrial 
wastewater discharge permit and all applicable federal and state laws and
regulations.  The program must include, without limitation, the review of
self-monitoring reports, inspections, sampling, flow verification and the
retention of all necessary records (40 CFR § 403.8(f)(1)(v)).





   (A)   The Director must inspect the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all
prohibitions, limitations and requirements are being complied with.





   (B)   Upon presentation of proper identification, persons or
occupants of premises where waste or wastewater is created or discharged must
allow inspectors ready access, at all reasonable times, to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination,
evidence gathering or in the performance of any of their other duties.





   (C)   In addition, the Director may enter property at any hour under
emergency circumstances involving the city's sewer system.





   (D)   The city, the approval authority and the EPA have the right to
set up on the user's property the devices needed to conduct sampling
inspection, compliance monitoring or metering operations.





   (E)   The Director, the EPA or approval authority must have access
to and the right to inspect and copy all of an industrial user's records
pertaining to wastewater discharge and compliance with pretreatment standards
and pretreatment requirements, whether the records are located at the
facility where the wastewater is created or discharged, or at another
facility of user.





   (F)   The Director will require the development of a compliance
schedule by each industrial user for the installation of technology required
to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and the submission
of all notices and self-monitoring reports from industrial users as are
necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with
pretreatment standards and requirements, including without limitation the
reports required in 40 CFR § 403(12)(c).





   (G)   During the inspection and compliance-monitoring activities,
the inspector must observe all reasonable security, safety and sanitation
measures.  In addition, the inspector must observe reasonable precautionary
measures specified by the user.





   (H)   Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises,
the user must make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city,
approval authority or EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.





   (I)   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, delay,
resist, or refuse entrance to an authorized inspector attempting to inspect
any raw material, waste or wastewater generation, conveyance, treatment or
storage facility (40 CFR § 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B)).





   (J)   A report listing any deficiencies and/or violations found
during the inspection must be prepared by the inspector and must be kept on
file at the city office.  A copy of the report must be provided to the user.





   (K)   If corrections are needed, the user must provide to the
Director an approved compliance schedule.





   (L)   When obtaining samples, the inspector must allow the user to
collect replicate samples for separate analysis.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.053  CONNECTIONS TO MAINS TO BE MAINTAINED BY OWNER.




   All lateral building sewers including that portion within public
right-of-way and connections, including the wye or saddle at the sewer main,
are owned by and maintained at the expense of the property owner.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.054  AVAILABILITY OF FACILITIES; RESTRICTION OF DISCHARGE RATE.




   (A)   If sewer system capacity is not available, the Director may
restrict discharge until sufficient capacity can be made available.  The
Director must advise any person desiring to locate a new facility of the
areas where wastewater of the proposed quantity and quality can be received
by available sewer system capacity.  The Director may refuse immediate
service to any new facility located in an area where there is insufficient
capacity in the city's sewer system to accommodate the proposed quality and
quantity of the wastewater or where the discharge of the wastewater will
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or cause the city's wastewater
treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit.





   (B)   The Director may restrict the rate of discharge into any
sanitary sewer during the peak flow hours (8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) or at any
other time when required to prevent the overloading of the sewer system.  A
discharger so restricted must be required either to curtail the discharger's
rate of discharge or to provide approved storage or retention facilities for
the wastewater.  Wastewater so retained may be discharged into a sanitary
sewer between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or during other periods
prescribed by the Director, at a rate of flow, which the sewer system can
accommodate.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.055  SEWER MAINTENANCE EXPENSE.




   Any person who discharges or causes to be discharged into the city's
sewer system either directly or indirectly, any waste or wastewater which
creates a stoppage, plugging, breakage, permanent reduction in the capacity
of a sewer, or any other damage to the city's sewer system is liable for the
damage and for sewer system maintenance expense occasioned thereby.  The
expense and the damage is a debt to the city and will be charged to the
discharger by the Director.  Any excessive maintenance expense or any other
expenses attributable thereto will be charged to the offending discharger by
the city.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.056  DAMAGE TO CITY'S SEWER SYSTEM; CREATION OF OTHER LIABILITY.




   Any person who discharges or causes to be discharged into the city's
sewer system, either directly or indirectly, any prohibited waste or
wastewater which causes damage to the system, causes detrimental effects upon
city wastewater treatment plan processes or causes the violation of a
discharge requirement or regulation imposed by a regulatory agency is liable
for all damages and costs occasioned thereby, including any penalty assessed
by a regulatory agency.  The damages, costs or penalty assessed are a debt
to the city and will be charged to the user by the Director.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.057  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.




   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections must be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as confidential information of the user.  Information
which the federal Department of Homeland Security has categorized as
"critical infrastructure information" is exempt from disclosure under the
federal Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-296.





   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of the report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes must not
be made available for inspection by the public, but must be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
chapter and/or the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; provided,
however, that the portions of a report must be available for use by the state
or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving
the person furnishing the report (40 CFR § 403.8(f)(1)(vii)).  Information
and data provided to the control authority pertaining to effluent
constituents and characteristics must be available to the public without
restrictions (40 CFR § 403.14(b)).  However, information which the federal
Department of Homeland Security has categorized as "critical infrastructure
information" is exempt from disclosure under the federal Homeland Security
Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-296.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.058  RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.




   Except as otherwise provided, a person may request administrative
review of the Director's decision pursuant to this chapter.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.059  TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.




   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be
commenced within ten days from the date on which written notice of the
Director's decision is made.





   (B)   If a request for review is untimely, the Director may,
nevertheless, extend the time for commencing the review for good cause shown.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.060  COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.




   A request for administrative review will be on a form provided by the
Director and contain the following information:





   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the person making
the request;





   (B)   A description of the decision, determination or order which is
the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order
was made or issued;





   (C)   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and





   (D)   The other information as may be required by the Director.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.061  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.




   (A)   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the
Director will provide a copy of the notice to the City Manager, or designee,
within ten business days.





   (B)   Upon receiving a request for review from the Director, the
City Manager, or designee, will review the request and, within ten days of
receiving the request notice, provide the person requesting review with a
written notification that:





      (1)   The Director's decision is affirmed;





      (2)   The Director's decision is modified;





      (3)   The Director's decision is reversed.





   (C)   The City Manager, or designee, may, but is not required to,
conduct a hearing at a time and place determined at the City Manager's sole
discretion.





   (D)   In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any
notification to the person requesting administrative review must set forth
any modifications of the Director's decision.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.062  CITY COUNCIL APPEAL.




   Unless otherwise provided, an applicant may appeal the City Manager's
decision to the City Council within ten days of that decision as provided
elsewhere in this code or by city policy and procedure.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.063  PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.




   Public notification will be made at least annually in the largest daily
local newspaper listing all local industries that, during the previous 12
months, were significantly violating applicable federal pretreatment
standards or other pretreatment requirements.  For the purposes of this
provision, a significant violation would be those violations which remained
uncorrected 45 days after notification of the violation; which are a part of
pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period; which involves a failure to
report noncompliance accurately; or which resulted in the city exercising its
emergency authority (40 CFR § 403.8(f)(2)(vii)).




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



Part 3.  Wastewater Discharged Into City Sewer System



§ 51.075  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE POLICY.




   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to connect any new building
sewer or add any new source to any existing building sewer, which connects to
any city sewer or other facility to the city's sewer system without first
obtaining a written permit from the city and paying to the city the
connection, conveyance, and any other permit fees required thereof.





   (B)   Domestic and industrial wastewater originating within the city
will be accepted into the city's sewer system if there is capacity in the
system and the wastewater will not:





      (1)   Threaten public health;





      (2)   Detrimentally affect the local environment;





      (3)   Create a nuisance, including odor and infestation;





      (4)   Impose excessive collection, treatment or disposal costs
upon the city;





      (5)   Significantly interfere with or impede wastewater
treatment processes;





      (6)   Interfere with or impede wastewater reclamation
processes;





      (7)   Exceed quality limits and quantity requirements
established by this chapter or regulations promulgated hereunder;





      (8)   Significantly contaminate the sludge from the treatment
process;





      (9)   Cause the city's wastewater treatment plant to violate
its NPDES permit.





   (C)   This chapter provides specific limits for prohibited
constituents only where they are now reasonably well established.  Other
constituents will be brought under regulation when specific limits are
established.  In some cases, the concentration or amount of any particular
constituent, which will be judged to be excessive or unreasonable, cannot be
foreseen, but will depend on the results of technical determinations relating
to the particular situation and actions of regulatory agencies.





   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any domestic or
industrial wastewater to the ground,  into any surface drainage conduit,
storm drain or channel, or stream or other watercourse.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.076  SPECIFIC DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.




   (A)   It is unlawful for any user to contribute or cause to be
contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will
interfere with the operation or performance of the city's sewer system. 
These city prohibitions apply to all users of the city's sewer system whether
or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
any other federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.





   (B)   It is unlawful for a user to contribute the following
substances, directly or indirectly, to the city sewer system (40 CFR §
403.5(b)):





      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in
the city sewer system, including, without limitation, waste streams with a
closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° Fahrenheit or 60° Centigrade using
the test methods specified in 40 CFR § 261.21.





      (2)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard in the city sewer
system or be injurious in any other way to the city's sewer system, its
operation or personnel.  At no time must two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL).





      (3)   Prohibited materials, include, without limitation,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides, sulfides or any other substances which violate this chapter or any
applicable local, state or federal laws, codes, rules, regulations, standards
or permits, or which damage or interfere with the operation or performance of
the city's sewer system.  See 40 CFR § 403.5(b)(1);





      (4)   Pollutants, which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the city sewer system in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems;





      (5)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the Public Works Director;





      (6)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or a pH higher
than 10.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive or detrimental
characteristics capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and/or personnel of the city's sewer system.  See 40 CFR § 403.5(b)(2);





      (7)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction
to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment plant such as, without limitation, grease, garbage with
particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch, manure, bones, hair, hides or flesh, entrails, whole blood
and/or components, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent
grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, and
glass grinding or polishing wastes (40 CFR § 403.5(b)(3));




      (8)   Rain water, storm water, ground water, street drainage,
sub-surface drainage, roof drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds, or
lawn sprays or other contaminated water.



      (9)   Non-biodegradable oils commonly called soluble oils
which may form persistent water emulsions or oil, petroleum oil or refined
petroleum products beyond a concentration set forth under “Specific
Pollutant Limitations,” disposal of oils and fats including lard, tallow,
or vegetable oil in  concentrations which may be detrimental to the city’s
sewer system or which violate the city’s NPDES permit;



         (10)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or
solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient
to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair;



         (11)   Any substance which may cause the city’s
wastewater treatment plant’s effluent, or any other product such as
residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with the reclamation process.



         (12)   In no case must a material be discharged which
causes the city’s wastewater treatment plant to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
§405 of the Act, 33 U.S.C. §1345.  Any criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act (2 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.), the Toxic
Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§2601 et seq., or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used;



         (13)   Any substance that could cause a pass through
violation, 40 CFR § 403.5(a)(1), or any slug load or pollutant, including
oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, and the like) released in a discharge at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, could cause Interference with wastewater
treatment plant (40 CFR § 403.5(b)(4)).



         (14)   Any wastewater with objectionable color
including, without limitation, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;



         (15)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than
150° F, or which could inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F
(40° C);



         (16)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes
or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the Director in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations;



         (17)   Any wastewater which could cause a hazard to
human life or create a public nuisance;



         (18)   Deionized water, steam underwaste or distilled
water in excess of laboratory usage; single pass cooling water, blow-down or
bleed water from cooling towers or other evaporation coolers exceeding
one-third of the make-up water (quantities in excess of one-third of the
make-up water may be discharged into the city’s sewer system, subject to
this chapter, during off-peak hours if hydraulic sewer capacity is available);



         (19)   Any wastewater with amounts of TDS which may be
detrimental to the city’s sewer system;



         (20)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or
cause to be discharged into the city’s sewer system any waste or wastewater
if in the opinion of the Director the discharge may have an adverse or
harmful effect on sewers, maintenance personnel, wastewater treatment plant
personnel or equipment, treatment plant effluent quality, public or private
property or may otherwise endanger ecological systems or create a public
nuisance.



         (21)   In determining the acceptability of specific
wastewater under this section, the Director, in addition to the foregoing,
must consider the nature of the wastewater, the adequacy and nature of the
collection, the treatment and disposal system available to accept the
wastewater, and the city policy embodied in this chapter.



         (22)   The Director may promulgate standards as provided
herein and upon appropriate application must establish terms and conditions
appropriate to specific dischargers.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 10-2-06)  Penalty, see §
51.999




§ 51.077  SPECIFIC DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL USERS.




   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for an industrial discharger to
discharge wastewater containing any pollutant which exceeds the concentration
limits set forth below, or the limits in 40 CFR § 403.5(c), as it may be
amended, whichever is more stringent:




         (a)   BOD-5 day:  600.00 mg/l.



         (b)   COD:  1,100.00 mg/l.



         (c)   S.S.:  800.00 mg/l.



         (d)   Oil and grease:  50.00 mg/l.



         (e)   Chloride:  110.00 mg/l.



         (f)   Arsenic:  3.00 mg/l.



         (g)   Ammonia:  30.00 mg/l.



         (h)   Cadmium:  1.00 mg/l.



         (i)   Chromium (total):  2.30 mg/l.



         (j)   Copper:  1.30 mg/l.



         (k)   Lead:  3.10 mg/l.



         (l)   Mercury:  0.01 mg/l.



         (m)   Nickel:  1.10 mg/l.



         (n)   Silver:  1.00 mg/l.



         (o)   Sulfide (dissolved):  0.10 mg/l.



         (p)   Zinc:  10.00 mg/l.



         (q)   Cyanide (total):  3.00 mg/l.




         (r)   TDS:  2,000.00 mg/l.





      (2)   Any exceedance of any of the foregoing limits, as they
may be amended, is a violation of this chapter and subjects the user to
enforcement action.  Concentration limits apply at the point of discharge to
the sewer system.  Concentrations for metallic substances are for "total"
metal.





   (B)   When the Director determines that the user is contributing to
the city's sewer system any of the above enumerated substances in amounts in
excess of these limitations, the Director must notify the user(s) of the
violation.





   (C)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (40 CFR Chapter 1,
Chapter N, Parts 405-471):





      (1)   Specific industrial subcategory discharges - pollutants
or pollutant properties discharged to a city sewer system by existing or new
industrial users in specific Industrial subcategories must be in addition to
all applicable pretreatment  standards and requirements.





      (2)   Within 60 days after the effective date of a
pretreatment standard for a subcategory under which an industrial user may be
included, the industrial user may request written certification on whether
the industrial user falls within that particular subcategory.





      (3)   If an existing industrial user adds or changes a process
or operation which may be included in a subcategory, the existing industrial
user must request certification before commencing discharge from the added or
changed processes or operation.





      (4)   A new source must request this certification before
commencing discharge.  See 40 CFR § 403.6.





      (5)   Indirect dischargers subject to the national categorical
standards must comply with those standards in addition to 40 CFR § 403.6.




      (6)   If the Public Works Director determines it is necessary,
any industrial user they may be required to implement measures to limit the
possibility slug discharges from their facility.  These control measures
shall be contained in a slug discharge control plan developed by the
industrial user and submitted to the Public Works Director.



   (D)   As provided in 40 CFR § 403.3, the Public Works Director may
determine that an industrial user subject to Categorical Pretreatment
Standards under § 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N is a
non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant
industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more
than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding
sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the other provisions
of 40 CFR.



   (E)   Any industrial permit is in significant noncompliance if its
violation meets one or more of the following criteria:



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l);



      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public).



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-20-13)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.078  LIMITATIONS ON THE USE OF GARBAGE GRINDERS.




   Waste from garbage grinders must not be discharged into the city's
sewer system except:





   (A)   Wastes generated in preparation of food in a residence; or





   (B)   Where the user has an existing garbage grinder and has an
approval for that specific use from the city, and agrees to undertake
whatever self-monitoring is required to enable the city to equitably
determine the charges and fees based on the waste constituents and
characteristics.





      (1)   The grinders must be repaired or replaced as necessary
in order to at all times ensure that the waste is shredded to a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing
in the city's sewer system.





      (2)   Garbage grinders must not be used for grinding plastic,
paper products, inert materials, garden refuse, or waste products resulting
from the handling, storage and sale of fruits and vegetables in wholesale and
retail produce establishments, and wastes from plants engaged in the
preparation, processing or preserving of foods not intended primarily for
immediate consumption; and





      (3)   At any time the property or business changes ownership,
excluding residential property, any existing garbage grinders installed on
the property must be removed and no new garbage grinders may be installed as
a condition of continued city sewer service to the property.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.079  VARIANCE FROM SPECIFIC DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.




   (A)   A variance from a specific compatible pollutant limitation may
be obtained from the Director.  Granting of a variance must be determined on
a case-by-case basis.  The Director must take into account the following
factors when making this determination:





      (1)   The industrial user's ability to meet the existing
limitations;





      (2)   The industrial user's wastewater discharge volume;





      (3)   The industrial user's current wastewater constituent
concentrations;





      (4)   The impact of increased constituent concentrations on
the city's sewer system, the wastewater treatment plant's processes, effluent
and/or sludge quality;





      (5)   The impact of increased constituent concentrations on
the wastewater treatment plant's NPDES permit requirements; and





      (6)   Any other factor(s) the Director deems applicable.





   (B)   Before issuing such a variance, the Director must verify with
EPA that the variance will not allow the user to exceed applicable
categorical standards.





   (C)   The Director may require the user to monitor its effluent in
excess of previous levels if the Director deems it necessary to properly
enforce any variance granted under this section.





   (D)   The Director reserves the right to impose requirements which
are stricter than, or are additive to, those specified in this chapter should
the quantity or quality of the user's effluent merit unique consideration by
virtue of its impact on the city's sewer system or the public health and
welfare.





   (E)   The Director reserves the right to revoke the variance at any
time.





   (F)   The Director reserves the right to charge additional fees as
related to the granting of a variance.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.080  DILUTION OF DISCHARGE.




   In accordance with 40 CFR § 403.6(d), it is unlawful for any
industrial user to increase the use of process water, or in any other way
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable
pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement (40 CFR § 403.6(d)).




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.081  STATE REQUIREMENTS.




   State requirements and limitations on dischargers apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter (40 CFR § 403.4).




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.082  FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS.




   The federal general pretreatment regulations for existing and new
sources of pollution found at 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter Parts 405-471 are
hereby incorporated by reference as follows:





   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the control authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR § 403.6(c).





   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the control
authority must impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream
formula in 40 CFR § 403.6(e).





   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.





   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.15.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.083  RIGHT OF REVISION.




   The control authority reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or
in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the wastewater treatment plant.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



Part 4.  Pretreatment Requirements



§ 51.095  REGULATORY ACTIONS.




   It is unlawful for any user to discharge into the city's sewer system
any wastewater not in compliance with this chapter.  If wastewater
containing excess concentrations of a substance or a prohibited substance in
this chapter is discharged or proposed to be discharged to the city's sewer
system, the Director, City Manager, and City Attorney are authorized to take
the steps as needed to prevent or curtail the discharge (see 40 CFR §
403.8(f)(1)(i)).  Without limitation, the actions may include:





   (A)   Prohibiting the discharge of the actual wastewater;





   (B)   Requiring the discharger to demonstrate that the in-plant
modifications would either reduce or eliminate the discharge in conformance
with the prohibitions, limitations and/or requirements of this chapter;





   (C)   Requiring pretreatment to reduce, eliminate or alter the
nature of the pollutants to a less harmful state before their discharge into
the city's sewer system;





   (D)   Requiring the person making, causing or allowing the discharge
to pay noncompliance penalties.





   (E)   Implementing any other remedial action as may be deemed
necessary to achieving the purpose and requirements of this chapter.





   (F)   The following conditions must apply to any compliance schedule
required by this chapter or the control authority:





      (1)   The schedule must contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include,
without limitation, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, beginning and conducting routine operation);





      (2)   No increment referred to above must exceed nine months;





      (3)   The user must submit a progress report to the control
authority no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and





      (4)   In no event must more than nine months elapse between
such progress reports to the control authority.





      (5)   No compliance schedule must exceed 18 months.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.096  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES AND OPERATION.




   (A)   A user may be required by the Director to install, maintain
and use wastewater pretreatment devices or systems before discharge to the
city's sewer system.  Pretreatment may be necessary to restrict or prevent
the discharge of certain waste constituents, to distribute more equally over
a longer time period any peak discharges of industrial wastewaters, or to
accomplish any pretreatment results required by this chapter (40 CFR §
403.8(f)(1)(iii)).





   (B)   Pretreatment facilities as required by the Director must be
maintained in good working order and operated as efficiently as possible at
the expense of the discharger, and are subject to the requirement of this
chapter and all other applicable codes and laws.





   (C)   Where pretreatment or flow equalization before discharge into
the city's sewer system is required, plans, specifications and other
pertinent data or information relating to the pretreatment or flow control
must first be submitted to the Director for approval.  The approval must not
exempt the discharger of said facilities from compliance with any applicable
rule or ordinance of any other governmental authority.  Any alterations or
additions to the pretreatment facilities must not be made without due notice
to the Director for prior review and approval.





   (D)   All federal pretreatment standards applicable to local
industry which specify quantities or concentrations of pollutants that may be
discharged by a specific industrial subcategory will be enforced by the city
as required in §§ 309(e) and (f) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§
1319(e) and (f).  Compliance by existing industrial users with categorical
pretreatment standards must be within three years of the date the standard is
promulgated unless a shorter time is specified by the EPA.





   (E)   All domestic wastewaters including, without limitation, those
from restrooms, showers and drinking fountains must be kept separate from
industrial wastewaters until the industrial wastewaters have passed through
any required pretreatment and/or monitoring device or system.





   (F)   The following conditions must apply to any compliance schedule
required by this chapter or the control authority:





      (1)   The schedule must contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include,
without limitation, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, beginning and conducting routine operation);





      (2)   No increment referred to above must exceed nine months;





      (3)   The user must submit a progress report to the control
authority no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and





      (4)   In no event must more than nine  months elapse between
such progress reports to the control authority.





      (5)   No compliance schedule must exceed 18 months.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.097  PREVENTION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.




   (A)   Each industrial user must prevent discharge of prohibited
materials, other regulated wastes or wastewater or any other materials in
concentration or quantities of which could be detrimental to the city's sewer
system, its operation or personnel as specified in this chapter.





   (B)   Each floor drain or floor sink located in an area where
regulated chemicals are stored or used must be protected in a manner approved
by the Director to prevent uncontrolled or accidental discharges of these
regulated constituents from directly entering the city's sewer system.





   (C)   Facilities to prevent accidental discharges must be provided
and maintained at the user's expense.  Detailed plans in the form of a spill
prevention control and counter-measures plan (showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection) must be submitted to the
Director for review and approval before construction of the facilities.





   (D)   The review and approval of plans and operating procedures must
not relieve the industrial user from responsibility of modifying said
facilities as necessary to meet the other requirements of this chapter.





   (E)   A notice must be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a dangerous discharge.  Employers must ensure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.





   (F)   Any person that causes or discovers an uncontrolled or
accidental discharge of regulated wastes or wastewater into the city's sewer
system must immediately telephone the Director in order that corrective
action may be taken to protect the city's sewer system, its operation or
personnel.





   (G)   In addition, to all other reports required by federal and
state law, the person responsible for the discharge of the wastes or
wastewater must file a written report to the Director detailing the date,
time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics
of the discharge and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges.





   (H)   The report must be filed within five days of the occurrence of
the uncontrolled or accidental discharge.  See 40 CFR § 403.12(f).





   (I)   Notice of potential problems, including slug loading.  All
categorical and non-categorical industrial users must notify the city sewer
system immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the city
sewer system, including any slug loadings.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.098  DISCHARGES OF WASTES OR WASTEWATER INTO THE CITY'S SEWER SYSTEM
FROM VEHICLES.




   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge into the city's
sewer system any industrial wastes or wastewater, any gravity separating
device or interceptor contents, any septic tank, seepage pit, or cesspool
contents or wastewater transported by or discharged from a vacuum truck,
cesspool pump truck or other waste or wastewater transport vehicle waste at a
location other than that which has been approved by the Director.





   (B)   Transported industrial wastes must be discharged only at
locations specified by the Director for the specific waste.  Payment for any
excessive treatment and disposal costs may be required and permission to
discharge prohibited wastes may be refused by the Director.





   (C)   Recreational vehicle wastes must be discharged only at an
approved home connection or recreational vehicle dump station.  Recreational
vehicle dump stations must provide a clearly marked source of nonpotable
rinse water with a hose and back flow protection within ten feet of the
discharge point.  A clearly marked source of potable water must also be
provided no closer than 25 feet nor more than 100 feet from the point of
discharge.  A sign must be posted at the dump station stating: "Recreational
Vehicle Domestic Wastes Only."




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.099  GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GRAVITY SEPARATING DEVICES.




   (A)   Restaurants.  All restaurants or similar establishments have
an approved grease interceptor of sufficient size so as to prevent excessive
discharges of grease into the city's sewer system.  The grease interceptor
must be easily accessible for inspection by the Director.  Exceptions to the
installation of a grease interceptor must be determined by a case-by-case
basis by the Director. The Director must take into account the following
items when determining exceptions:





      (1)   Size of restaurant;





      (2)   Meals served per day;





      (3)   Seating capacity;





      (4)   Dishwashing and garbage disposal facilities on-hand; and





      (5)   Any other criteria the Director deems applicable.





   (B)   Car washes, vehicle service stations and garages. Car washes
and vehicle service stations or garages must be required to install and
maintain a gravity-separating device designed to prevent the discharge of
sand, silt, oil and grease to the city's sewer system.





   (C)   Laundries and dry cleaners.  Not later than the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter all new laundries and dry
cleaners or similar establishments must install a gravity-separating device
of a size and design approved by the Director.  They must also install any
other pretreatment facility required by the Director to ensure their
compliance with all requirements and specifications of this chapter. 
Establishments in existence before this date must install an appropriate
pretreatment system if, in the opinion of the Director, the system is
warranted.





   (D)   Other facilities. Grease, oil or sand interceptors must be
provided in other new facilities when, in the opinion of the Director, they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, and other harmful ingredients. 
All interceptors must be of type and capacity approved by  the Director, and
must be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.





   (E)   Existing gravity separating device and grease interceptors. 
If the Director finds that a grease interceptor or gravity separating device
installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter
is incapable of retaining adequately the grease or sand and oil in the
wastewater flow from a service station, car wash or restaurant or similar
establishment or other facility, the Director must give the proprietor a
written notice requiring that an adequate interceptor or gravity separating
device be installed within a reasonable time period.





   (F)   Approved designs.  The Director may maintain for public use
an information file of acceptable designs of grease interceptors and gravity
separating devices.  The installation of a design shown in the file or of
any design meeting the size requirement set forth in this chapter or any
recommendation of requirements made by the Director must not impute any
liability to the city for the adequacy of the interceptor or gravity
separating device under the actual conditions in use.  The installation must
not relieve the owner or proprietor of responsibility for keeping prohibited
substances or substances above the limitations of this chapter out of the
city's sewer system.  If the interceptor, gravity separating device or other
pretreatment facility is not adequate under the conditions of use, one must
be constructed which is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.100  MAINTENANCE OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS AND GRAVITY SEPARATING DEVICES.




   (A)   Any grease interceptor or gravity separating device required
by this chapter must be readily accessible for inspection and properly
maintained by the user at the user's expense to assure that the accumulations
of grease or sand and oil do not impair its efficiency or pass out with the
effluent.





   (B)   All users required to use and maintain a grease interceptor or
gravity-separating device must maintain a maintenance record.





      (1)   This record must include the date, the name of the
person who cleaned it and the disposal site of the waste.  The report must
be reviewed by the Director at each routine inspection.





      (2)   Persons hauling wastes and wastewater removed from these
interceptors or gravity separating devices must be registered to do so by the
proper permitting agency.





      (3)   An interceptor or gravity separation device must not be
considered properly maintained if material accumulations total more than 25%
of the operating fluid capacity.





      (4)   The city will endeavor to inspect all grease
interceptors and  gravity-separating device at least annually.  If it is
found that the grease interceptor or gravity separating device is improperly
maintained or adequate records are not being kept, a warning will be issued
to the owner and/or user of the property.





      (5)   If on subsequent inspections it is found that one of the
above conditions continues to exist, a fine must be levied against the owner
and/or user of the property.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



Part 5.  Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit System



§ 51.110  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.




   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged any industrial wastewater directly or indirectly to any city sewer
without first obtaining a city permit for industrial wastewater discharge.





   (B)   The permit for industrial wastewater discharge may require a
pretreatment of industrial wastewaters before discharge, restriction of peak
flow discharges, discharge of certain wastewaters only to specified sewers of
the city, relocation of point of discharge, prohibition of discharge of
certain wastewater components, restriction of discharge to certain hours of
the day, payment of additional charges to defray increased costs to the city
created by the wastewater discharge and other conditions as may be required
to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.




   (C)   If the Public Works Director or his designee decides that a
slug control plan is needed, the plan must contain, at a minimum, the
following elements:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the city sewer
system of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a
prohibition under 40 CFR § 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written
notification within five days;



      (4)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control
of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response (40 CFR §
403.8(f)(1)(iii)).



   (D)   The city will deny or condition new or increased contributions
of pollutants or changes in the nature of pollutants from industrial users
based on industry’s violations of applicable pretreatment standards or the
limitations imposed by this chapter or where the contributions could cause
the city’s wastewater treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit (40 CFR
§ 403.8(f)(1)(iii)).



   (E)   In addition each permit upon renewal or each application for a
permit must be accompanied by the fees as required by this chapter and the
schedule of fees adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-20-13)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.111  PERMIT APPLICATION.




   (A)   The user seeking an industrial discharge permit must complete
an application form provided by the Director and file it with the Director
accompanied by the required fee.





   (B)   In support of this application, the applicant must supply in
the following information:





      (1)   Name and address of applicant and standard industrial
classification (S.I.C.) number of the operations to be carried out by user;





      (2)   The location of the discharge;





      (3)   Time and duration of discharge;





      (4)   Estimated average and peak flow rates including any
expected daily, monthly and seasonal variations;





      (5)   Major constituents and characteristics including without
limitation those regulated by this chapter and the applicable categorical
standards as determined by a certified analytical laboratory;





      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, plumbing plans and details to
show all public sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;





      (7)   Description of toxic or hazardous materials stored or
used on the premises, which are or could be discharged to the city's sewer
system;





      (8)   Each product by type and production process;





      (9)   Identification of applicable regulating pretreatment
standards;





      (10)   Number of employees and normal hours of operation of
the facility;





      (11)   Any other information, which may be deemed necessary by
the Director to evaluate the permit application.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.112  PERMIT CONDITIONS.




   (A)   The industrial wastewater discharge permit must constitute the
performance specification to which each industrial user must conform in order
to maintain authorization to use the city's sewer system.





   (B)   Industrial wastewater discharge permits must be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter, federal pretreatment standards and
regulations pursuant to § 307 et seq. of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§
1317 et seq.) and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by
the city.





   (C)   Permit conditions must be uniformly enforced in accordance
with this chapter and applicable state and federal regulations.





   (D)   Permit conditions may include without limitation the
following, in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.12(b):





      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater
constituent concentrations and other relevant qualitative characteristics;





      (2)   Mass emission discharge rates or any more stringent
federal pretreatment standards and user's average daily wastewater discharge
for the past three years.  When not available, data for a year or that,
which is mutually acceptable to the user and the city, will be used;





      (3)   Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for
flow regulations and equalization;





      (4)   Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling
facilities and specifications for monitoring programs;





      (5)   Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical
self-monitoring reports and plant records relating to Industrial wastewater
discharges;





      (6)   Compliance schedules;





      (7)   Applicable federal pretreatment standards which are more
stringent than local limitations;





      (8)   Other conditions to ensure compliance with this chapter.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.113  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES.




   A compliance schedule required as a result of an industrial user's
noncompliance with applicable federal and/or local pretreatment standards or
requirements, or for the installation of technology required to meet
applicable standards or requirements must be based on the following:





   (A)   A list of the expected increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
consistent compliance with applicable federal and/or local pretreatment
standards;





   (B)   No increment referred to above exceed three months;





   (C)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the industrial user must submit a progress
report to the Director including as a minimum, whether or not the user
complied with the latest increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the
steps taken by the user to return to the schedule established.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.114  DURATION AND REVISION OF PERMITS.




   (A)   Permits are issued for a period of one year. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification as limitations or
requirements in this chapter are modified or as a result of pretreatment
standards and/or requirements promulgated pursuant to §§ 307 et seq. of the
Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317 et seq.





   (B)   The user must be informed of the proposed changes in the
user's permit 30 days before the effective date of the change.  Any new
conditions in the permit must include a reasonable compliance schedule to be
proposed by the industrial user and approved by the Director.  The
compliance schedule will allow the user time to modify the industrial process
sufficiently to comply with the new permit changes.





   (C)   Permits issued to each industrial user must be based on the
user's typical discharge rate, peak discharge rate and wastewater
constituents and characteristics as described in the user's permit
application or through the Director's knowledge of the history of the user's
discharge.





   (D)   The user is required to promptly notify the Director of any
significant changes in the user's operation that may affect the user's
discharge rate, peak flow rate, wastewater constituents or characteristics
(40 CFR § 403.12(j)).




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.115  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.




   Industrial wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user
for a specific operation.  A permit must not be reassigned or transferred or
sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed
operation.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.116  VIOLATION OF PERMIT.




   (A)   When the Director determines that a condition and/or discharge
is in violation of any provision of this chapter or in violation of any
permit condition or limitation imposed, the industrial user must be issued a
notice of violation by the Director which specifies the violation or
designates the deficiencies and must specify a period of time within which
the discharge must be brought into conformity with all requirements.





   (B)   The period of time specified by the Director must be
reasonably related to the character of the violation, to the quality and
quantity of the discharge and to the risk imposed upon the city's sewer
system or threatened to the public health, safety and welfare.





   (C)   The discharger must submit in writing, to the Director, the
following:





      (1)   An explanation as to the cause of violation;





      (2)   A compliance schedule, which outlines the methods
undertaken to remedy the violation and to assure a repetition of the
violation, does not occur.





   (D)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the control authority as soon as possible but no later than
24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.





   (E)   The user must also immediately repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control
authority within the time period specified by the control authority but at no
time greater than 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.





   (F)   The user may not be required to resample if the control
authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the
control authority samples between the user's initial sampling and when the
user receives the results of this sampling.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.117  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.




   (A)   The Director may suspend a permit if the suspension is
necessary to terminate a discharge which is in violation of any provision of
this chapter; provided, that a notice of violation has been served on the
user and the time designated therein to correct the violation has expired.





   (B)   The Director may suspend a permit upon informal notice only,
if immediate suspension is necessary to terminate a discharge which presents
an imminent hazard to the local environment and/or public health, to the
city's sewer system or to city personnel or the termination of which is
reasonably required to preserve the public health, safety or welfare.





   (C)   Any person notified of the suspension of the industrial
wastewater discharge permit must immediately stop or eliminate the discharge
of the specified wastewater or other material into the city's sewer system. 
In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the city must take such steps as deemed necessary,
including, without limitation, immediate severance of the sewer connection,
to prevent or minimize damage to the city's sewer system or endangerment of
any individuals.





   (D)   The Director must reinstate a permit suspended hereunder upon
proof of the user's compliance with the notice of violation and with the
requirements of this chapter.  A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken
to prevent any future occurrence must be submitted to the city within 15 days
of the date of occurrence.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.118  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.




   (A)   Any industrial user who violates the conditions of the user's
permit or provisions of this chapter or applicable federal and state
regulations is subject to having the user's permit revoked.





   (B)   Violations subjecting a user to possible revocation of the
permit include, without limitation, the following:





      (1)   Failure of a user to report factually their wastewater
constituents or concentrations or to comply with their self-monitoring
requirements;





      (2)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;





      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring;





      (4)   Violation of conditions of the user's permit; or





      (5)   Failure of the user to comply with the terms of the
user's compliance schedule.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.119  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.




   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste must
notify the control authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, state hazardous waste authorities and the Governor's Office of
Emergency Services in writing, of any discharge into the wastewater treatment
plant of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261.





      (1)   The notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).





      (2)   If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of the
hazardous waste per calendar month to the wastewater treatment plant, the
notification must also contain the following information to the extent  the
information is known or readily available to the user:  an identification of
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass
and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during
that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.





      (3)   All notifications must be provided not later than 180
days after the discharge commences.





      (4)   Any notification under this section need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged.  However, notifications of
changed discharges must be submitted under this chapter.





      (5)   The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements
of this chapter.





   (B)   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of division (A) of
this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, is discharged unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).





      (1)   Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a
one-time notification.





      (2)   Subsequent months during which the user discharges more
than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.





   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act identifying additional characteristics
of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste,
the user must notify the control authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of the substance within 90 days of the effective date of the
regulations.





   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user must certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it is feasible.





   (E)   This reporting provision does not create a right to discharge
any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a
permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



Part 6.  Industrial Wastewater Monitoring and Reporting



§ 51.130  RECORDS AND MONITORING.




   (A)   All industrial users discharging or proposing to discharge
industrial wastewater to the city's sewer system must maintain records of its
raw materials and usage, processes, effluent flows, pollutant concentrations
and related factors.  These records must be necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any applicable federal
or state pretreatment standards.





   (B)   Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of
this chapter must be required to retain for a minimum of three years any
records of monitoring activities and results.  This period of retention must
be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the
industrial user or city sewer system or when requested by the director or the
approval authority.





   (C)   All records related to compliance with pretreatment standards
must be made available for inspection and copying at the company facility or
if located elsewhere, at the other location, to officials of the EPA,
approval authority and the director (40 CFR  § 403.12(o)(2)).





   (D)   The owner and/or occupant of any premises or facility
discharging industrial wastewater into the city's sewer system must install
at its or their own expense suitable monitoring equipment as may be required
by this chapter to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling, and
measurement of regulated constituents.  The equipment must be maintained in
proper working order and kept safe and accessible at all times.





   (E)   If the Director requires or the owner or operator chooses to
install a flow meter, the flow meter must be calibrated every six months and
a photocopy of the calibration must be sent to the Director.  The
calibration must be performed by one of the following:  the manufacturer or
a qualified civil engineer.  Flow charts are to be held by the user for a
minimum of three years and made available to the director upon request. 
Totalizer readings must be recorded daily and every month a report must be
submitted to the director showing total daily flows and total monthly flow.





   (F)   All industrial users required to periodically sample and
analyze their wastewater must use sampling methods and sampling locations
approved by the Director.  For each sample collected and analyzed the user
must maintain a record of:





      (1)   The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and
the names of the person or persons taking samples;





      (2)   The dates and analyses where performed;





      (3)   Who performed the analysis;





      (4)   The analytical techniques/methods used;





      (5)   The results of the analyses.





   (G)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
approved sampling point must be constructed in accordance with the city
requirements.  An industry may request approval from the city for sampling
wells installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, which meet the design and accessibility requirements for sampling
purposes.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.131  SAMPLING WELL.




   (A)   A sampling well(s) of a design approved by the Director must
be furnished and installed by designated industrial user to facilitate
inspection, sampling and flow measurements.  The sampling well(s) must be
located in an accessible location and the location must be designated by the
Director.





   (B)   Unrestricted access to the sampling well(s) must be provided
to authorized personnel of the city or its duly authorized representative at
all times.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.132  SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS.




   (A)   Determinations with respect to compliance with this chapter
must be made by the Director on the basis of either instantaneous grab or
composite sampling of the wastewater.  Grab samples may be taken as deemed
necessary by the Director to meet the needs of the specific circumstances.





   (B)   All analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
established pursuant to § 304(g) through (m) of the Federal Clean Water Act
(33 U.S.C. §§ 1314(g) through (m)) and contained in 40 CFR part 136, as
amended.





   (C)   Sampling of industrial wastewater and wastes for the purpose
of compliance determination must be conducted at intervals specified by the
Director.  However, it is the intention of the Director to conduct
compliance sampling for all industrial users at least once per year, for the
constituents set forth in the user's industrial wastewater discharge permit.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.133  SELF-MONITORING REPORTS.




   (A)   All industrial users required to do so by the Director must
monitor and report on the quantity and quality of their industrial wastewater
discharge.  The items to be included in the report and the frequency with
which the report must be submitted to the Director will be detailed in the
user's industrial wastewater discharge permit.  The frequency of
self-monitoring and reporting for those industrial dischargers not regulated
by the federal general pretreatment regulations will be based on the
following factors:





      (1)   The effect of the wastewater on the city's system;





      (2)   The degree of toxic material, which may pass through the
treatment plant;





      (3)   The quantity, nature and type of the industrial
wastewater discharge;





      (4)   The extent to which the discharge could contribute to
violation of the city's wastewater treatment plant NPDES permit.





   (B)   All reports submitted by the industrial user are required to
be signed by an authorized representative of the user and are to include a
tabulation of all samples collected and all samples analyzed by the
industrial user even if they are more frequent or more complex than the
monitoring requirement specified by the city.





   (C)   Signature requirements for POTW reports.  Reports submitted
to the approval authority by the POTW must be signed by a principal executive
officer, ranking elected official or other duly authorized employee if such
employee is responsible for overall operation of the POTW.





   (D)   The reports and other documents required to be submitted or
maintained under this section are subject to:





      (1)   The provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 relating to false
statements;





      (2)   The provisions of CWA § 309(c)(4), as amended,
governing false statements, representation or certification; and





      (3)   The provisions of CWA § 309(c)(6), as amended,
regarding responsible corporate officers.





   (E)   These reports must be subject to the provision of 18 U.S.C. §
1001 relating to false statements and the provisions of § 309(c) of the
Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1319(c), governing false statements.





   (F)   Each self-monitoring report and all reports as required within
this division must contain the following completed declaration:





   "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted.





   "Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or
those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete.  I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.




Executed on the ____ day of _____ at (city and state)



(Signature) ___________________________



(Typed name) ________________________



(Title) ______________________________




   (G)   The following reports will be required pursuant to
promulgation of §§ 307 et seq. of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317
et seq., and the establishment of any pretreatment standards and regulations:





      (1)   One-hundred eighty days after the promulgation of
pretreatment standards, or 180 days after the final administrative decision
made upon a category determination submission or whichever is later, all
existing industries subject to the standards must be required to submit to
the city a report containing:





         (a)   The name and address of the user;





         (b)   The location of the discharge;





         (c)   The nature, average production rate, and standard
industrial classification of the operations carried out by such user;





         (d)   The average and maximum flow of the discharge in
million gallons per day;





         (e)   The nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process and identification of applicable
pretreatment standards.  The concentration must be reported as a maximum or
average as provided for in applicable pretreatment standards;





         (f)   A statement reviewed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified
professional indicating whether the pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and if not, whether operation and maintenance improvements
or additional pretreatment is required for compliance;




      (2)   When a permitted facility changes ownership a complete
notice that contains the information outlined in (G)(1)(a) - (f) shall be
submitted to the Director of Public Works within 30 days of such transfer.



 



   (H)   Within 180 days after the promulgation of pretreatment
standards, or within 180 days after the final administrative decision made
upon a category determination submission, all existing industries subject to
such standards must be required to submit to the city a report containing:



      (1)   The name and address of the user;



      (2)   The location of the discharge;



      (3)   The nature, average production rate, and standard
industrial classification of the operations carried out by such user;



      (4)   The average and maximum flow of the discharge in gallons
per day to the sewer system from each of the following:



         (a)   Regulated process streams; and



         (b)   Other streams as required to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula (40 CFR § 403.6(e)).  The Public Works
Director may allow for variable estimates of these flows where justified by
cost or feasibility considerations.



      (5)   The nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process and identification of applicable
pretreatment standards.  The concentration must be reported as both a daily
maximum and average, or mass, as provided for in applicable pretreatment
standards (40 CFR § 403.12(b)(5)(ii)).




   (I)   Compliance schedule for meeting categorical pretreatment
standards.  If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance
improvements are required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment or operation and maintenance.  The completion date submitted
must not be later than the compliance date established in the applicable
pretreatment standard.  The following conditions must apply.





   (J)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the wastewater
treatment plant, any user subject to the pretreatment standards and
requirements must submit to the control authority a report containing the
information described in this section.  For users subject to equivalent mass
or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
CFR § 403.6(c), this report must contain a reasonable  measure of the
user's long-term production rate.





   (K)   For all other users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established by the control authority, this report must
contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate.  For
all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production
(or other measure of operation), this report must include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period.





   (L)   All significant industrial user(s) must, at a frequency
determined by the control authority but in no case less than every six
months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured
or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.  All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
this section.





   (M)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge.  Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities must be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times.  The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order must not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.




   (N)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the control
authority, the results of this monitoring must be included in the report. 
If any monitoring or site review identifies a violation, the waste must be
resampled and the analytical results submitted to the Department of Public
Works within 30 days of identifying the violation.



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1156, passed 10-2-06; Am. Ord. 1250,
passed 5-20-13)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.134  REPORT OF CHANGED GOODS.




   (A)   Each user must notify the control authority of any planned
significant changes to the user's operations or system, which might alter the
nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the
change.  The control authority may:





      (1)   Require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission
of a wastewater discharge permit application.





      (2)   Issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an
existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.





   (B)   No user must implement the planned changed condition(s) until
and unless the control authority has responded to the user's notice.





   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
without limitation, flow changes of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.135  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.



   The Director must publish a list of industrial users (IU) documented as
being in significant non-compliance (SNC) with existing permit operating
conditions in the a local newspaper with the largest circulation.  An
industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or
more of the following criteria:



   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude)
a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l);



   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by 40 CFR § 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public).



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-20-13)



Part 7.  Fees, Charges and Computations



§ 51.145  SCHEDULE OF CHARGES.



   (A)   Fees and charges made and collected in accordance with and
under the authority of this chapter must be set and established by the City
Council.



   (B)   Current charges shall be as follows:



 


SEWER RATES



 
 

Existing rates Since June 2006

 

2009

 

2010

 

2011

 

2012





Residential
 

$42.68

 

$59.39

 

$77.21

 

$77.21

 

$77.21



   Plus per hundred cubic feet (hcf) charge based on water consumption
 


 


 

$0.58

 

$1.12



Commercial, Standard Strength
 

$4.74

 

$5.65

 

$7.34

 

$7.89

 

$8.40



   Plus per hundred cubic fee (hcf) charge based on water consumption


   Minimum Bill
 

$45.78

 

$59.39

 

$77.21

 

$77.21

 

$77.21



Commercial, High Strength
 

$7.50

 

$7.25

 

$9.42

 

$10.13

 

$10.79



   Plus per hundred cubic feet (hcf) charge based on water consumption


   Minimum Bill
 

$45.78

 

$59.39

 

$77.21

 

$77.21

 

$77.21





 




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1115, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1138,
passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 1157, passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord. 1214, passed 8-17-09)




§ 51.146  ESTIMATED QUANTITIES AND VALUES.




   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever the fees and
charges required by this chapter are based on estimated values or estimated
quantities, the Director must make the necessary determinations in accordance
with established practices.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.147  SPECIFIC FEES.



   (A)   User fees.  All persons connected to the city’s sewer
system must pay to the city monthly fees for sewer service as established by
the City Council.



   (B)   Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees.  All persons
requiring an industrial waste discharge permit must pay to the city a yearly
permit fee as established by the City Council.



   (C)   Service fees.  Should the city or its agents perform required
industrial wastewater sampling, analysis, review, flow measurements or other
activities for an industrial user, said user must be held responsible for all
accrued costs.  Fees for the service must be as established by the City
Council.



   (D)   Connection fees.  The Director must charge and collect the
fees specified by the City Council from persons connecting to the city sewer
system, from applicants for permit and permittees under this chapter and from
users of the city sewer system.



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1214, passed 8-17-09)



§ 51.148  DETERMINATION OF TOTAL FLOW.




   (A)   The total flow of industrial wastewater discharged by the
industrial user must be measured by the Director by means of:





      (1)   A metering device, approved by the Director and
obtained, installed, and maintained at the expense of the user; or





      (2)   Estimate determined from total water used in the area
occupied by the user.





   (B)   The Director must select the method to be used unless the
discharger can demonstrate that another method will more accurately represent
the discharge.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.149  CHARGES FOR UNUSUAL OR EXCESSIVE STRENGTH WASTEWATERS.




   (A)   A charge for wastewater of the quality or character as to
impose upon the city unusual operation and maintenance or capital cost
whether or not related to flow volume, BOD, SS, or peak flow rates must be
set by the Director and paid by the user. 





   (B)   These charges must be reasonably calculated to defray cost
attributable to the wastewater.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.150  LOW-INCOME SENIOR RATE.



   (A)   On an annual basis, the City Council may determine by
resolution whether to make a low-income senior rate available to persons who
qualify for such a discounted rate pursuant to this section. Nothing in this
section creates, or is intended to create, a property right for qualified
persons to a low-income senior rate as described by this section. Rather,
establishing a low-income senior rate is a discretionary determination made
by the City Council annually that is dependent, among other things, on
projected interest revenue derived from the city's sewer enterprise fund.



   (B)   Persons meeting the qualifications in this section may, but
are not required to, pay a discounted rate equal to the monthly residential
sewer service fee established by this chapter minus a flat dollar amount
determined by City Council resolution. In adopting a resolution determining
the flat dollar amount, the City Council should consider the following
matters:



      (1)   The interest revenue anticipated by the city budget for
the city's sewer enterprise fund;



      (2)   The number of persons qualified to pay the discounted
rate established by this section; and



      (3)   The residential sewer service fee established by this
chapter.



   (C)   To qualify, a person must meet all these criteria in a given
billing period:



      (1)   Be at least 62 years old;



      (2)   Be a qualified participant in the California Alternate
Rates for Energy ("CARE") program established by Cal. Public Utilities Code
§§ 739.1 and 739.2 as determined by the most recent California Public
Utility Commission decisions. For example, and not limitation, the CARE
income limit for a one or two person household is $28,600 until May 31, 2007;
and



      (3)   Be a residential sewer customer or a legal tenant in a
mobile home park legally operating pursuant to this code, as established by
reasonable documentary evidence, where the tenant is directly responsible for
paying the monthly residential sewer service fee established by this chapter.



   (D)   Applications for the low-income senior rate must be filed with
the Finance Department. To apply for the low-income senior rate, a person
must submit the following documents to the Finance Department:



      (1)   A signed photocopy of the CARE application form, or
other competent acceptable evidence of CARE qualification and enrollment such
as a recent Southern California Edison billing statement;



      (2)   A photocopy of proof of age; and



      (3)   Proof that the person resides at the residence or, as
applicable, a mobile home park legally operating pursuant to this code where
the tenant is directly responsible for paying the monthly residential sewer
service fee established by this chapter.



   (E)   The low-income senior rate will first be recognized on the
next full billing cycle after the date of approval. The Finance Department
may require such additional evidence as it deems necessary or appropriate in
processing the claim. Only one person from each household is permitted. The
Finance Department, at any time, may require a person to provide proof of
continuing eligibility. Any change in the qualification status of the person
during the fiscal year of the allowance must be immediately reported by that
person to the Finance Department.



   (F)   Persons who would otherwise qualify, but are billed through a
master meter serving multiple housing units, are not eligible for the
low-income senior rate.




(Ord. 1165, passed 10-2-06)




Part 8.  Special Restrictions as to Discharges with Mineral Content
Exceeding that of Water Supply



§ 51.165  REGISTRATION OF WATER-TREATING APPARATUS.



   (A)   Any person who owns or recharges any apparatus in the city for
treating water which produces any wastewater with a mineral content exceeding
that of the water supply of the property must register the  apparatus with
the city giving the information as the Director may reasonably require.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to use or to maintain in a
condition of readiness for use, any unregistered apparatus at any time.



   (C)   When a change in the name on a water service document is
submitted to the city, a notarized affidavit must be submitted to the city
indicating that no self-regenerating water softener is in place on the
property proposed for service.



   (D)   At the sole discretion of the city, an inspection of the
facility may be conducted to verify the facts in the affidavit identified in
(C) above.



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-20-13)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.166  APPARATUS PRODUCING WASTEWATER WITH MINERAL CONTENT HIGHER THAN
THAT OF WATER SUPPLY.




   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to install, replace or enlarge
in the city, any apparatus for treating all or any part of the water supply
to a property if the apparatus is of a kind that produces, in any phase of
its use or servicing, any wastewater with a mineral content higher than that
of the water supply of the property, except that such apparatus may be
installed if arrangements are made to dispose of the wastewater by other
means than discharge to the sewers of the city or to the ground in any place
where it might pollute any usable water supply or violate any state or
federal regulation.




   (B)   The apparatus includes zeolite and resinous ion exchange
softeners or demineralizers, stills, processes using reverse osmosis, and
other like devices.



   (C)   These provisions of the City Code are applicable to all
dischargers to the city sewer collection system including:  residential,
commercial and industrial dischargers.



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-20-13)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.167  APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN SECTIONS TO SOFT-WATER ESTABLISHMENTS
AND WATER SOFTENERS.



   The regeneration of ion exchange softeners in commercial soft-water
service establishments and the addition of ion exchange softeners in
commercial soft-water service establishments and the ion exchange materials
to water softeners in all industrial, commercial and residential dwellings
are included in the operations limited by this chapter.



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-20-13)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.168  MAINTENANCE OR USE OF ILLEGAL APPARATUS.




   It is unlawful for any person to use or to maintain in a condition of
readiness for use any apparatus, which it would be illegal to install under
this chapter, if the apparatus was installed after April 16, 1958.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.169  PERMIT TO INSTALL OR ALTER APPARATUS.




   (A)   Any person desiring to install, enlarge or replace any
water-treating apparatus of the kind described above, or to regenerate ion
exchange water softeners or to add ion exchange materials to any water
softener, must submit to the Director a letter describing the intended
installation or alteration and describing the arrangements which will serve
to prevent improper discharge of the wastewater.





   (B)   No person must install, replace or enlarge a water-treating
apparatus of the kind described above nor may he operate a unit if installed
after April 16, 1958, nor may he regenerate an ion exchange water softener in
a commercial establishment nor may he add ion exchange materials to any water
softeners, unless he has a permit issued by the Director prescribing the
approval and satisfactory arrangements for disposal of the wastewaters.





   (C)   The apparatus may be operated only so long as the method of
wastewater disposal is as approved by the Director.





   (D)   Alteration in the method of disposal may be made only after
communication to the Director and receipt of the permit as in the first
instance.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-20-13)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.170  ACCESSIBILITY OF APPARATUS AND REPORT AS TO OPERATION.




   A person installing or operating a water-treating apparatus of the kind
described above must make the  apparatus accessible to the Director for
inspection, and must make the reports as the city may request as to the
operation of the apparatus and disposal of wastewaters.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.171  EXEMPTIONS; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The following must be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.



      (1)   Any water-treating appliance, which has a rated capacity
less than five gallons in an eight-hour period.  Multiple units installed to
supply water to the same points of use must be considered as a single
appliance for the purposes of this exemption;



      (2)   Any water-treating appliance for which the regeneration
of the appliance is performed at a facility separate from the location where
such appliance is used, provided the regeneration is performed in compliance
with this chapter and all applicable law and regulations.



   (B)   The terms CLOCK CONTROL, DEMAND CONTROL, FULLY MANUAL
REGENERATION, HARDNESS, MANUALLY- INITIATED CONTROL, REGENERATION, and SALT
EFFICIENCY RATING, as used in this section, have the meanings ascribed by
Cal. Health & Safety Code § 116780.



(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 5-20-13)



§ 51.172  CERTIFICATION.




   (A)   Any person installing a water-treatment apparatus under the
provisions of this chapter must provide certification that the appliance to
be installed meets the requirements set forth in this section. 
Certification must be provided before the issuance of the plumbing permit.





   (B)   The certification form must contain all of the following
information:





      (1)   Name and address of the homeowner;





      (2)   Manufacturer of the water-softening or conditioning
appliance, model number of the appliance, pounds of salt used per
regeneration and salt efficiency rating at the time of certification;





      (3)   Manufacturer of the water-saving devices to be
installed, model number and number to be installed;





      (4)   Name, address, and the contractor's license number of
licensee making the certification, if any.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



Part 9.  Enforcement



§ 51.185  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.




   Discharges of wastewater, in any manner, in violation of the provisions
of this chapter or of any order issued by the director as authorized by this
chapter are declared a public nuisance.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.186  ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.




   In addition to any other provision of this code, the city may require
compliance with permit conditions or limitations, or any provision of this
chapter by issuing administrative orders pursuant to this chapter which
orders are enforceable in a court or by direct court action.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.187  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.




   (A)   Notice of violation.  When the Director finds that a
discharge to the city's sewer system has taken place in violation of the
prohibitions, limitations, requirements or provisions of this chapter or its
implementing regulations or the conditions of an industrial wastewater
discharge permit, the Director must issue a notice of violation to the
user.  A notice of violation is official recognition of violation of the
prohibitions, limitations, requirements and/or provisions of this chapter or
conditions of an industrial wastewater discharge permit.





   (B)   Cease and desist orders. When the Director finds that after
the issuance of a notice of violation a discharge of wastewater has taken
place in violation of the prohibitions, limitations, requirements or
provisions of this chapter or the conditions of an industrial wastewater
discharge permit or upon a plan approval related thereto the Director may
issue a cease and desist order and direct that those persons:





      (1)   Comply immediately; or





      (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance schedule as set
forth by the Director.





   (C)   Termination of service order.  The Director may revoke any
industrial user's industrial waste-water discharge permit or terminate
wastewater service to any premise if any discharge of pollutants presents, or
may present an endangerment to the environment or the city's operation of its
sewer system.  Twenty-four hours before taking any action to terminate
wastewater service, the user must receive written notification of the
proposed termination and the opportunity to respond to the notice.  Should
services be terminated, all costs for terminating service and for reinstating
service must be paid by the user before any reconnection is made.  See 40
CFR § 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(b).





   (D)   Emergency noncompliance authority.  The Director has the
authority to take necessary measures (informal notice may suffice) to
immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of materials to the
city's sewer system which reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to
the city's sewer system, city personnel or the health, safety and/or welfare
of the public (40 CFR § 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(b)).




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



§ 51.188  UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES; DAMAGES AND LIABILITY.




   (A)   If the Director finds that any person has discharged any
wastes or wastewater into the city's sewer system in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or of the user's industrial wastewater discharge
permit, and that the discharge caused increased operating costs or diminished
the efficiency of the treatment process, the Director must estimate the value
of the damage and add that sum to that person's next regular sewer service
billing.  The items the Director must consider must include, but not be
limited to, the following:





      (1)   The cost of repairs to the city's sewer system;





      (2)   The depreciation of the system due to damages not
repaired;





      (3)   The extra operating costs;





      (4)   The value of the loss of wastewater treatment plant
operating efficiency based upon the city's normal operating costs and the
extent to which the performance of the plant was reduced below normal as a
result of such improper discharge to the sewer.





   (B)   All charges made pursuant to this section are due and payable
upon receipt of notice thereof.  All such charges must become delinquent ten
days after mailing notice thereof to the mailing address of the discharger
subject to the charges.  This remedy is nonexclusive and may be asserted in
addition to any other remedy available to the city under law.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.189  FALSE STATEMENTS.




   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, or
certify in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or industrial wastewater
discharge permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.999  PENALTY.




   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided shall be punished according to Chapter 13 of this code.




(Ord. 1093, passed 2-17-04)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section




Water Utility and Revenue Fund




   52.001   Utility created



   52.002   Management of system



   52.003   Fees



   52.004   [Reserved]



   52.005   Water Fund




Water Utility Services




   52.015   Definitions



   52.016   Rates and charges



   52.017   [Reserved]



   52.018   Temporary water service



   52.019   Hydrant flow tests



   52.020   Water capital facilities fee



   52.021   Water rights dedication and water resource in-lieu fee



   52.022   Extraterritorial water connections



   52.023   General conditions for extraterritorial water service



   52.024   [Reserved]



   52.025   [Reserved]



   52.026   Service connections and meters



   52.027   Automatic fire services



   52.028   New subdivisions and development; city installation of lines



   52.029   Title to pipes



   52.030   Arrangements must precede tract acceptance



   52.031   Inspection of work



   52.032   Testing meters



   52.033   Turning on and using water



   52.034   Submeters



   52.035   Conditions of service



   52.036   Supplying of water by customers



   52.037   Emergency shutoffs



   52.038   Water waste



   52.039   Shutting off water



   52.040   Covering meter boxes



   52.041   Leaks in plumbing



   52.042   Fire hydrants



   52.043   Unauthorized use of water



   52.044   Cross-connection control




Groundwater Conservation




   52.066   Well seal  inspection reports



   52.067   Corrective actions



   52.068   Destruction of abandoned wells



   52.069   Certificate of exemption to active status



   52.070   Fees



   52.071   Inspection



   52.072   Abatement



   52.073   Flow prevention device



   52.074   Exemption



   52.075   Aquifer protection program



   52.076   Water well and water well permit prohibitions



   52.077   Exceptions to water well permit prohibitions



   52.078   Waivers of the water well and permit prohibitions



   52.079   Liens applied



   52.080   Enforcement



   52.081   Notice of violation



   52.082   Administrative fines



   52.083   Delivery of notices



   52.084   Administrative appeals



   52.085   Appeals



 



   52.999   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Municipal water systems, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 38730 et seq.



WATER UTILITY AND REVENUE FUND



§ 52.001  UTILITY CREATED.



   A water utility is hereby created as a city enterprise and utility to
operate, maintain, and fund the city's water system.  The purpose of this
utility is to provide for, among other related matters, the funding,
operating, permitting, maintaining, planning, designing, retrofitting,
reconstructing, constructing, environmentally restoring, regulating,
surveying, water quality testing, and inspecting of water facilities and the
management thereof.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.002  MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM.



   The City Council may adopt water management programs or regulations to
facilitate operation of the utility.  The City Council shall appoint a
director of the utility who shall be responsible for administering and
supervising the operations of the water system in accordance with the
provisions of the management programs adopted by the City Council, and
revised from time to time, pursuant to City Council resolution.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.003  FEES.



   The City Council may establish by resolution water utility fees to be
imposed upon users of the water system.  The purpose of these fees are to
provide funds:  to provide water devices to improve water quality; to
maintain and operate water facilities, water rights and rights-of-way; to pay
for the costs of planning, permitting, designing, establishing, acquiring,
developing, upgrading, retrofitting, constructing, reconstructing or
improving water facilities and public improvements, and the manage-ment
thereof; and to pay for, or secure the payment of, any indebtedness incurred
for such purposes.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.004  [RESERVED].



§ 52.005  WATER FUND.



   A fund for accumulating water revenues is hereby created, to be known
as the “Water Fund.”  The Water Fund shall consist of water revenues and
shall be used for funding expenses of the water utility enterprise.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



WATER UTILITY SERVICES



§ 52.015  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  The person, association, corporation or governmental
agency applying for water service.



   CAPITAL FACILITIES FEE.  Charges for facilities in existence at the
time the charge is imposed and/or charges for new facilities to be
constructed in the future which are of benefit to the person or property
being charged.



   CITY.  The City of Santa Paula.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the city.



   CITY INSPECTOR.  A person authorized by the Public Works Director to
inspect work for which a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person, association, corpora-tion, entity or
governmental agency supplied or entitled to be supplied with water service
for compensation by the utility.



   DATE OF PRESENTATION.  The billing date as is printed on the bill
mailed or delivered to the customer.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Public Works Department of the city.



   DEVELOPER.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association
who proposes to develop, develops, or causes to be developed real property
for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of such
persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not developers.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Public Works Department or his or her
duly authorized representative.



   ENTERPRISE, WATER ENTERPRISE or WATER UTILITY.  The operations that
are financed and operated in a manner similar to private business where the
intent of the city is to recover the costs of providing the goods or services
to the general public on a continuing basis through user charges or where the
city desires a periodic determination of net income.



   FACILITIES or PUBLIC FACILITIES.  Public improvements, public
services, and community amenities.



   FINANCE DIRECTOR.  The Finance Director of the city.



   IRRIGATION SERVICE.  Provision of water for commercial agricultural,
floracultural or horticultural use and billed under distinct irrigation rates.



   METERED SERVICE.  Service for which the charges are computed on the
basis of measured quantities of water.



   OWNER.  The record or legal owner of the parcel of real property, or
the purchaser(s) under contracts of sale.



   PREMISES.  The integral property or area, including improvements
thereon, to which water service is, or is to be, provided.



   SERVICE CONNECTION or CONNECTION.  The point of connection of the
customer's piping or ditch with the meter, service pipe or ditch to the
public water system.



   SERVICE PIPE.  The connection between the utility's mains and the
service connection, including all of the pipe, fittings and valves necessary
to make the connection.



   SERVICE TERRITORY.  The city and the unincorporated area of Ventura
County contiguous and adjoining the incorporated boundaries of the city.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.016  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The rate for water furnished through water meters and any
applicable services(s) is set forth in Exhibit A of Ordinance 1213, which
rates are hereby adopted by reference, and such rates and charges shall
constitute the charges for supplying water service to any customer and shall
be collected by the Finance Director.  The City Council may also establish
by resolution a surcharge to reimburse the city for revenues lost due to the
city’s acquisition of the water utility.  The city shall keep a record of
all fees and charges assessed and collected under this subchapter.  The
record shall reflect the names and addresses of the persons on whose account
the fees or charges were paid, the date, the amount of payment and the
purpose for which charges were paid or the premises affected.



   (B)   The City Manager, or designee, will periodically, but not less
than annually, review the water charges to determine whether revenues from
the charges are meeting actual cost of services and facilities needed for
water treatment and distribution services to the residents and
non-residential developments within the city.  If the City Manager
determines that revenues do not adequately meet costs, the City Manager will
recommend to the City Council a revised rate and charge schedule to be
adopted by the City Council by ordinance.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. 1000, passed 6-3-96; Am. Ord. 1084,
passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 1147, passed 10-17-05; Am. Ord. 1213, passed 8-17-09)



§ 52.017  [RESERVED]



§ 52.018  TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   From fire hydrants.



      (1)   Metered service from fire hydrants may be provided for
limited periods upon proper applica-tion, subject to the approval of the
Director and to all permit requirements of this subchapter of the code. 
Applicants shall be required to pay for service the actual cost of
installing, maintaining, repairing, and removing the meter and appurtenant
piping; the actual cost of making any changes in location; the regular
established monthly service charge for the installed meter; water used at two
times the highest rate established pursuant to § 52.016 herein; and overhead
costs as determined by the Finance Director.



      (2)   Prior to the installation of the temporary meter and
service, the applicant shall pay a fee to the city.  The amount of the fee
shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



      (3)   All flow of water from the fire hydrant shall be
controlled by means of the approved auxiliary valve, unless otherwise
specifically authorized by the Director.  When such authorization has been
granted, the hydrant shall only be operated with an approved spanner wrench.



      (4)   Any person using a fire hydrant without authorization
shall pay to the city a fee set by resolution, in addition to the estimated
cost of water that was used and the cost of any repairs needed due to
improper operation of the hydrant.



   (B)   Other.  Whenever it is not possible or practical to provide
temporary metered service from a fire hydrant, a temporary metered connection
may be made to any existing water facility at the discretion of the
Director.  The conditions of service and application procedures shall be
determined by the Director.  The City Council shall set the charge for such
service by resolution.



   (C)   Unmetered.  For temporary service, where in the opinion of
the Director, it is not practical to meter, then the Director shall estimate
by any reasonable method the quantity of water served and shall determine a
fair and equitable charge therefor.  For all unmetered service, however, a
minimum charge shall be required.  Such minimum charge shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.019  HYDRANT FLOW TESTS.



   The city shall conduct tests of available water flows and pressures at
various fire hydrant locations in the city if requested to do so by a
developer or current or prospective customer within a reasonable time upon
the person requesting the test having deposited the required fee with the
Director in advance of the test.  The fee for performing such tests shall be
set by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.020  WATER CAPITAL FACILITIES FEE.



   (A)   The owner or developer of property within the service
territory requesting a new service connection or an increase in the size of
an existing service connection shall pay a water capital facilities fee. The
fee shall be paid at the earliest of the issuance of construction permit,
certificate of occupancy or installation or modification of the service
connection. The fee for an increase in the size of a service connection shall
be the difference between the fee for the new size and the fee for the
existing size.



   (B)   The fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   This fee shall be in addition to all other fees and charges
required by this subchapter.



   (D)   Specific improvements necessary to adequately supply water
services to a service connection may be required by the Director in lieu of
or in addition to this fee.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. 1058, passed 2-18-03)



§ 52.021  WATER RIGHTS DEDICATION AND WATER RESOURCE IN-LIEU FEE.



   (A)   Purpose. As Santa Paula grows and develops, agricultural land
uses are likely to be converted to urban land uses. The water rights that are
now used by that agriculture would then be needed to serve the new urban land
uses. This section provides a mechanism by which those agricultural water
rights will be dedicated to municipal use, or alternatively a fee paid in
lieu of the dedication of those rights when the available rights either are
not sufficient to meet the needs of the new land use, or the owner or
developer cannot or will not dedicate the required water rights to meet the
needs of the new land use. The purpose of the fee is to provide funds for
projects to develop or acquire additional water rights or water resources to
mitigate the added water demand caused by the land development. Furthermore,
the purpose of this fee is to assure that adequate water supplies are
available for proposed or intensified developments without adverse impacts to
the city's existing customers or new developments. This section also includes
a provision for the sharing of water rights for new or existing agriculture
located on the remaining portion of any parcel of land that is being
developed to assure that existing agriculture located on the parcel is not
needlessly or prematurely destroyed due to a lack of water, or that viable
new agriculture proposed to be located on the remaining portion of the parcel
is not prohibited due to a lack of water.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, WATER RIGHT
shall mean any right held on or after March 7, 1996 to pump ground water
pursuant to the judgment in the case of United Water Conservation District
vs. City of San Buenaventura (Case No. 115611), or such other water rights
that may be available for permanent transfer. Any water right in the Santa
Paula Basin to be dedicated to the city shall be determined by the Santa
Paula Basin Technical Advisory Committee.



      PROJECTED DEMAND FOR WATER. Shall mean the estimated annual
quantity of water required to serve the proposed annexation, development or
water service connection, as determined by the Director, including an
allowance of 25% for potential future increases in the quantity of water
required.



   (C)   Dedication of water rights within city limits.



      (1)   The owner or developer of any parcel of land, located
within or being annexed to the city, shall dedicate all transferable and
exercisable water rights attached to said parcel to the city upon any of the
following events:



         (a)   Annexation of said parcel to the city;



         (b)   The granting of any development entitlement by the
city for any land use, other than agriculture, upon said parcel;



         (c)   The construction or enlargement of any service
connection to said parcel from the city water enterprise.



      (2)   In the event that any water rights attached to said
parcel have been sold or transferred to anyone other than the city on or
after March 7, 1996, the owner or developer of said parcel shall, to the
extent feasible, obtain at his or her sole expense, equivalent water rights
and dedicate said rights to the city.



      (3)   In the event that the water rights serve more land than
the land or parcel to be annexed, developed or to receive a water service
connection, the water rights to be dedicated shall be determined by proration
on the basis of the historical water usage of the various lands or parcels
served. If it is not feasible to prorate the water rights on the basis of
historical water usage, then the proration shall be made on the basis of the
irrigated land areas of the various lands or parcels served.



      (4)   In the event that the water rights are held by an
association, water company or agency on behalf of the property owner or
developer and said association, water company or agency cannot or will not
dedicate the required water rights to the city, the owner or developer of
said parcel shall, to the extent feasible, obtain at his or her sole expense
equivalent water rights and dedicate said rights to the city.



      (5)   In the event that the dedicated water rights are not
sufficient to meet the projected demand for water, including the demand for
water needed to serve any remaining agriculture as provided in division
(C)(7) below, by said parcel or in the event that there are no water rights
attached to said parcel, or in the event that it is not feasible to obtain
equivalent water rights as required by divisions (C)(2) or (C)(4) above, the
owner or developer shall pay a water resource in-lieu fee, as established in
division (E) below, to the city based upon that portion of the projected
demand for water that is not met by the dedicated water rights.



      (6)   In the event that the dedicated water rights exceed the
projected demand for water by said parcel, a credit shall be issued against
the various fees and charges due to the city under this chapter. The credit
shall be equal to the water resources in-lieu fee, as established in division
(E) herein applicable to that portion of the dedicated water rights in excess
of the projected demand for water.



      (7)   In the event a parcel has an active or inactive meter,
the property owner/developer may request water demand credits.



      (8)   In the event that the dedicated water rights are needed
to continue to serve agriculture remaining on any undeveloped or residual
portion of the land or parcel, including any new agricultural development
proposed on said land or parcel, the city shall enter into an agreement with
the property owner or developer for the shared use of the dedicated water
rights, provided the water is to be used only on said land or parcel and
provided the quantity of water to be used and the type of agriculture to be
served is reasonable and appropriate.



      (9)   In the event that the dedicated water rights are needed
to serve agriculture remaining on said land on an interim basis until said
land is converted to non-agricultural use, the city may enter into an
agreement with the property owner or developer for the shared use of the
dedicated water rights until such time as the agricultural use is terminated.



      (10)   In the event that the dedicated water rights are needed
to supply water to a proposed non-potable water distribution system intended
to supply water for irrigation purposes to public or private landscaping on
said land, the city may enter into an agreement with the property owner or
developer for the shared use of the dedicated water rights. In the event that
the property to be developed has an active or inactive water meter, a water
demand credit, as determined by the Director, may be provided.



         (a)   An active water meter is a city meter which has a
historical usage for at least 12 consecutive months in the last 10 years
prior to the issuance date of the development. The water demand credit may be
the average annual use of the same meter size and customer class of the meter.



         (b)   An active meter is a city meter that was available
to serve the property but there was not 12 consecutive months of metered use
in the past 10 years prior to the issuance date of the development
entitlement for the proposed development and the customer has paid the city's
fixed monthly charges up to the issuance date of the development entitlement
for the proposed development. The water demand credit may be half the average
annual use of the same meter size and customer class of the meter.



         (c)   In the event that there is no meter serving the
property, no water demand credit will be provided.



      (11)   The addition of water demands to an active or inactive
meter that does not increase the water meter size, as determined by the
Director, is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   Dedication of water rights outside city limits.



      (1)   The owner of, or developer of, any parcel of land
located outside the limits of the city shall dedicate sufficient water rights
to the city to meet the projected demand for water of any new or enlarged
service connection constructed to said parcel from the city water enterprise.



      (2)   In the event that the water rights are held by an
association, water company or agency on behalf of the property owner or
developer and said association, water company or agency cannot or will not
dedicate the required water rights to the city, the owner or developer of
said parcel shall, to the extent feasible, obtain at his or her sole expense
equivalent water rights and dedicate said rights to the city.



      (3)   In the event that the water rights attached to said
parcel are not sufficient for said dedication and that said water rights have
been sold or transferred to anyone other than the city on or after March 7,
1996, the owner or developer of said parcel shall, to the extent feasible,
obtain at his or her sole expense, equivalent water rights and dedicate said
rights to the city.



      (4)   In the event that the dedicated water rights are not
sufficient to meet the projected demand for water by said parcel, or in the
event that there are no water rights attached to said parcel, the owner or
developer shall pay a water resource in-lieu fee, as established in division
(E), to the city based upon that portion of the water demand that is not met
by the dedicated water rights.



   (E)   Water resource in-lieu fee imposed.



      (1)   The City Council has established a water resource
in-lieu fee by resolution. The fee shall be imposed in accordance with this
section. The proceeds of the fee shall be retained in a separate account and
shall be used for capital projects, including associated engineering,
environmental review, and legal and administrative costs, that will generate
additional water resources or water rights for use by the water enterprise.
Those projects may include, but are not limited to, the purchase of water
rights, construction of projects to import state water or other water,
construction of projects to increase groundwater recharge, and construction
of projects to use reclaimed water in-lieu of existing water demand. The
projected water demand and the amount of the resulting fee shall be
calculated by the director, using factors contained in the resolution. The
water resource in-lieu fee shall be in addition to all other fees and charges
required by this chapter.



      (2)   In the event that a fee resolution has not been adopted,
the director shall collect a deposit in the amount established in the prior
resolution for the estimated annual water demand in excess of the water
rights dedicated to the city. The deposit shall be applied to the fee upon
adoption of the resolution. Any amount in excess of the adopted fee shall be
refunded to the person who paid the deposit.



      (3)   Effective on July 1 of each year, the fee amount
established in the resolution will be increased by 5.4% per year which
represents the growth rate pumping right sales in the Santa Paula Basin from
2006 to 2015 until a new resolution is adopted.



   (F)   Appeal process.



      (1)   Any proposed development applicant (Applicant) who does
not agree with the fee calculated for their proposed development pursuant to
this chapter shall have the right to appeal.



      (2)   The appeal must be in writing, legible, and received by
the director within 15 days of the determination of the fee submitted to the
applicant. The written request for appeal shall include:



         (a)   A description of the reason for the appeal;



         (b)   Evidence supporting the appeal; and



         (c)   A suggestion for resolution for the dispute, if
any.



      (3)   Within 15 calendar days of receipt of the written
appeal, the director will notify the applicant of confirmation of the receipt
of the appeal and a timeline for the director's written independent
determination of the fee.



      (4)   The director's determination may be appealed in writing
to the City Manager within 15 calendar days of the mailing of the director's
determination. The appeal of the director's determination shall be heard and
considered by the City Manager at a time and place set by the City Manager
within 30 calendar days from the City Manager's receipt of an appeal, but no
public hearing is required. The City Manager shall provide the applicant
notice of the time and place for the appeal hearing at the address listed in
the appeal filed by the applicant. The City Manager may, in his or her
discretion, affirm, reverse or modify the determination accordingly. The City
Manager's decision shall be final.



(Ord. 1058, passed 2-18-03; Am. Ord. 1270, passed 4-17-17)



§ 52.022  EXTRATERRITORIAL WATER CONNECTIONS.



   The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to provide potable water
service to real property located outside of the city's jurisdictional
boundaries that meet the following criteria:



   (A)   The real property is located within the city's existing
service area including, without limitation, such area acquired pursuant to
the final order entered January 2, 1996 in the case captioned City of Santa
Paula v. Santa Paula Water Works, Ltd., Ventura County Superior Court Case
No. 157925;



   (B)   The city can supply water service without extending the city's
existing water distribution mains;



   (C)   Water service would be provided to an existing, or proposed,
single-family dwelling unit or second unit that is located on an existing lot
recorded in the Ventura County Recorder's office before the date that the
city receives a request for water service; or



   (D)   The use is a low water consuming commercial or industrial use,
as determined by the Public Works Director, provided that:



      (1)   The use meets the zoning and land use requirements of
the County of Ventura;



      (2)   The use does not require a land division of five or more
parcels regardless of whether the land division is accomplished by a
subdivision map or parcel map;



      (3)   The use is consistent with the Santa Paula General Plan,
other land use policies, and does not include irrigated agricultural
cultivation; and



      (4)   The use does not require a water meter larger than
three-fourths inch.



(Ord. 1171, passed 1-7-08)



§ 52.023  GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR EXTRATERRITORIAL WATER SERVICE.



   If the city can provide extraterritorial water service, persons seeking
such water service must comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   Persons seeking water service must own the real property to
which water service would be provided;



   (B)   All public improvements and facilities needed to deliver water
to the real property must be constructed or installed in accordance with the
city's standard specifications including, without limitation, regulations for
water saving devices, and without cost to the city;



   (C)   Property owners must enter into an agreement with the city in
a form approved by the City Attorney and recorded against the real property
that:



      (1)   Sets forth the terms and conditions under which water
service is being provided to the property;



      (2)   Includes the owner's waiver of any right to protest
annexation of the real property to the city's jurisdiction;



      (3)   Reimburses the city for all costs and expenses
associated with providing extraterritorial water service, including, without
limitation, administrative costs and attorneys fees incurred in connection
with proceedings before the Ventura Local Agency Formation Commission that
are required to obtain Commission approval to the extension of water service
to the property; and



      (4)   Reimburses the city for all costs and expenses
including, without limitation, administrative costs and attorneys fees,
associated with proceedings before the Ventura Local Agency Formation
Commission that are required to annex the property to the city's jurisdiction
where the real property is contiguous to the city's incorporated boundaries.



(Ord. 1171, passed 1-7-08)



§ 52.024  [RESERVED]



§ 52.025  [RESERVED]



§ 52.026  SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND METERS.



   (A)   New services and meters.  Each person desiring the
installation of a new service and meter shall make application in the form
and manner prescribed by the Director.  The size of the service and meter
shall be subject to approval by the city.  If a water distribution main is
available adjacent to the property, the city shall install a service and
meter at a reasonable location.  If a water distribution main is not
available adjacent to the property, then the city may either require the
installation of a water main at the applicant's expense or may install a
service and meter adjacent to the nearest available main, in which case it
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain easements and install
necessary service lines to the property.  The charges for installing each
new service and meter, which amount shall be paid in advance by the
applicant, shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the City
Council.



   (B)   Changes in location and/or size.



      (1)   When a change in location of an existing service and
meter is requested by a property owner, or when a change in location is
required by the city because of some act or omission of a property owner or
customer, the charge, payable in advance, shall be the charge for installing
a new service and meter.



      (2)   When a decrease in size of an existing meter at the same
location is requested by a property owner, the smaller meter shall be
installed, provided that the requested meter is determined by the city to be
of adequate size.  The property owner shall pay a fee for this service which
shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



      (3)   When a decrease in size of an existing meter at a
different location is requested by a property owner, or when an increase in
size of an existing meter at the same or a different location is requested or
is required by the city, the charge, payable in advance, shall be the total
installation fee for the new size.



   (C)   Ownership of services and meters.



      (1)   All services and meters shall be owned by the city. 
The expense of maintenance repair and renewal due to normal wear and tear
shall be borne by the city except that expenses incurred by any act or
omission on the part of the customer, or the customer's family, employees,
agents, or tenants shall be charged to the customer.  All meters will be
sealed by the city at the time of installation and no seal should be altered
or broken except by one of its authorized employees.



      (2)   All connections to services and meters shall be in a
manner prescribed by the Director.  Substandard connections or the
installation of any private or non-city approved materials within meter boxes
or vaults shall be corrected or removed within 30 days of mailing of notice
by registered mail to the owner of record of the water service.  Failure to
comply may result in discontinued service.



   (D)   Removal or abandonment of services and/or meters.  The city
reserves the right to remove or abandon any service and/or meter for which no
person has made application and through which no water has legally passed
during the preceding 18 months.  If the meter only is removed and the
service left intact, and application is subsequently made for a meter of the
same size, then the city shall reset a meter.  The charge, payable in
advance, shall be the installation cost for that size meter.  If the meter
is removed and the service abandoned, and application is subsequently made
for a meter of the same or different size, then the charge payable in
advance, shall be the total installation cost and capital facility fees for
the requested size.



   (E)   Location of water meters.  Water meters shall be located in
or adjacent to the public right-of-way.  Existing meters not so located
shall be relocated at the option of the city which shall bear all costs for
such relocations except those associated with the customer's connection to
the relocated meters.



   (F)   Oversize services.



      (1)   An oversize service connection may be approved by the
Director for any residence on an agricultural property for which a larger
service is needed to support agricultural operations occurring on an
infrequent basis, not including agricultural irrigation, or for any residence
located in an area which is subject to the threat of wildfires, for which a
fire service standpipe is required by the local fire department or for other
similar uses requiring high flows for short or infrequent periods of time, as
approved by the Director.



      (2)   The monthly fees and charges for an oversize service
connection shall be determined by the Director on the basis of an equivalent
meter size. In making that determination, the director may consider the size
and use of the property and the buildings thereon, the prior year's water
consumption, if any, and any other relevant factors. The equivalent meter
size shall be reviewed annually and revised as found necessary by the
Director. Any charges for installation of the service or for the installation
of a new or replacement meter shall be based upon the actual size of the
service or meter. The water capital facilities fee and the water resource
in-lieu fee shall be based upon the equivalent meter size determined and the
use of the property at the time the service is installed.



      (3)   High precision water meters shall be used on all
oversize service connections. Any additional costs above that of an ordinary
meter of the equivalent meter size, as determined in division (B) above,
shall be the responsibility of the customer.



      (4)   Oversize Service Connections shall be limited to water
services with an actual water meter size of 1½ inches or two inches. After
the first year of service, the equivalent meter size to be used to determine
monthly fees and charges as described in division (F)(2) above shall be
determined on the basis of the prior 12 month's consumption as shown in the
following table:



 


Average Monthly Consumption(HCF/Month)

 

Equivalent Meter Size(Inches)




0 - 40

 

¾




> 40 - 70

 

1




>70 - 160

 

1½




 



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. 1058, passed 2-18-03)



§ 52.027  AUTOMATIC FIRE SERVICES.



   (A)   Application and installation.



      (1)   Each person desiring service from a new or existing
automatic fire line shall make application and pay a fee to the city as
provided elsewhere in this subchapter.  The applicant shall agree that no
water shall be used through the fire service except that which is reasonably
related to fire protection and shall agree to permit employees of the city
upon proper identification to enter the premises to make inspections and
tests of the fire system.



      (2)   The city assumes no responsibility for loss or damage
because of lack of water or pressure and shall merely furnish such quantities
and pressure as are available in its distribution system.  The service is
subject to shutdown and variations required by the operation of the system.



      (3)   Applicants for new fire service installa-tions shall pay
the appropriate installation fee.  Prior to commencing such work, the
Director shall calcu-late the charge and the applicant shall pay to the city
said charge.  All fire service connections and by-pass meters shall be the
property of the city.  Backflow prevention devices, water valves and piping
after the service connection to the water main shall be the property of the
applicant.



      (4)   All connections to automatic fire services shall be in a
manner prescribed by the Director.  Substandard connections or the
installation of any private non-city approved materials within the
appurtenant fire service facilities shall be corrected or removed within 30
days of mailing of notice by registered mail to the owner of record of the
auto-matic fire service.  Failure to comply may result in discontinued
service.



      (5)   All new and existing automatic fire service installation
connections must be inspected and approved by the city prior to commencement
of service.



   (B)   Charges for service.  The standby charge for automatic fire
service shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
No additional charge shall be made for water used when in the opinion of the
Director such usage is reasonably related to fire protection.



   (C)   Misuse of fire service.  When in the opinion of the Director,
water is used which is not reasonably related to fire protection, double the
established monthly charges shall apply until such usage is abated.  Should
any customer fail to abate the usage of water not related to fire protection
within a reasonable period, the city may discontinue the fire service.  The
customer shall be notified of such discontinuance and the city shall be held
free from liability for loss or damage as a result of such shutoff. 
Services shall not be resumed until the customer has established to the
satisfaction of the Director that adequate provisions have been made to
prevent further unauthorized use of water and has paid all outstanding
standby charges, plus a turn on charge as described in § 52.033.  In case
of fire services which do not have approved backflow prevention devices, the
Director may also require the installation of such a device at the customer's
expense prior to resuming service.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.028  NEW SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT; CITY INSTALLATION OF LINES.



   (A)   (1)   At the time of the laying out or the subdividing or
resubdividing of tracts of parcels of land within the city or at the time of
the development of such parcels of land previously subdivided, the owner of
the said tracts or parcels of land shall lay, at the expense of said owner in
streets or along rights-of-way dedicated to public use, all water mains,
sub-mains, laterals, transmission, distribution, production, transfer and
storage facilities as determined by the Director as necessary to serve water
to the said lands and to each and every lot and parcel thereof and the same
shall thereupon become the property of the city and dedicated to the public
use for the purpose of distributing water.



      (2)   Before the work of installing such mains, submains and
laterals shall be commenced, the said owner proposing to install the same
shall submit a detailed plan or plans of the work to be done, showing upon a
map or maps drawn to a suitable scale, the streets or public ways within
which said mains, sub-mains and laterals are to be laid.  There shall also
accompany said map specifications showing the size and grade of pipe and
fittings to be used including valves and hydrants.  Such plans must be in an
approved format and scale and in conformity with this code, the standards of
the city, and with all the ordinances and rules existing in the city at the
time of said contemplated installation, including the current construction
standards of the city and none of the actual work of said installation shall
be proceeded with until the said map or maps and specifications shall have
been officially approved by the Director.



      (3)   The city may establish fees for the checking or
preparation of plans and for the inspection, administration or construction
of improvements.



   (B)   The owner of said lands may apply to the city to have the city
furnish the necessary materials and labor to install the pipe lines.  Upon
payment of a sufficient amount to defray expenses of such lines and the
availability of city forces as determined by the Director, the Department of
Public Works may proceed with the work of installing said lines, keeping all
cost data for labor and materials.  Any excess remaining over and above said
costs, plus overhead costs as determined by the Finance Director, shall be
returned to said owner.  In the event that the amount deposited with the
Director is insufficient to meet the cost of said materials and labor, plus
overhead costs thereof, the owner shall pay the difference between such costs
and the amount previously deposited.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.029  TITLE TO PIPES.



   The title to all the said water pipes shall remain vested in the city
as a part of the water distributing system of said city.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.030  ARRANGEMENTS MUST PRECEDE TRACT ACCEPTANCE.



   No subdivision or resubdivision, or plat, or any tract within the city
shall be accepted by the City Council and approved unless and until the
necessary and required arrangements with regard to water service therein,
under the terms of this subchapter, shall have been financially arranged and
approved by the Director.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.031  INSPECTION OF WORK.



   All work and materials used, incident to the installation of water
distributing pipe within such subdivision, shall be inspected by the city and
the city may reject any work done or any materials used and require new or
for other work to be done or other materials used.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.032  TESTING METERS.



   (A)   Any customer shall have the right to demand that the meter
through which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the city for
the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the
amount of water which is being delivered through it.



   (B)   Upon application and within a reasonable period of time, the
city will cause said meter to be examined and tested during normal business
hours for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering
correctly the water being delivered through it.



   (C)   For any size meter, if the test proves the meter is not within
plus or minus three percent of the American Water Works Standards,
adjustments will be made to the water charges on the customer's most current
utilities bill.



   (D)   Adjustments to bills for inaccurate meters will be for a
maximum period of one year prior to the date of the test.



   (E)   If the customer is not satisfied with tests performed by the
city, the meter shall be tested by the manufacturer.  The customer must pay
all costs of such further tests in advance.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.033  TURNING ON AND USING WATER.



   No person, other than the authorized agents or employees of the city,
shall turn on water or operate the shut-off valve at meters, fire hydrants,
or any other city water facilities without the consent of the city.  A fee
set by resolution of the City Council shall be charged to any customer who
causes or allows the meter shut-off valve or appurtenant piping to be damaged
by unauthorized operation of the meter.  This fee shall be doubled if the
repair cannot be completed during normal business hours.  Any negligent
damage to the meter shut-off valve or appurtenant piping during unauthorized
operation by the customer or the customer's agent shall be repaired at the
expense of the customer.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.034  SUBMETERS.



   The city shall not be required to maintain or read submeters in any
building for the purpose of giving information to the owner of said building
as to the use of water by individual tenants.  This provision shall not
prevent any property owner from applying for and having installed at the
regular rate, as many meters as may be desired to measure water to individual
tenants.  All such meters installed will be billed to the property owner.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.035  CONDITIONS OF SERVICE.



   (A)   No connection shall be made for the purpose of supplying
through a common structure two or more independent customers occupying
premises held under the same ownership, unless the houses are on the same lot
or the property is what is known as a court or apartment house covering more
than one lot.  No physical connection shall be made through water pipes, to
any abutting property, except in case of a court or apartment house as herein
stated.



   (B)   Where a customer has more than one service serving one or more
pieces of property, whether adjacent or separated, the applicable minimum
charge shall be charged for each individual meter or service.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.036  SUPPLYING OF WATER BY CUSTOMERS.



   No customers shall supply water to any person other than the occupant
of the premises of said customer, except that water may be supplied to any
contractor for construction use for the customer or water may be supplied to
water vending machines on the customer's property.  The customer shall be
solely responsible for all bills accruing and the city shall not be required
to make collections from or enter into any agreement with the contracting or
water vending machine operator and the customer.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.037  EMERGENCY SHUTOFFS.



   Customers shall install an appropriate shutoff inside of property lines
at a location accessible in case of emergency.  If the city is required to
shutoff the water for an on-property leak due to the failure to use, lack of,
or inoperability of the emergency shutoffs, then charges as described in §
52.033 of this subchapter shall apply to each trip to the property.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.038  WATER WASTE.



   No person shall lawfully or neglectfully waste water in any manner
whatsoever.  Continued wasting of water after mailing of notice by
registered mail to the customer of record at the mailing address of record by
the Director may result in discontinued water service.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.039  SHUTTING OFF WATER.



   The city may at any time order the water shutoff from any premises
connected with the city mains without notice for repairs, extensions or other
necessary purposes.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.040  COVERING METER BOXES.



   No person shall place upon or about any fire hydrant, gate-valve,
manhole, stopcock, meter or meter box connected with the water pipes of the
system of waterworks of the city, any object, materials, debris, or structure
of any kind so as to prevent free access to the same at all times.  Upon
notice by the city, the owner or person responsible for the placement of such
material shall immediately remove same.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.041  LEAKS IN PLUMBING.



   Customers shall be required to pay for all water lost through failure
to keep plumbing in repair, and the Public Works Department shall not be
required to adjust excessive statements incurred by customer in such a way.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.042  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   Fire hydrants are provided for the purposes of extinguishing fires and
accessing and flushing the water system.  Fire hydrants are to be opened and
used only by the city or the Fire Department of the city, or by such persons
as may be authorized by the Director in accordance with § 52.018 of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)



§ 52.043  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER.



   No person shall use water from any service, fire hydrant, automatic
fire service, blow-off valve, or any other public works facility without
first obtaining permission of the city.  Any unauthorized use of water shall
be charged at the rates described in § 52.018.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.044  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.



   (A)   Guidelines.  Cross-connection control guidelines shall be
maintained by the city and shall list the situations requiring backflow
prevention devices and the appropriate types of approved backflow prevention
devices in conformance with Cal. Code of Regs. Title 17, §§ 7601 et seq.



   (B)   Right of examination.  The department, its employees, agents
or authorized representatives shall have the right to enter all property in
the presence of the owner or the owner's agent for the purpose of examining
the plumbing and plumbing connections to determine the existence of actual or
potential cross-connections.



   (C)   Compliance.  Customers required to install backflow
prevention devices on existing water services shall install the type of
equipment in compliance with the Uniform Plumbing Code and Cal. Code of Regs.
Title 17, §§ 7601 et seq.  Failure to comply with this section may result
in discontinuance of water service.  New customers shall install backflow
prevention devices, when required, prior to commencement of service.



   (D)   Inspection.  It shall be the duty of the customer on any
premises on which backflow prevention devices are installed to have competent
inspections made.  The frequency of inspections shall be determined by the
Director, but no more frequent than at the time of installation and annually
thereafter.  These devices shall be inspected, repaired, overhauled or
replaced at the expense of the customer.  Records of such inspections,
repairs, overhauls or replacements shall be kept and submitted to the city
upon request.



(Ord. 993, passed 12-18-95)  Penalty, see § 52.999



GROUNDWATER CONSERVATION



§ 52.055  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the construction,
maintenance, operation, use, repair, modification, and destruction of wells
within the city in such a manner that the groundwater of the county will not
be contaminated or polluted, and that water obtained from wells will be
suitable for beneficial use and will not jeopardize the health, safety or
welfare of the people of the county.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.010)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



Statutory reference:



   Water wells, see Cal. Water Code §§ 13700  et seq.



§ 52.056  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED WELL.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A water well used less than eight hours in any 12-month
period;



      (2)   A monitoring well from which no monitoring data has been
taken for a period of two years;



      (3)   A well which is in such a state of disrepair that it
cannot be made functional for its original use or any other use regulated by
this subchapter within six months or such other shorter or longer period as
determined by the Director depending on well condition and the risk of the
aquifer;



      (4)   An engineering test hole where 24 hours has elapsed
after construction and testing work has been completed on the site;



      (5)   A cathodic protection well which is no longer used for
its intended purpose; or



      (6)   A water well for which annual reports of well usage
pursuant to § 52.073.



   ACTIVE WELL. A water well that has operated for at least eight hours
during a calendar year, a monitoring well from which data has been collected
at least once during the past two years, or a cathodic protection well
maintained and utilized for its intended purpose.



   ACRE-FOOT. The volume of water necessary to cover one acre to a depth
of one foot; equal to 43,560 cubic feet or 325,851 gallons.



   AGENCY. Ventura County Public Works Agency.



   AQUITARD. A confining bed and/or formation composed of rock or sediment
that retards but does not prevent the flow of water to or from an adjacent
aquifer and that does not readily yield water to wells or springs but stores
groundwater.



   AQUIFER. A body of rock or sediment that is sufficiently porous and
permeable to store, transmit, and yield significant or economic quantities of
groundwater to wells and springs.



   APPLICANT. The well owner or the well owner's authorized representative.



   ARTESIAN PRESSURE. Hydrostatic pressure of artesian water, often
expressed in terms of pounds per square inch, or the height, in feet above
land surface, of a column of water that would be supported by the pressure
and which pressure may cause water to flow from the well.



   BASIN. A groundwater basin or subbasin identified and defined in the
latest State of California Department of Water Resources' (DWR) Bulletin No.
118.



   BACKUP WELL or STANDBY WELL. A well that is not the primary well, but
is a well used to provide supplemental water when the primary well is out of
service or not fully functional. The backup well shall not be used to
initiate any new use or increased use of groundwater, and must meet the
minimum requirements for an active status well.



   CAN'T LOCATE WELL. Classification assigned to a well which the owner
cannot locate.



   CAN'T LOCATE REPORT WELL. Classification assigned to a well for which
the owner has conducted a well search according to the County's Well Location
Procedures, and submitted a report documenting the search efforts and results.



   CATHODIC PROTECTION WELL.  Any artificial excavation in excess of 50
feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or
facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact
with the ground, commonly referred to as cathodic protection. (Water Code §
13711)



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION. A certificate prepared by the county
documenting that a well condition inspection has been conducted by a
registered inspector and a well condition inspection report has been prepared
and deemed satisfactory by the county.



   CITY.  The City of Santa Paula.



   CITY INSPECTOR.  A person authorized by the Director to inspect all
work for which a permit is issued pursuant to this subchapter.



   COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY WELL.  Any water well which provides water for
public water systems as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 116275.



   COMPLETION OPERATION.  Any of the following work conducted after
artificial excavation:



      (1)   Placement of a well casing;



      (2)   Gravel packing;



      (3)   Sealing;



      (4)   Perforation of a well casing; or



      (5)   Any other work listed on a permit issued pursuant to
this subchapter as being a required part of a completion operation.



   CONFINED AQUIFER. An aquifer that is bounded above and below by
formations of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself,
or an aquifer containing confined groundwater.



   CONTAMINANT. Any substance or property preventing the use or reducing
the usability of water for ordinary purposes such as drinking, preparing
food, bathing, washing, recreation, and cooling, or any solute or cause of
change in physical properties that renders water unfit for a given use.



   COUNTY INSPECTOR. A person authorized by the Agency to inspect
permitted work.



   DE MINIMUS EXTRACTOR. A person who extracts, for domestic purposes, two
acre-feet or less per year.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Public Works Department of the city.



   DESTROY A WELL.  To fill it (including both interior and annular
spaces if the well is cased) completely in such a manner that it will not
produce water or act as a conduit for the interchange of water between any
water-bearing formations penetrated.



   DIRECTOR.  The director of the department or his or her duly
authorized representative.



   ENGINEERS TEST HOLE.  An uncased excavation used to determine the
engineering or geological properties of subsurface materials by seismic
investigation, direct observation or any other means.



   EXEMPT WELL. An abandoned well for which a well condition inspection
report has been conducted and a certificate of exemption has been approved by
the County of Ventura.



   FLOWMETER. A manufactured instrument for accurately measuring and
recording the volume of water pumped from a well or wells.



   GOOD STATE OF REPAIR. A well whose condition is adequate to perform its
intended function without allowing contaminants to migrate between zones of
water bearing sediments where one or more zones contain water of different
quality and where the well has a physical barrier that prevents surface water
contaminants from entering groundwater.



   GROUNDWATER. Water beneath the surface of the earth within a zone below
the water table in which the soil is completely saturated with water, but
does not include water that flows in known and definite channels.



   GROUNDWATER BASIN. An alluvial aquifer or a stacked series of alluvial
aquifers with reasonably well-defined boundaries in a lateral direction and
having a definable bottom.



   INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC WELL.  Any water well used to supply water for
domestic needs of an individual residence, commercial establishment, or
farming operation.



   INSPECT A WELL.  To personally witness, record and certify work
pursuant to a condition or conditions of a valid permit.



   MODIFY OR REPAIR A WELL.  To replace its casing in a manner which
involves removal or partial removal of the old casing, to reperforate its
casing, to install a liner in the well, or to change the depth of the well.



   MONITORING WELL.  Any artificial excava-tion by any method for the
purpose of monitoring fluctuations in groundwater levels, quality of
underground waters, or the concentration of contaminants in underground
waters.



   NON-COMPLIANT WELL. An abandoned well for which the owner does not
repair and reuse, destroy or obtain a certificate of exemption.



   OWNERSHIP OF A WELL. The person who is assessed as the owner of the
well by the County Assessor or, if the well is not separately assessed, the
person who owns the land upon which the well is located as shown on the
latest equalized assessment roll of the County Assessor.



   PERSON.  An individual, corporation, company, association,
partnership, limited liability company, municipality, public utility, or
other public body or institution. (Cal. Health and Safety Code § 116275(g))



   POLLUTION.  An alteration of waters by waste, salt water intrusion or
other material to a degree which adversely affects either the suitability of
such waters for beneficial uses or the facilities employed in conjunction
with such beneficial uses.



   POSSESSES A WELL.  In actual possession of the well or has a legal
right to the possession thereof.



   REGISTERED INSPECTOR.  A civil engineer or a professional geologist
possessing a current license in the State of California and approved by the
Agency. Registered inspectors are required to inspect drilling and sealing
operations for engineering test holes and monitoring wells and for the
determinations in connection with a certificate of exemption. A technician
trained and experienced in drilling and sealing operations who is working
under the direct supervision of one of the aforementioned professionals may
be deemed qualified to perform required inspection(s) provided one of the
aforementioned professionals reviews the well condition inspection report and
assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the work by
signing the well condition inspection report.



   REPLACEMENT WELL. A new well that replaces a well but does not increase
the former well's capacity. Well capacity means the name plate performance
rating for the existing well equipment or the well's documented historical
production.



   UNCONFINED AQUIFER. An aquifer which is not bounded on top by an
aquitard and the upper surface of which is the water table.



   UNSATURATED ZONE. The zone below the land surface in which pore space
contains both water and air.



   WATER WELL.  Any artificial excavation constructed by any method for
the purpose of deter- mining the availability of water, extracting water from
or injecting water into the underground, except the following:



      (1)   Oil wells, gas wells, and geothermal wells constructed
under the jurisdiction of the State of California Department of Conservation,
except those wells converted to use as water wells;



      (2)   Wells used exclusively for the purposes of dewatering
excavation during construction or of stabilizing hillsides or earth
embankments (Cal. Water Code § 13710); and



      (3)   Seepage pits approved for use under permit from the
department.



   WELL.  Includes a cathodic protection well, engineer test hole,
monitoring well or water well.



   WELL COMPLETION REPORT. A required, confidential report detailing the
construction, alteration, abandonment, or destruction of any water well,
cathodic protection well, groundwater monitoring well, or geothermal heat
exchange well. The reports were called water well drillers' reports prior to
1991 and are often referred to as "driller's logs." The report requirements
are described in Cal. Water Code § 13751.



   WELL CONDITION INSPECTION REPORT. A report documenting the integrity of
a well and its associated components pursuant to § 52.066.



   WELL FIELD. Two or more water wells located in close proximity or area,
and that extract groundwater.



   WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA. The surface and subsurface area surrounding a
water well or well field that supplies a public water system through which
contaminants are reasonably likely to migrate toward the water well or well
field.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.020)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.057  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall, within the city, construct, repair, modify or destroy
any cathodic protection well which is over 50 feet deep, any engineering test
hole which is over 50 feet deep, any monitoring well, or any water well
unless such work is done pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired
written permit for such work issued by the department as provided in this
subchapter. Additionally, for any cathodic protection well or engineering
test hole, if groundwater is encountered (or expected to be encountered)
shallower than 50 feet deep, a permit is required. A copy of the approved
permit shall be made available for inspection on the job site during any work
authorized by the permit.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.030)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.058  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Types of permits for water wells:



      (1)   Permits for construction, modification, replacement, and
repair of all water wells.



      (2)   Permits for destruction of all wells, except engineering
test holes which shall be destroyed immediately after completion of testing
in compliance with § 52.066(E).



      (3)   Annual permits for one or more engineering test holes
which are over 50 feet deep and which are inspected by registered inspectors.



   (B)   Applications for permits shall be made to the Agency, and
shall include the following:



      (1)   A vicinity map showing the location of the property on
which the well is located;



      (2)   A plot plan indicating the exact location of the well
with respect to the following items within a radius of 500 feet of the well:



         (a)   Approximate property lines;



         (b)   Sewage disposal systems or works carrying or
containing sewage;



         (c)   All intermittent or perennial, natural or
artificial water bodies or water courses;



         (d)   Drainage pattern of the property;



         (e)   Existing wells of all types, regardless of whether
they are subject to regulation under this subchapter; and



         (f)   Access roads.



      (3)   Name of the person who will perform the work on the well;



      (4)   Name and affiliation of registered inspector, when a
registered inspector will be utilized;



      (5)   Proposed depth of well;



      (6)   Proposed use of well;



      (7)   Proof that the person who will construct the well is in
possession of a valid license in accordance with the Contractor's License
Law; and



      (8)   Such other information as the Agency may deem necessary
in order to determine whether underground waters will be protected.



   (C)   Permits shall be issued or denied within 15 days after the day
on which the completed applications are received by the Department.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.040)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.059  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND EXPIRATION.



   Permits shall require compliance with all applicable standards set
forth in § 52.064.  A permit to be valid must comply with all other
applicable provisions of law.  A permit shall expire six months from the
date of issuance unless it is extended by the director.  The director may
grant one or more extensions of a permit, each for a period not to exceed six
months, if the permittee proves to the satisfaction of the director that
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee make it infeasible to
complete the permitted work prior to the expiration date.  Annual permits
for engineering tests holes shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and shall not be extended.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.050)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.060  TIME TO COMPLETE PERMITTED WORK AND SATISFY PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   The permittee shall complete work authorized by the permit and satisfy
all the requirements of the permit prior to the expiration date of the permit
or any extension.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.060)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.061  GUARANTEE OF PERMITTED WORK.



   Prior to the issuance of a permit or any extension thereof, the
applicant may be required to post with the Agency a cash deposit or bond to
guarantee compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and the
applicable permit, such cash or bond to be in an amount deemed necessary by
the Agency to remedy improper work, but not in excess of the total estimated
cost of the permitted work.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.070)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.062  LICENSE AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED OF PERSONS PERFORMING WORK.



   No person shall perform any work, either on such person’s own
property or on the property of another, for which a permit is required by §
52.057 unless such person is in possession of a valid license appropriate to
such work which has been issued in accordance with the Contractors License
Law (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code Chapter 9, commencing with § 7000 of Division 3
of the Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code) and is registered with the department to
perform work permitted by this subchapter.  Licensed water well contractors
(Class C-57) registered with the Agency may perform all types of permitted
work while licensed engineering contractors (Class A) and limited specialty
contractors (Class C-61) registered with the Agency may only perform work
permitted by their license. An application for registration with the Agency
shall include a copy of the applicable license and a copy of a certificate of
workers’ compensation insurance. The registration shall expire
automatically on the expiration date indicated on the copy of the license or
the expiration date indicated on the copy of the certificate of workers’
compensation insurance submitted with the application, whichever expiration
date is earlier.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.080)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.063  SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Any permit issued pursuant to § 52.057 is subject to
suspension or termination prior to expiration as provided in this section:



      (1)   Grounds.  Any of the following occurrences constitutes
a ground for termination of the permit:



         (a)   Suspension, revocation or termination of the
license required by § 52.062 of the person who is to perform the work; or



         (b)   Failure of such person to comply with any
provision of Cal. Lab. Code § 3800; or



         (c)   Failure of such person or of any person who owns
or possesses the well to comply with any provision of this subchapter or any
permit issued pursuant thereto.



      (2)   Notice.  To initiate proceedings to terminate a permit,
the director shall send written notice to the person to whom the permit was
issued.  The notice shall briefly describe the suspected occurrence which
constitutes a ground for termina-tion, shall specify a time and place of a
hearing at which such person shall be afforded an opportunity to present
evidence showing the proposed grounds for evidence do not exist, and shall
state that failure to appear and present such evidence may result in
termination of the permit.



      (3)   Hearing.  The director shall conduct the hearing
specified in the notice.  The hearing shall be informal and shall not be
governed by rules of evidence applicable to courts of law.  The person to
whom the permit was issued shall have the right to present relevant evidence
at the hearing.  The director may, but need not, permit other persons to
present relevant evidence.  At the conclusion of the hearing, or within 30
calendar days thereafter, the director shall determine, based upon the
preponderance of the evidence accepted at the hearing, whether there are
grounds for suspension.  The determination of the director shall be final
and conclusive. Such determination shall be in writing and shall contain a
brief statement of the findings of fact upon which the determination is
based. If it is determined that there is grounds for termination, the
director shall terminate the permit; provided, however, that the director
shall have the discretion not to terminate the permit if the director
determines that the occurrence which gave rise to the grounds for termination
was not willful, is not ongoing and is not likely to recur.



      (4)   Prehearing suspension.  The director may suspend a
permit prior to the hearing when the director determines that such action is
necessary to protect the public health and safety or the environment from
imminent danger.  The director shall notify the person to whom the permit
was issued of such suspension.  The suspension shall remain in effect until
the director makes a final determination based upon the hearing; provided,
however, that the director may rescind the suspension at any earlier time at
which the director determines that it is no longer necessary.



   (B)   This section shall not deprive the director or the county of
the authority to pursue any other action or remedy otherwise available under
the law.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.090)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.064  STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards for construction, repair, modification or
destruction of wells shall be those set forth in the Department of Water
Resources, California Well Standards Bulletins Nos. 74-81 and 74-90, and
Ventura County Water Well Standards Bulletin No. 74-9.



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   The Agency may adopt additional or more stringent
standards to be applicable in any or all zones of the city as delineated in
aforementioned Bulletin No. 74-9.



      (2)   All community water supply wells and individual domestic
wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective means through which
chlorine or other disinfecting agents may be introduced directly into the
well.  If a pipe is provided, it shall be installed at a height equal to the
pump slab, shall be kept sealed, and shall be provided with a threaded or
other secure cap.  Equivalent protection for excluding contaminants from
entering the well shall be provided for subsurface pump discharge
installations.  If an air relief vent is used, it shall terminate downward
and be screened with 16 mesh screen to prevent contaminants from entering the
vent.



      (3)   Every new, repaired or modified community water supply
well or individual domestic water well, after construction, modification or
repair, and before being placed into service, shall be thoroughly cleaned of
all foreign substance and shall be thoroughly disinfected utilizing the
procedures set forth in Appendix C of the aforementioned Bulletin No. 74-81.



      (4)   All wells shall be constructed with a sounding tube, tap
hole with plug, or similar access for water level measuring equipment. For
wells fitted with a well cap, the cap shall have a removable plug for this
purpose. (State of California Department of Water Resources' Bulletin
No.74-81.) Well discharge piping shall contain a water sampling port or valve
for water quality sampling. Every new water well shall be equipped with a
flowmeter. This flowmeter requirement does not apply to de minimis
extractors. For those required to have flowmeters, flowmeters will be
calibrated and a report submitted to the Agency at a minimum of every three
years. The specifications for flowmeter calibration are set forth in Appendix
1. Substitution of comparable flowmeter calibration specifications may be
approved upon review by the director.



      (5)   Engineering test holes deeper than 50 feet shall be
destroyed within one working day upon completion of testing by complete
filling and/or sealing of the borehole in accordance with criteria
established by the Agency. The Agency may waive complete sealing if the
permittee demonstrates to the director's satisfaction that the purpose of
this subchapter as set forth in § 52.055 will be satisfied.



      (6)   All pump discharge pipes not discharging or open to the
atmosphere shall be equipped with an automatic device to prevent backflow
and/or siphonage into a well. Specific backflow prevention measures are
required for drinking water supply wells as prescribed in Title 17, Public
Health, Cal. Code of Regulations (§§ 7583-7565 and 7601-7605), effective
June 25, 1987. (State of California Department of Water Resources' Well
Standard Bulletin No. 74-90). Irrigation well systems, including those used
for landscape irrigation and other well systems that employ, or which have
been modified to employ, chemical feeders or injectors, shall be equipped
with a backflow prevention device (State of California Department of Water
Resources' Well Standard Bulletin No.74-90). A check valve may also be
utilized to meet this backflow prevention requirement.



      (7)   For irrigation and industrial wells chemicals of any
type are not to be injected, pumped or poured into the well with the
exception of disinfectants following any well rehabilitation work.
Rehabilitation work may include use of chemicals to clean or remove scale
from the well casing and gravel pack (if installed). Chemicals used for
disinfection of groundwater extracted from the well shall be injected
downstream from a backflow prevention device. Continuous injection or drip of
chemicals into the well is prohibited.



      (8)   No well, regardless of status, shall be left unattended
without a cap that has been constructed to prevent the accidental access to
the well by a person or animal, or have an opening that allows the well to be
susceptible to contaminants or pollution.



      (9)   All wells shall be located an adequate horizontal
distance from potential sources of contamination and pollution as specified
in the Department of Water Resources, California Well Standards Bulletins No.
74-81, § 8.A.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.100)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.065  LOG OF WELL.



   (A)   (1)   Licensed water well contractors who have performed
any work for which a permit is required by § 52.057 and which involves
drilling, digging, excavating or boring of a well, except for an engineering
test hole, shall, within 30 days of completion of such work, submit to the
Agency an accurate and complete report.



      (2)   For the purpose of obtaining sealing requirements from
the Agency, geophysical well logs will be required as described in this
section. New water wells in Sealing Zone III shall have a geophysical log.
New water wells in Sealing Zone II shall either have a geophysical log, or
soil samples shall be collected and recorded for every ten feet of depth
within potential sealing zones. Geophysical logs must include spontaneous
potential, and resistivity (short and normal, or lateral log). All abandoned
water wells to be destroyed in Sealing Zones II and III shall have a
geophysical log by gamma ray if no existing electric log or satisfactory
drilling report is available for that well, unless it is determined by the
Agency that a log is not warranted.



   (B)   Any permittee whose water well contractor fails to comply with
this provision shall be in violation of this section and shall not be granted
any new permits until the violation has been corrected. This shall not
preclude the application of other penalties for violation of this subchapter.
A well log shall include, at a minimum, all of the following:



      (1)   A detailed record of the boundaries, character, size,
distribution and color of all lithologic units penetrated;



      (2)   The type and size of well casing;



      (3)   The location of perforations, sealing zones and existing
seals;



      (4)   Reports on the quantity and quality of groundwater; and



      (5)   Any other data required by the Agency as a condition of
the permit.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.110)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.066  WELL SEAL INSPECTION REPORTS.



   (A)   Well construction seal inspection report. A County Inspector
will prepare a well seal inspection report for water wells and cathodic
protection wells constructed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired
permit issued under this subchapter.



   (B)   Well destruction seal inspection report. A County Inspector
will prepare a well seal inspection report for water wells and cathodic
protection wells destroyed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired
permit issued under this subchapter.



   (C)   Monitoring well/engineering test hole construction seal
inspection report. The well seal inspection report for monitoring wells and
engineering test holes constructed pursuant to and in compliance with an
unexpired permit issued under this subchapter shall be submitted by a
registered inspector within 30 days of sealing on a form* satisfactory to the
Agency, and shall include:



      (1)   Permit number;



      (2)   Dates of sealing work;



      (3)   Number of wells constructed under this permit;



      (4)   Diameter and depth of bore hole(s), diameter and depth
of casing(s) to top of annular filter pack;



      (5)   Depth to water;



      (6)   Depth and type of sealing material(s);



      (7)   Method of placement of sealing material(s);



      (8)   Method of protection of wellhead or open (engineering
test) bore hole; and **



      (9)   Signature of registered inspector.



* Bulletin 74-90 (DWR) requires that monitoring well construction,
alteration, and destruction reports be completed on forms provided by the
California Department of Water Resources.



** Section 52.064(H) requires that all engineering test holes be destroyed
within one working day after completion of testing.



   (D)   Monitoring well destruction seal inspection report. The well
seal inspection report for monitoring wells and engineering test holes
destroyed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired permit issued under
§ 52.059 shall be submitted by a registered inspector within 30 days of
sealing on a form* satisfactory to the Agency, and shall include:



      (1)   Permit number;



      (2)   Date(s) of sealing work;



      (3)   Number of wells destroyed under this permit;



      (4)   Diameter and depth of bore hole(s) and diameter and
depth of casing(s) installed (monitoring wells);



      (5)   Depth to water;



      (6)   Depth and type of sealing material(s);



      (7)   Method of placement of sealing material;



      (8)   Method of restoration of site area; and



      (9)   Signature of registered inspector.



   (E)   Water well condition inspection report for certificate of
exemption or returning well to active status. Any person who owns or who
possesses a water well that is abandoned or about to become abandoned due to
lack of use, but who does not desire to destroy the well, may submit to the
Agency a well condition inspection report signed by a registered inspector
pursuant to § 52.069. The report shall include:



      (1)   State well number;



      (2)   Driller's report;



      (3)   Assessor parcel number of the property on which the well
is located;



      (4)   An accurate location description with respect to nearby
wells, septic systems, animal enclosures, roads, and property boundaries;



      (5)   Photographs of the well site, taken not more than six
months prior to application for a certificate of exemption;



      (6)   Video log of well casing, conducted not more than six
months prior to application for a certificate of exemption;



      (7)   A description of the well casing condition based upon a
review of the most recent video log of the well;



      (8)   An opinion that the well is, or is not, equipped with an
annular seal or seals to prevent the interchange of waters between
water-bearing strata penetrated by the well;



      (9)   A statement that the well is, or is not, protected from
artesian flow and from entry by surface waters;



      (10)   A description of any work necessary to assure the
safety of local groundwater supplies due to the continued existence of the
well; and



      (11)   A description of any repair work necessary to allow the
well to function for its intended purpose.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.120)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.067  CORRECTIVE ACTIONS.



   Any person who owns a well and any person who is in possession of a
well may be required to take corrective action with respect to the well as
provided in this section.



   (A)   Grounds.  Any of the following occurrences constitutes a
ground for ordering corrective action:



      (1)   Maintenance, operation or use of the well in a manner
that will cause or contribute to, or run a substantial risk of causing or
contributing to, the pollution or contamination of the groundwater; allowing
water to be wasted as a result of artesian pressure; or



      (2)   Construction, maintenance, repair, modification or
destruction of the well in a manner that violates any provision of this
subchapter.



   (B)   Notice.  To initiate proceedings to order corrective action,
the director shall send written notice to the person who owns the well or the
person in possession of the well or both of them.  The notice shall briefly
describe the grounds for ordering corrective action, shall describe the
proposed corrective action, shall specify a time and place of a hearing at
which such person shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence
showing that the grounds for corrective action do not exist or that the
proposed corrective action is inappropriate, and shall state that failure to
appear and present such evidence may result in an order requiring such a
person to take some or all of the proposed corrective action.



   (C)   Hearing.  The director shall conduct the hearing specified in
the notice.  The hearing shall be informal and shall not be governed by
rules of evidence applicable to courts of law.  The person to whom the
permit was issued shall have the right to present relevant evidence at the
hearing.  The director may, but need not, permit other persons to present
relevant evidence.  At the conclusion of the hearing, or within 30 calendar
days thereafter, the director shall determine, based upon the preponderance
of the evidence accepted at the hearing, whether there are grounds for
ordering corrective action, and, if so, whether the proposed corrective
action is appropriate. Such determination shall be in writing and shall
contain a brief statement of the findings of fact upon which the
determination is based.



   (D)   Order. If the determination is that there are grounds for
corrective action and that some or all of the proposed corrective action is
appropriate, the director may issue and serve upon the person or persons who
were served with notice of the hearing a written order requiring such
appropriate corrective action. The order shall state a deadline for
commencing the corrective action if such action is to be ongoing and shall
state a deadline for completing the corrective action if such corrective
action is not taken in compliance with the order, such action may be taken by
the county at the expense of the person served with the order and, in
addition, such person may be subject to criminal prosecution.



   (E)   Compliance.  Any owner or possessor of the well who is served
with such an order shall, on or before the deadline stated therein, commence
every corrective action described therein as being ongoing and complete every
corrective action described therein as not being ongoing.  Any owner or
possessor of the well served with such an order, and any person who
thereafter acquires ownership or possession of the well with actual or
constructive notice of the order, shall, for so long as such person owns or
possesses the well, continue to take every corrective action described in the
order as ongoing, until such time as either the well is destroyed pursuant to
this subchapter or the director states in writing that such ongoing
corrective action is no longer necessary.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.130)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.068  DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED WELLS.



   No person shall own or possess an abandoned cathodic protection well
which is over 50 feet deep, an abandoned monitoring well, an abandoned
engineering test hole which is over 50 feet deep, or an abandoned water well
unless either such well has been destroyed pursuant to this subchapter or a
current certificate of exemption has been issued for such well pursuant to §
52.069. Any down-hole explosive work shall be conducted by a state licensed
blaster who has obtained all appropriate city and county permits.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.140)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.069  CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION TO ACTIVE STATUS.



   (A)   Any person who owns or possesses a water well or monitoring
well which is abandoned or about to become abandoned but who does not desire
to destroy the well, or a person who desires to return an abandoned well to
active status, may submit to the Agency a report prepared and signed by a
registered inspector. Recommendations for repair must be submitted for review
and approval of the Agency. If the Agency determines that the well would not
result in pollution of ground water and would not create a hazard to health
and safety, the Agency may issue a certificate of exemption or may approve
the well to be returned to active status. Either alternative requires a
satisfactory well condition inspection report.



   (B)   A certificate of exemption shall expire five years after
issuance and may be terminated by the Agency at any time prior to expiration
upon a determination that destruction of the well is necessary to prevent
pollution or contamination of groundwater or to avoid a hazard to health or
safety. Successive certificates of exemption may be issued with respect to a
well in the same manner as the original certificate was issued. The well
condition inspection report shall only be valid when the report has been
shown to meet the requirements of § 52.066(E). The well condition inspection
report will expire after 12 months and a new well condition inspection report
will be necessary for well status changes.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.150)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.070  FEES.



   The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, establish fees for the
issuance of a permit, extension of a permit, a certificate of exemption, or
an appeal pursuant to this subchapter. The payment of such fee, if any,
established by such resolution shall accompany the application to which it
pertains. If the application is withdrawn before the issuance of the permit,
the Agency shall compute the cost to the county of processing the application
up to that point in accordance with the city’s standard cost accounting
procedures and, if such cost is less than the amount of the fee paid, the
difference shall be refunded to the applicant.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.160)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.071  INSPECTION.



   The Agency and the county's inspectors may, at any and all reasonable
times, enter any and all places, property, enclosures and structures for the
purpose of making examinations and investigations to determine whether any
provision of this subchapter is being violated. The director may require that
any work for which a permit is required by this subchapter be completed in
stages and that work completed for any stage be inspected prior to any
further work. Registered inspectors must inspect drilling and sealing
operations for engineering test holes and monitoring wells if required by
permit conditions. Prior to commencing any inspection pursuant to this
subchapter, the Agency shall obtain either the consent of the owner or
occupant of the property or an administrative inspection warrant.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.170)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.072  ABATEMENT.



   If any corrective action required by an order issued pursuant to §
52.067 is not taken in full compliance with such order, the director may
cause the corrective action to be taken by the county and all persons
required by § 52.067 to take such corrective action shall be jointly and
severally liable to the county for the cost of such action. In cases where
the public health and safety require emergency corrective action, the
director may cause the emergency corrective action to be taken by the county
without a prior order or notice and all persons who own or possess the well
shall be jointly and severally liable to the county for the cost of such
action.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.190)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Am. Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



§ 52.073  FLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.



   All wells having a history of flowing as a result of artesian pressure
shall be maintained and equipped to prevent flowing due to pressure in the
aquifer system. Wells without any history of flowing that begin to flow shall
be repaired, or retrofitted as necessary to prevent flowing. Such repair or
retrofit shall be completed within a period of 30 days of notice by the
county. This includes flowing as a result of a failed casing or other
deteriorated component, or the absence of a surface seal.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.074  EXEMPTION.



   (A)   Leak detection system. The foregoing provisions of this
subchapter do not apply to any leak detection system installed or destroyed
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.7 (commencing with § 25280) of
Division 20 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.



   (B)   Monitoring and recovery wells. The Agency may waive permit
requirements for installation or destruction of monitoring and recovery wells
which are less than 50 feet deep and which are constructed to determine the
extent of, or remove, pollution from



underground storage tanks, pursuant to requirements of the Environmental
Health Division, provided the director determines that the purpose of this
subchapter as set forth in § 52.055 will be satisfied.



   (C)   Natural gas monitoring and recovery wells. The Agency may
waive permit requirements for installation or destruction of natural gas
monitoring and recovery wells which are less than 50 feet deep pursuant to
requirements of the Environmental Health Division, provided the Department
determines that the purpose of this subchapter as set forth in § 52.055 will
be satisfied.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.075  AQUIFER PROTECTION PROGRAM.



   The purposes of this program are to allow retention of those wells that
are being used and are in good condition and to require either repair or
destruction of those wells that are not usable and are causing groundwater
pollution.



   (A)   Water wells.



      (1)   Beginning on January 1, 1999, and on each January first
thereafter, any person who owns a water well, or any person who is in
possession of a water well, except those wells for which a valid certificate
of exemption is in effect, shall submit to the Agency a report of the volume
of groundwater extracted, as measured by flowmeter if so equipped, or other
reasonable means, and the total time the well was operated within the
preceding 12 months. In addition, for water wells constructed to allow access
for water level measuring, the static water level in each water well shall be
measured and reported annually. Any results from a completed aquifer pump
test, or groundwater quality data collected shall also be reported. This
report shall be submitted to the Agency prior to February 1 of each year on a
form approved by the Agency. Owners of wells located within the following
agency jurisdictions, in lieu of a separate submittal, may submit copies of
the existing reporting form if the form contains the information required by
this section:



         (a)   United Water Conservation District;



         (b)   Fox Canyon Groundwater Management Agency;



         (c)   Ojai Basin Groundwater Management Agency; or



         (d)   Any other government agency that requires the
reporting of groundwater extractions within its boundaries.



      (2)   If a well is classified as abandoned, as defined in §
52.056, a certificate of exemption shall be obtained or the well may be
returned to active status by completing a well condition inspection report in
the manner provided in § 52.069, or the well shall be destroyed as required
by § 52.068.



   (B)   Based upon the above information, all wells in the
unincorporated areas of Ventura County shall be classified as one of the
following:



      (1)   Active;



      (2)   Abandoned with a valid certificate of exemption;



      (3)   Abandoned and requiring destruction;



      (4)   Non-compliant-abandoned;



      (5)   Non-compliant;



      (6)   Can't locate; or



      (7)   Can't locate report.



   (C)   Applicants in violation of this subchapter shall not be
entitled to further well permits or any land use entitlement until all
violations of this subchapter are corrected.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.076  WATER WELL AND WATER WELL PERMIT PROHIBITIONS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, beginning October
28, 2014, due to drought and groundwater conditions in Ventura County, no
permits for the construction of new water wells or modification or repair of
existing wells shall be issued under § 52.058(A) and no person shall
construct a new water well or modify or repair an existing water well under
§ 52.058(B)(1) within the area described in Section 2 "Applicability" of
Ventura County Ordinance No. 4468 and City of Santa Paula Ordinance No.
52.055 except as provided in §§ 52.077 and 52.078.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.077  EXCEPTIONS TO WATER WELL PERMIT PROHIBITIONS.



   The water well and permit prohibitions in § 52.076 shall not apply to:



   (A)   Water well permits for the repair, modification or replacement
of an existing permitted water well or legal nonconforming water well
involving no increase in well capacity. Well capacity means the name plate
performance rating for the existing well equipment.



   (B)   Water well permits for backup or standby wells which do not
initiate any new or increased use of groundwater. For purposes of this
section, a new or increased use of groundwater is a use that did not exist
before October 22, 2014.



   (C)   Water well permits within areas in which groundwater rights
have been adjudicated by a court where this water well permit prohibition
would interfere with the court's order, decree, or physical solution.



   (D)   County water well permit applications approved for processing
by a Groundwater Management Agency, provided that on October 22, 2014, the
Groundwater Management Agency is prohibiting new groundwater extraction
facilities. For purposes of this § 52.077, Groundwater Management Agency
shall mean an agency formed under Cal. Water Code Appendix §§ 121-102 et
seq.



   (E)   County water well permit applications filed on or before
October 22, 2014.



   (F)   Water well permits applications within groundwater basins
designated as High or Medium Priority under the Department of Water Resources
("DWR") California Statewide Groundwater Elevation Monitoring Program
(CASGEM) Groundwater Basin Prioritization for which designations are made
pursuant to Cal. Water Code § 10722.4 and for which a groundwater
sustainability agency has adopted and submitted to DWR a groundwater
sustainability plan or alternative plan pursuant to Water Code §§ 10727 and
10733.6 (effective January 1, 2015).



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.078  WAIVERS OF THE WATER WELL AND PERMIT PROHIBITIONS.



   A waiver of the water well and permit prohibitions in § 52.076 may be
granted by the director on a case-by-case basis, upon receipt of an
application for a waiver and upon the director's determination that the
application demonstrates that:



   (A)   There are special circumstances or exceptional characteristics
of the real property and groundwater which do not apply generally to
comparable real property and groundwater conditions in the same vicinity, and
that the granting of such waiver will not be detrimental to the condition of
groundwater resources; or



   (B)   Strict application of the prohibition as it applies to the
real property or its groundwater conditions will result in practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the purpose and
findings of Ventura County Ordinance No. 4466 and City of Santa Paula
Ordinance No. 52.055 and that the granting of such waiver will not be
detrimental to the condition of groundwater resources.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.079  LIENS APPLIED.



   Failure to comply with any section of this subchapter may result in the
county placing a notice of noncompliance or a lien on the affected property
to cover the costs of managing and performing work deemed necessary, as well
as other remedies prescribed by this subchapter.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.080  ENFORCEMENT.



   The director is hereby designated as the enforcing agent of this
subchapter. HEARING OFFICER as used herein shall mean the director or the
director's designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings
authorized by this subchapter and issue final decisions on matters raised
therein.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.081  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever the director determines that any person who owns a
well, or any person who is in possession of a well or any other person is
responsible for violating any provision of this subchapter, or that any
requirement of any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter is not being
implemented or adhered to by such person, the director shall send such person
a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be delivered in
accordance with § 52.083.



   (B)   The notice of violation shall:



      (1)   Identify the provision of this subchapter or the
applicable permit which has been violated;



      (2)   State how the violation may be corrected;



      (3)   Advise that if the violation is not corrected by a
deadline to be specified in the notice of violation, a notice of
noncompliance may be recorded against the property in the Office of the
County Recorder;



      (4)   Advise that continued noncompliance may result in
additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or other
person;



      (5)   Advise that administrative fines may be imposed pursuant
to § 52.081; and



      (6)   Advise that the determination that a violation exists
may be appealed, but that the appeal must be filed in accordance with §
52.082.



   (C)   If the violation is not corrected pursuant to the notice of
violation as determined by the director within the time allotted or if the
violation is upheld after an appeal pursuant to § 52.082, a notice of
noncompliance may be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. The
notice of noncompliance shall describe the property and specify the ordinance
section or permit terms or conditions violated. The director shall record a
release of notice of noncompliance with the Office of the County Recorder
only if and after the violations have been fully corrected to the
satisfaction of the director and all county enforcement costs and fees and
administrative fines have been paid. The violator must pay a fee for
recordation of the release of notice of noncompliance as determined in the
adopted schedule of fees.



   (D)   If a notice of noncompliance is recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder, a notice of imposition of administrative fines shall be
served upon the violator. The notice of imposition of administrative fines
shall describe the property and state the following for each violation:



      (1)   The amount of the fine that will accrue per violation as
determined pursuant to § 52.082;



      (2)   The date the fine will begin accruing, which may be the
same date the notice is served;



      (3)   That additional fines may accrue until the violation is
corrected as determined by the director;



      (4)   That the amount of the fine may be increased in the
future if the violation is not corrected;



      (5)   That the accrued fines are immediately due and owing and
that the notice of imposition of administrative fines may be recorded as a
lien against the property for all unpaid fines; and



      (6)   That the amount of the fines may be administratively
appealed in accordance with § 52.082 within 30 days of the date of service
of the notice of imposition of administrative fines.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.082  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   The following administrative fines may be imposed by the director where
a notice of violation is not appealed in accordance with § 52.084 or, if
properly appealed, the appeal process is complete and the notice of violation
is upheld: $100 for a first violation, $500 for a second violation, and a
fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation occurring within one
year. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to
comply with either a separate provision of this subchapter, a notice of
violation, a corrective action order, or a permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.083  DELIVERY OF NOTICES.



   Any notice of violation or notice of imposition of administrative fines
to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this subchapter shall be
subject to the following:



   (A)   The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to
appeal the matter as set forth in § 52.084;



   (B)   Delivery shall be deemed complete upon:



      (1)   Personal service to the recipient;



      (2)   Deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first
class delivery; or



      (3)   Facsimile service with confirmation of receipt;



   (C)   If the recipient of notice is the owner, the address for
notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized
assessment roll for the property or as otherwise appears in the current
records of the county; and



   (D)   If the owner or occupant of any private property cannot be
located after the reasonable efforts of the Agency, the notice shall be
deemed delivered ten calendar days after posting on the property.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.084  ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.



   Any person receiving a notice of violation or notice of imposition of
administrative fines may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative
hearing.



   (A)   Request for administrative hearing. Any person appealing a
notice of violation or notice of imposition of administrative fines, shall,
within 30 calendar days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an
administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as
established by separate resolution, with the Clerk of the Board of the
County, with a copy of the request for administrative hearing mailed on the
date of filing to the director. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be
held before the Hearing Officer within 45 calendar days of the date of filing
of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the Hearing
Officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a
continuance of the hearing is granted.



   (B)   Hearing proceedings. The Agency or its authorized
representative shall appear in support of the notice of violation or notice
of imposition of administrative fines, and the appealing party shall appear
in opposition to the notice. The Agency shall have the burden of supporting
the notice and any enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the
evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other
documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case.



   (C)   Final decision and appeal. The final decision of the Hearing
Officer shall be issued by mail within ten calendar days of the conclusion of
the hearing. The final decision shall be delivered by first-class mail,
postage prepaid, to the appealing party at the address set forth in the
request for an administrative hearing. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
53069.4(b)(1), if the final decision is contested, review must be sought in
the Superior Court as a limited civil case within 20 days after the date of
service of the final decision. A copy of the notice of appeal must be served
on the director either in person or by first class mail. If no notice of
appeal is timely filed with the Superior Court, the final decision issued by
the Hearing Officer shall be deemed confirmed and final.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.085  APPEALS.



   Any person shall have the right to appeal the decision(s) of the
Director to the Board of Supervisors, provided such appeal is made in writing
within 21 days of the date of the decision and the applicable appeal fee is
paid. This right of appeal shall not apply to final decisions of the Hearing
Officer made pursuant to § 52.084.



(Ord. 1274, passed 6-5-17)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty
provided in Chapter 13 of this code.



   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 52.055 through
52.073 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
according to Chapter 13 of this code, and shall be guilty of  a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which such violation
is committed, continued or permitted, and shall be subject to the same
punishment for each such separate offense as for the original offense. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the prosecuting attorney has determined
that such action would be in the best interests of justice, the prosecuting
attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading that the violation shall be
an infraction and the violation shall then be prosecuted as an infraction. 
The provisions of this division are in addition to and independent of any
other sanctions which are or may be imposed under this chapter or any other
provision of law.



   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 52.055 through
52.085 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
according to Chapter 13 of this code, and shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which such violation
is committed, continued or permitted, and shall be subject to the same
punishment for each such separate offense as for the original offense.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the prosecuting attorney has determined
that such action would be in the best interests of justice, the prosecuting
attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading that the violation shall be
an infraction and the violation shall then be prosecuted as an infraction.
The provisions of this sectopm are in addition to and independent of any
other sanctions which are or may be imposed under this chapter or any other
provision of law.



(‘81 Code, § 8.40.180)  (Ord. 945, passed  - -91; Ord. 1274, passed
6-5-17)



CHAPTER 53:  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES



Section



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Public hearing by Council



   53.03   Report by City Engineer



   53.04   Council may designate underground utility districts by
resolution



   53.05   Unlawful acts



   53.06   Exceptions



   53.07   Notice to property owners and utility companies



   53.08   Responsibility of utility companies



   53.09   Responsibility of property owners



   53.10   Responsibility of city



   53.11   Extension of time



   53.12   Installation of lines or wires underground required;
exceptions



   53.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Underground utility districts, see Cal. Sts. and High. Code §§ 5896.1
et seq. and  Cal. Gov't Code § 38793



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMISSION.  The Public Utilities Commis-sion of the state.



   PERSON.  Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their
agents and employees.



   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES.  Poles,
towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms,
braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar
or associated service.



   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT.  That area in the city
within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are
prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the
provisions of § 53.04.



   UTILITY.  All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.



('81 Code, § 13.16.010)



§ 53.02  PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Council may from time to time call public hearings to
ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires
the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires
and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or
associated service.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail
of the time and place of such hearings at least 10 days prior to the date
thereof.



   (C)   Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be
continued from time to time.



   (D)   At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an
opportunity to be heard.



   (E)   The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.



('81 Code, § 13.16.020)



§ 53.03  REPORT BY CITY ENGINEER.



   (A)   Prior to holding such hearing, the City Engineer shall consult
with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such
hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities
participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected
property owners.



   (B)   Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time
required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead
facilities.



('81 Code, § 13.16.030)



§ 53.04  COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS BY RESOLUTION.



   (A)   If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the
city or a public utility has voluntarily agreed to pay over 50% of all costs
of conversion, excluding costs of user's connection to underground electric
or communications facilities, and further finds that the public necessity,
health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such
removal and underground installation.



   (B)   Such resolution shall include a description of the area
comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and
underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected
property owners must be ready to receive underground service.



   (C)   A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and
underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor,
materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation
of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.



('81 Code, § 13.16.040)



§ 53.05  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders
the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
therein as provided in § 53.04, it is unlawful for any person or utility to
erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles,
over-head wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the
date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish
service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or
occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in § 53.09(A),
and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after the
work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 13.16.050)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.06  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Emergency or unusual circumstances.



      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead
facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed 30
days, without authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service.



      (2)   The Public Works Director may grant special permission,
on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances,
without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct,
install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated
overhead structures.



('81 Code, § 13.16.060)



   (B)   Types of facilities exempt.  This chapter and any resolutions
adopted pursuant to § 53.04 shall, unless otherwise provided in such
resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:



      (1)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under
the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;



      (2)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street
lighting;



      (3)   Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures,
crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been
prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when
such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures are not prohibited;



      (4)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of
34,500 volts;



      (5)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a
building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one
location on the building to another location on the same building or to an
adjacent building without crossing any public street;



      (6)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting
structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;



      (7)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as
surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets, and concealed ducts;



      (8)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.



('81 Code, § 13.16.070)



§ 53.07  NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.



   (A)   Within 10 days after the effective date of a resolution
adopted pursuant to § 53.04, the City Clerk shall notify all affected
utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by
such resolution of the adoption thereof.  The City Clerk shall further
notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any
person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric,
communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall
provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive
such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new
location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the
respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.



   (B)   Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy
of the resolution adopted pursuant to § 53.04, together with a copy of this
chapter, to affected property owner's as such are shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and to the affected utilities.



('81 Code, § 13.16.080)



§ 53.08  RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.



   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service
within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to § 53.04, the
supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and
associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission.



('81 Code, § 13.16.090)



§ 53.09  RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   Construction of service connection required.



      (1)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or
renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide
that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in § 53.08 and the termination facility on or within such
building or structure being served.



      (2)   If the requirement set forth in subdivision (1) of this
division is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in
the resolution enacted pursuant to § 53.04, the City Engineer shall give
notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice
in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment
roll, to provide the required underground facilities within 10 days after
receipt of such notice.



('81 Code, § 13.16.100)



   (B)   Notice; mailing procedure.



      (1)   The notice to provide the required facilities may be
given either by personal service or by mail.



      (2)   In case of service by mail on either of such persons,
the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope
with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises
at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as
such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known
address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when
no address appears, to “General Delivery, City of Santa Paula.”



      (3)   If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed
to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours
after the mailing thereof.



      (4)   If notice is given by mail to either the owner or
occupant of such premises, the City Engineer shall, within 48 hours after the
mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight
inches by 10 inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such
premises.



('81 Code, § 13.16.110)



   (C)   Contents of notice.  The notice given by the City Engineer to
provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what
work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not
completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the City Engineer will
provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and
expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a
lien upon such property.



('81 Code, § 13.16.120)



   (D)   City to do necessary work.



      (1)   If upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the
required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer
shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises
are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished
thereto, the City Engineer may in lieu of providing the required underground
facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead
service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such
property.



      (2)   Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he
shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that
the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof,
together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is
to be assessed.



      (3)   The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for
hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such
premises, which time shall not be less than 10 days thereafter.



('81 Code, § 13.16.130)



   (E)   Notice of hearing.  The City Engineer shall forthwith, upon
the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in
writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing
thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in division (B) of this
section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground
facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report
and will hear protests against such assessment.  Such notice shall also set
forth the amount of the proposed assessment.



('81 Code, § 13.16.140)



   (F)   Hearing; determination.  Upon the date and hour set for the
hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all
protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the
assessment.



('81 Code, § 13.16.150)



   (G)   Assessment against property.



      (1)   If any assessment is not paid within five days after its
confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer,
and the City Engineer is directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax
Collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment
has not been paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of
such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the
premises upon which such assessment was not paid.



      (2)   The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time
as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and
payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year.



('81 Code, § 13.16.160)



§ 53.10  RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.



   The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from
all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable
the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified
in the resolution enacted pursuant to § 53.04.



('81 Code, § 13.16.170)



§ 53.11  EXTENSION OF TIME.



   In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to § 53.04 cannot be performed within the time provided on
account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities,
strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances
beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be
accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such
limitation.



('81 Code, § 13.16.180)



§ 53.12  INSTALLATION OF LINES OR WIRES UNDERGROUND REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   All electrical distribution lines of 16,000 volts or less,
telephone, C.A.T.V. and similar service wires or cables which provide direct
service to the property being developed shall be installed under-ground. 
Risers on poles and buildings are permitted and shall be provided by the
developer or owner onto the pole which provides service to such property. 
The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of
this section and he shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility
companies for installation of such facilities.



   (B)   The following exceptions shall apply:



      (1)   A utility pole may be placed on the rear of such
property for the sole purpose of terminating underground facilities providing
it is not practical or economically feasible to carry such underground lines
to an existing utility pole.



      (2)   Temporary utilities along with the necessary service
poles, wires and cables may be permitted for the period during which
authorized construction is continuing for which valid building permits have
been issued or for temporary uses which comply with requirements of the
zoning ordinance, building code and other applicable regulations.



      (3)   Appurtenances and associated equip-ment including, but
not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes
and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an under-ground system may be
placed aboveground.



('81 Code, § 13.16.190)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   Any person in violation of any section of this chapter shall be subject
to the general penalties as listed in Chapter 13 of this code.



CHAPTER 54:  STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   54.01   Purpose and intent



   54.02   Definitions




Prohibition of Non-Stormwater Discharges and Illicit Connections




   54.10   Illicit discharges prohibited, exempt discharges



   54.11   Pollution prohibited



   54.12   Illicit connections




Reduction of Pollutants in Stormwater and Requirements for the Control of
Urban Runoff




   54.30   Best management practices required



   54.31   Construction activities



   54.32   Development



   54.33   Best management practices adopted



   54.34   Notification of intent and compliance with general permits



   54.35   Illicit discharge and connections



   54.36   Watercourse protection




                Permits, Inspections and Enforcement




   54.50   Scope of inspections



   54.51   Administrative citations and remedies



   54.52   Nuisance



   54.53   Non-exclusive remedies



   54.54   Violations of other laws



   54.55   Civil remedies, injunctions



   54.56   Other civil remedies



   54.57   Discharge permit



   54.58   Permit denial, suspension, revocation or modification



   54.59   Permit enforcement and compliance



   54.60   Disclaimer and severability



   54.61   Judicial review



   54.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of the Stormwater Quality Management Ordinance is to
prescribe regulations as mandated by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
(referred to as the Clean Water Act), 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as
amended, and the California Water Code, to effectively prohibit
non-stormwater discharges into the storm drain system, flood control
channels, and debris and detention basins, and to reduce the discharge of
pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable. Stormwater runoff
is one step in the natural cycle of water. However, human activities, such as
construction and the operation and maintenance of an urban infrastructure,
may result in undesirable discharges of pollutants, which may accumulate in
local drainage channels and eventually may be deposited in the waters of the
United States. The intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety,
and general welfare of citizens and protect and enhance water quality by
controlling the contribution of urban pollutants to runoff which enter the
storm drain system and watercourses of the city of Santa Paula.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this article. Words and
phrases not ascribed a meaning by this article shall have the meanings as
defined in the NPDES Permit, if defined therein, and if not, to the meanings
ascribed by the regulations complementing the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System, Clean Water Act § 402, and Division 7 of the California
Water Code, as they may be amended from time to time.



   AUTHORIZED INSPECTOR. The Public Works Director, and persons designated
by and under the Director's instruction and supervision, who are assigned to
investigate compliance and detect violation of this chapter.



   BASIN PLAN. The Water Quality Control Plan for the Santa Clara River
Basin as adopted by the State Water Resources Control Board on June 3, 1991,
as the same may be amended from time to time.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Activities, practices, and procedures to
prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent that is technologically and
economically feasible, the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES include, but are not limited to: public education
and outreach, planning of development projects, treatment facilities to
remove pollutants from stormwater; operation and maintenance procedures; and
the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures.



   CITY DISCHARGE PERMIT. An authorization, license or equivalent control
document issued by the city for a non-stormwater discharge that is not
prohibited by the NPDES Permit (see Stormwater Quality Management Ordinance
Article 2) or any other applicable order of the Regional Board, State Water
Resources Control Board or the EPA.



   CO-PERMITTEE. Any of the following public entities: the Ventura County
Flood Control District (VCFCD), the County of Ventura, or the City of
Camarillo, Fillmore, Moorpark, Ojai, Oxnard, Port Hueneme, San Buenaventura,
Santa Paula, Simi Valley, or Thousand Oaks, which are responsible for
compliance with the terms of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Permit.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or
reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether
single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial,
commercial, retail, and other non-residential projects, including public
agency projects; or mass grading for future construction, for which either
discretionary land use approval or any permit is required.



   DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the city and persons designated
by and under the Director's instruction and supervision.



   DISCHARGE.Any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching
(including subsurface migration to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any
liquid, semi-solid or solid substance.



   DISCHARGE PERMIT. An authorization, license or equivalent control
document issued by the EPA, the State Water Resources Control Board or the
Regional Board, and includes NPDES general permits; the NPDES Permit; and any
permits issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.



   DISCHARGER. Any person causing a discharge.



   EPA. The Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of
America.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any man-made conveyance or drainage system
pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet, or condition of property whether on the
surface or subsurface through which the discharge of any pollutant to the
storm drain system occurs or may occur. The term ILLICIT CONNECTION shall not
include connections to the storm drain system that are authorized by a
co-permittee with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the
connection is made.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system or an
upstream flow, which is tributary to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a discharge
permit and discharges that are exempt in accordance with any applicable order
of the Regional Board. The term ILLICIT DISCHARGE shall not include the
following types of non-stormwater discharges, unless the Regional Board
determines that these discharges cause specific receiving water limitation
violations:



      (1)   Dechlorinated water line flushing;



      (2)   Landscape irrigation;



      (3)   Diverted stream flows;



      (4)   Rising ground waters;



      (5)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration [as defined at
40 CFR 35.2005 (20)] to separate storm sewers;



      (6)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;



      (7)   Discharges from potable water sources;



      (8)   Foundation drains;



      (9)   Air conditioning condensation;



      (10)   Irrigation water;



      (11)   Natural springs;



      (12)   Water from crawl space pumps;



      (13)   Footing drains;



      (14)   Lawn watering;



      (15)   Individual residential car washing;



      (16)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;



      (17)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;



      (18)   Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting
activities;



      (19)   Other types of discharge identified and recommended in
annual reports by the co-permittees, as approved by the Executive Officer of
the Regional Board.



   INVOICE FOR COSTS. The actual costs and expenses of the city, including
but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries and other expenses
recoverable under state law, incurred during any inspection or investigation
conducted pursuant to this chapter, where a Notice of Violation,
Administrative Compliance Order or other enforcement option this chapter is
utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. The
municipal discharge permit(s) issued by the Regional Board and entitled Waste
Discharge Requirements for Stormwater Management/Urban Runoff Discharges for
VCFCD, County of Ventura, and the cities of Ventura County, Order No. 94-082,
NPDES Permit No. CAS 063339, as may be amended from time to time.



   OCEANPLAN. The Water Quality Control Plan for Ocean Waters of
California as adopted by the State Water Resources Control Board on March 22,
1990, as the same may be amended from time to time.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership,
government entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association,
joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent,
employee or representative of any of the above.



   POLLUTANT. Any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances, or combination
thereof, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Artificial materials, chips or pieces including, but not
limited to, floatable plastics, wood chips or metal shavings.



      (2)   Household waste including, but not limited to, trash,
paper, plastics, lawn clippings and yard wastes; animal fecal materials;
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; used oil and fluids from vehicles,
lawn mowers and other common household equipment.



      (3)   Metals including, but not limited to, cadmium, lead,
zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium and non-metals including, but not
limited to, phosphorus and arsenic.



      (4)   Petroleum hydrocarbons including, but not limited to,
fuels, lubricants, hydraulic fluids, surfactants, waste oils, solvents,
coolants and grease.



      (5)   Soil, sediment and particulate materials.



      (6)   Animal waste including, but not limited to, discharge
from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables,
show facilities, and polo fields.



      (7)   Substances having characteristics such as a pH less than
6.5 or greater than 8.5 or unusual coloration, or turbidity, or containing
fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, enterococcus, or other pathogens.



      (8)   Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction
sites and by construction activities including, but not limited to, painting,
staining; use of sealants, glues, limes; excessive pesticides, fertilizers or
herbicides; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos
fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants,
hydraulic, radiator or battery fluids; construction equipment washing,
concrete pouring and cutting slurry wastes, and cleanup wash water or use of
concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting residues; use of
chemical decreasing or diluting agents; and super chlorinated water generated
by potable water line flushing.



      (9)   Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen
demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon.



      (10)   Materials which contain base/neutral or acid
extractable organic compounds.



      (11)   Pollutants as defined in § 502 (6) of the Clean Water
Act, 33 U.S.C. 1362 (6) or incorporated into California Water Code §  13373.



   RECEIVING WATER LIMITATIONS. The following conditions, such conditions
which are not allowed to create a condition of nuisance or to adversely
affect beneficial uses of waters of the State:  Floating, suspended, or
deposited macroscopic particulate matter, or foam; bottom deposits or aquatic
growths; alteration of temperature, turbidity, or apparent color beyond
present natural background levels; visible, floating, suspended or deposited
oil or other products of petroleum origin; or toxic or deleterious substances
to be present in concentrations or quantities which will cause deleterious
effects on aquatic biota, wildlife, or waterfowl, or which render any of
these unfit for human consumption either at levels created in the receiving
waters or as a result of biological concentration; or any other discharge
which causes a violation of any applicable water quality objective for
receiving waters contained in the Ocean Plan or the Basin Plan or any other
applicable water quality objectives adopted by the Regional Board.



   REGIONAL BOARD. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Los Angeles Region.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The person(s) identified in and responsible for
compliance with the provisions of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan,
Stormwater Pollution Control Plan, or Stormwater Quality Master Plan.



   STATE GENERAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the State Water Resources
Control Board or the Regional Board pursuant to CFR §§ 122 and 123 to
regulate a category of point sources. The term STATE GENERAL PERMIT includes
but is not limited to the General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated
with Construction Activity and the General Industrial Activities Stormwater
Permit and the terms and requirements of both. In the event the EPA revokes
the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board,
then the term State General Permit shall also refer to any EPA administered
stormwater control program for industrial, construction, and any other
category of activities.



   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and/or drainage associated with
rain storm events and/or snow melt.



   STORM WATER. "Stormwater".



   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM. A conveyance or system of conveyances including
streets, gutters, channels, natural or artificial drains, lined diversion
structures, wash areas, inlets, outlets or other facilities, which is a part
of a tributary to a watercourse and used for the purpose of collecting,
storing, conveying, or disposing of stormwater to waters of the United States
as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN. A plan identifying potential
pollutant sources from a construction site and describing proposed design,
placement and implementation of Best Management Practices, to effectively
prevent non-stormwater discharges and reduce pollutants in stormwater
discharges to the storm drain system, to the maximum extent practicable,
during construction activities.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A plan, as required by a State
General Permit, identifying potential pollutant sources and describing the
design, placement and implementation of Best Management Practices, to
effectively prevent non-stormwater discharges and reduce pollutants in
stormwater discharges during activities covered by the General Permit.



   STORMWATER QUALITY MASTER PLAN. A plan that defines the strategy and
describes the design, placement and implementation of Best Management
Practices to effectively prevent non-stormwater discharges and reduce
pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable, for
post-construction discharges to the storm drain system.



   STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN. The Ventura Countywide Stormwater
Quality Management Plan, which includes descriptions of programs,
collectively developed by the Co-permittees, in accordance with provision of
the NPDES Permit, to comply with applicable federal and state law, as the
same is amended from time to time.



   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or artificial channel for passage of water
including the VCFCD jurisdictional channels, or "red line channels" as
described in the "List of Channels" within the Comprehensive Plan of the
VCFCD, October 4, 1994, and its amendments.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



PROHIBITION OF NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES AND ILLICIT CONNECTIONS



§ 54.10  ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED, EXEMPT DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge any material other than stormwater
to the city storm drain system or watercourses, which is an illicit
discharge, except in compliance with a Discharge Permit.  The discharges
listed below shall be exempt, non-stormwater discharges unless the Regional
Board determines that any of the below discharges cause specific Receiving
Water Limitation violations:



      (1)   Dechlorinated water line flushing;



      (2)   Landscape irrigation;



      (3)   Diverted stream flows;



      (4)   Rising ground waters;



      (5)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at
40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers;



      (6)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;



      (7)   Discharges from potable water sources;



      (8)   Foundation drains;



      (9)   Air conditioning condensation;



      (10)   Irrigation water;



      (11)   Natural springs;



      (12)   Water from crawl space pumps;



      (13)   Footing drains;



      (14)   Lawn watering;



      (15)   Individual residential car washing;



      (16)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;



      (17)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;



      (18)   Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting
activities;



      (19)   Other types of discharge identified and recommended in
annual reports by the Co-permittees, as approved by the Executive Officer of
the Regional Board.



   (B)   A discharger may be required to obtain a permit pursuant to
this chapter and may be required to apply Best Management Practices prior to
discharge of an exempt non-stormwater discharge provided for in this chapter.



   (C)   With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the Director
may exempt in writing other non-stormwater discharges which are not a source
of pollutants to the storm drain system or watercourses.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.11  POLLUTION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, kept, or maintained, in or upon any public or private
driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, or component of the storm
drain system or watercourse, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, articles, accumulations, and/or pollutants so
that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Any owner, occupant, or
person in charge of day to day operations of the property who fails to remove
pollutants within a reasonable time, as determined by the Director, may be
charged with a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.12  ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall, unless in compliance with a Discharge Permit:



      (1)   Construct, use, maintain, operate and/or continue to
utilize an illicit connection described in Section 5A.02.



      (2)   Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or
independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit
connection.



   (B)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



REDUCTION OF POLLUTANTS IN STORMWATER AND REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CONTROL OF
URBAN RUNOFF



§ 54.30  BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIRED.



   No person shall discharge stormwater containing pollutants which have
not been reduced to the maximum extent practicable by application of Best
Management Practices.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.31  CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   All construction activity including clearing, grading or
excavation that requires a grading permit shall be undertaken in accordance
with:



      (1)   Any conditions and requirements established by the NPDES
Permit or other permits which are reasonably related to the reduction or
elimination of pollutants in stormwater from the construction site.



      (2)   Any condition and/or requirements established by the
city or Director to protect specific watersheds or drainage basins.



      (3)   A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, which shall be
prepared and submitted in accordance with the State General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity.



      (4)   A Stormwater Pollution Control Plan, which shall be
prepared in accordance with city requirements.



   (B)   Prior to the issuance by the city of a discretionary land use
approval or any permit authorizing grading or construction for a development
or at the discretion of the city, the property owner shall submit to and
obtain the approval of the Director for a Stormwater Pollution Control
Plan.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Stormwater Pollution Control Plan
shall not be required for construction of a (one) single family detached
residence or for a room addition to a single family residence unless the
Director determines that the construction may result in the discharge of
significant levels of a pollutant into the storm drain system. This exemption
shall not apply to construction of more than one home at a time by one
developer in a residential subdivision. Each Stormwater Pollution Control
Plan shall name a responsible party for the project.



   (C)   The owners of a development project, their successors and
assigns, and each named responsible party, shall implement and adhere to the
terms, conditions and requirements of the approved Stormwater Pollution
Control Plan. Each failure by the owner of the property, their successors or
assigns, or a named responsible party, to implement and adhere to the terms,
conditions and requirements shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   The costs and expenses of the city incurred in the review,
approval, or revision of any Stormwater Pollution Control Plan shall be
charged to the property owner or responsible party and shall be due and
payable to the city. The Director may elect to require a deposit of estimated
costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from
the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the property owner or
responsible party.



   (E)   Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a
Stormwater Pollution Control Plan shall not exempt any person from the
requirement to comply independently with each provision of this chapter.



   (F)   Proof of compliance with the State General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity (NPDES Permit No.
CAS000002) may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to issuance
by the city of any permit authorizing grading or construction; upon
inspection of the construction site; during any enforcement proceeding or
action; or for any other reasonable cause.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.32  DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   All development within the city shall be undertaken in
accordance with:



      (1)   Any conditions and requirements established by the NPDES
Permit or other Permits which are reasonably related to the reduction or
elimination of pollutants in stormwater from the project site.



      (2)   Any condition and/or requirements established by the
city or Director to protect specific watersheds or drainage basins.



      (3)   Any condition and requirement of a Stormwater Quality
Master Plan covering the development site.



   (B)   A Stormwater Quality Master Plan shall be required to be
submitted by the property owner in accordance with city requirements when the
Director determines that the development may result in the discharge of
significant levels of any pollutant to the storm drain system based upon the
Director's review of the size of the development and its relationship to the
size of the affected watershed, the type of development, estimated levels of
pollutants, estimated stormwater flows and the probability of violation of
Receiving Water Limitations. The determination shall be at the Director's
sole discretion, subject to appeal to the City Council. Such development may
include, but not be limited to, specific plans, multiphased subdivisions,
redevelopment plans or larger planned developments.  Each Stormwater Quality
Master Plan shall name a responsible party for the project.



   (C)   The owners of a development project, their successors and
assigns, and each named responsible party, shall implement and adhere to the
terms, conditions and requirements of the approved Stormwater Quality Master
Plan. Each failure by the owner of the property, their successors or assigns,
or a named responsible party, to implement and adhere to the terms,
conditions and requirements shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   The Director may require that the Stormwater Quality Master
Plan be recorded with the County Recorder's office by the property owner. The
signature of the owner of the property, any successive owner or the named
responsible party shall be sufficient for the recording of the plans or any
revised plan and a signature on behalf of the city shall not be required for
recordation.



   (E)   The costs and expenses of the city incurred in the review,
approval, or revision of Stormwater Quality Master Plan or other development
requirements shall be charged to the property owner or responsible party and
shall be due and payable to the city. The Director may elect to require a
deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses
shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the
property owner or responsible party.



   (F)   Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a
Stormwater Quality Master Plan shall not exempt any person from the
requirement to comply independently with each provision of this chapter.



   (G)   Proof of compliance with any State General Permit may be
required in a form acceptable to the Director prior to or as a condition of
approval of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or
improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement
proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause.



§ 54.33  BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES ADOPTED.



   (A)   The Director may adopt requirements identifying appropriate
Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of the storm drain system.
Where Best Management Practice requirements are promulgated by the Stormwater
Quality Management Program - Management Committee and adopted by the
Director, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or
operating such facility shall comply with such requirements.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements
promulgated pursuant to the foregoing Subsection (A), any person engaged in
activities or operations, or owning facilities or property, which will or may
result in pollutants entering the storm drain system, shall implement Best
Management Practices to the extent they are technologically and economically
achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.34  NOTIFICATION OF INTENT AND COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL PERMITS.



   Each discharger associated with construction activity, or other
discharger, described in any State General Permit addressing such discharges,
as may be issued by the EPA, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the
Regional Board, shall provide notice of intent, comply with, and undertake
all other activities required by such permit applicable to such discharges.
Copies of such notification shall be provided to the Director.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.35  ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The Director may, by written notice, require persons
responsible for an illicit discharge to immediately, or by a specified date,
discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, to take measures to eliminate
the source of the illicit discharge. If the discharge is not discontinued in
the time specified, the Director may take any lawful measures to eliminate
the source of the illicit discharge and to prevent the occurrence of future
illicit discharges.



   (B)   Whenever the Director finds that an illicit discharge of
pollutants is taking place or has occurred which may result in, or has
resulted in, pollution of the storm drain system, the Director may require
the responsible person to cease polluting, and to restore the affected
property to its pre-pollution condition within a specified time, in addition
to other remedies available to the city.



   (C)   The Director may, by written notice, require a person
responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system to disconnect
or to secure approval for the connection, regardless of whether or not the
connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the
effective date of this chapter. If, after disconnection, the responsible
person can demonstrate that an illicit discharge will no longer occur, said
person may request approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation
of the connection shall be at the city's discretion and shall be subject to
such conditions as the Director may determine; such reconnection or
reinstallation shall be at the responsible person's sole expense.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.36  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes shall
keep and maintain the property or cause the property to be kept and
maintained, reasonably free of trash, debris, pollutants, excessive
vegetation, and other obstacles which could pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse; shall
maintain existing structures, or cause the existing structures to be
maintained, within or adjacent to the watercourse, so that such structures
will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the
watercourse; and, consistent with other laws regarding riparian habitat
protection, shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually
necessary for said maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner
as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 54.50  SCOPE OF INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Prior to commencing any inspection as herein below authorized,
the Authorized Inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or
person in charge of day to day operations of the property or shall obtain an
administrative inspection warrant or search warrant. The Authorized Inspector
may enter public or private property to investigate the source or potential
source of a discharge to the storm drain system or watercourses located
within the city at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect
and copy records related to compliance with this chapter. In the event the
owner or person in charge of day to day operations refuses entry after a
request to enter and inspect has been made, the agent is hereby empowered to
seek assistance from any other governmental agency and/or any court of
competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.



   (B)   An Authorized Inspector may inspect public or private property
for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including but not
limited to:



      (1)   Identifying products produced, processes conducted,
chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property.



      (2)   Identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater,
process water systems and pollutants.



      (3)   Investigating the natural slope at the location,
including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems including roads
with drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, channels and storm
drains.



      (4)   Establishing the location of all points of discharge
from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system.



      (5)   Locating any illicit connection or the source of any
illicit discharge.



      (6)    Evaluating compliance with any Stormwater Pollution
Control Plan.



      (7)   Evaluating compliance with any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter.



   (C)   An Authorized Inspector may also:



      (1)   Inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other
mobile equipment as is necessary to determine compliance with this chapter;



      (2)   Inspect records of the owner, occupant or person in
charge of day to day operations of private property as necessary to determine
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;



      (3)   Inspect, sample and test any runoff, soil, groundwater,
process discharge, materials within any waste storage area, container
contents and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the
potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system;



      (4)   Investigate the integrity of any storm drain and
sanitary sewer systems or other pipelines on the property using appropriate
tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys;



      (5)   Take photographs or videotape, make measurements or
drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document
conditions on the property;



      (6)   Undertake monitoring and analysis including both the
construction and maintenance of devices, or require the owner or person in
charge of day to day operations of the property to undertake construction and
maintenance of devices, at the owners expense, for the purpose of measuring
or sampling any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm drain
system.



   (D)   The owner or person in charge of day to day operations of the
property subject to inspection shall provide copies of test results to the
Director and, on submission of a written request to the Director, be entitled
to copy test results conducted by the Authorized Inspector.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.51  ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND REMEDIES.



   (A)   Administrative citations and remedies shall be in accordance
with Chapter 11 of this Code.



   (B)   An Authorized Inspector may issue an Administrative Citation
or Compliance Order delivered in accordance with Chapter 11 of this Code. An
Administrative Citation or Compliance Order may direct the owner, occupant or
person in charge of day to day operations of any public or private property
and/or other person responsible for a violation of this article to:



      (1)   Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or
illicit discharge to the storm drain system;



      (2)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the
property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this
chapter;



      (3)   Immediately discontinue or correct any other violation
of this chapter;



      (4)    Clean up the area affected by the violation.



   An Authorized Inspector may direct, by Administrative Citation or
Compliance Order, that the owner or person in charge of day to day operations
of any property, including the responsible party subject to the terms and
conditions of this chapter, any Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan,
Stormwater Pollution Control Plan, Stormwater Quality Management Plan or any
permittee under any permit issued pursuant to this chapter; immediately cease
any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of
the applicable plan, permit, or this chapter. Administrative costs for any
Administrative Citation or Compliance Order may be recovered pursuant to
Chapter 11 of this Code.



   (D)   An administrative hearing on the issuance of an Administrative
Citation or Compliance Order shall be held in accordance with Chapter 11 of
this Code.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.52  NUISANCE.



   Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter,
including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any illicit connection
or the occurrence of any illicit discharge, shall constitute a threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance
pursuant to Chapter 94 of this Code and shall be subject to abatement as
provided therein.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.53  NON-EXCLUSIVE REMEDIES.



   Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter
shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the Authorized
Inspector or the Director to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple
monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation
of this chapter.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.54  VIOLATIONS OF OTHER LAWS.



   Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in
violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the State Porter-Cologne Act and
other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability.
Accordingly, the City Attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant
to Federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and
orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The Director may
notify EPA Region IX, the Regional Board, or any other appropriate state or
local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.55  CIVIL REMEDIES, INJUNCTIONS.



   The Director may request the City Attorney to file in a court of
competent jurisdiction, a civil action seeking an injunction against any
threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may
include an order for reimbursement to the city of all costs incurred in
enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and
monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the city,
costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as
authorized by law.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.56  OTHER CIVIL REMEDIES.



   (A)   The Director may request the City Attorney to file an action
for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of:



      (1)   All costs incurred in enforcement of this chapter,
including but not limited to attorneys fees, costs relating to investigation,
sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses
as authorized by law, and consequential damages.



      (2)   All costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment
or reducing the threat to human health.



      (3)   Damages for irreparable harm to the environment.



   (B)   The City Attorney is authorized to file actions for civil
damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or
to the storm drain system from any violation of this chapter where the same
has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property
or the storm drain system.



   (C)   The remedies available to the city pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall not limit the right of the city to seek any other
remedy that may be available by law.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.57  DISCHARGE PERMIT.



   (A)   On application of the owner of property or the operator or
person in charge of day to day operations of any facility, which property or
facility is not otherwise subject to the requirements of a State General
Permit, the Director may issue, either for a fee or in the Director's
discretion, without fee, a permit authorizing a non-stormwater discharge to
the storm drain system if the discharge is not prohibited by the NPDES Permit
or any other applicable order of the Regional Board, State Water Resources
Control Board or the EPA, if the discharge is reasonably necessary for the
conduct of otherwise legal activities on the property and the discharge
complies with all provisions of this chapter and state and federal law.



   (B)   The applicant shall provide all information requested by the
Director for review and consideration of the application, including but not
limited to specific detail as to the activities to be conducted on the
property, plans and specifications for facilities located on the property,
identification of equipment or processes to be used on-site and other
information as may be requested in order to determine the constituents, and
quantities thereof, which may be discharged if permission is granted.



   (C)   Permits shall be issued for a specific time period, not to
exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. The Director may
issue a permit for a period of less than five years or the permit may be
stated to expire on a certain date.



   (D)   The permit may include terms, conditions and requirements to
ensure compliance with the objectives of this chapter and as necessary to
protect the receiving waters, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Identification of the discharge location on the property
and the location at which the discharge will enter the storm drain system;



      (2)   Identification of the constituents and quantities
thereof to be discharged into the storm drain system;



      (3)   Specification of pollution prevention techniques and
structural or non-structural controls and requirements as reasonably
necessary to prevent the occurrence of potential discharges in violation of
this chapter;



      (4)   Requirements for the installation of inspection and
sampling facilities;



      (5)   Requirements for self-monitoring of any discharge;



      (6)   Requirements for the submission of documents and data,
such as technical reports, production data, discharge reports,
self-monitoring reports and waste manifests; compliance schedules;



      (7)   Other terms and conditions appropriate to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the protection of
receiving waters, including requirements for compliance with Best Management
Practices guidance documents approved by any Federal, State of California or
Regional agency.



   (E)   Except as provided in this section, subsection (A)(1) above,
the permission to discharge shall be conditioned upon the applicant's payment
of the city costs, in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by a separate
resolution.



§ 54.58  PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION.



   (A)   The Director may deny, suspend or revoke any permit when it is
determined that:



      (1)   The proposed permit would violate any applicable
provision of this chapter, State or Federal law; or



      (2)   The permittee has violated any term, condition or
requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this chapter; or



      (3)   The permittee's discharge or the circumstances under
which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer appropriate
to exempt the discharge from the prohibitions on illicit discharge contained
within this chapter; or



      (4)   The permittee fails to comply with any schedule for
compliance issued pursuant to this chapter; or



      (5)   Any regulatory agency, including the EPA or a State or
Regional Water Quality Control Board having jurisdiction over the discharge,
notifies the city that the discharge should be terminated.



   (B)   The Director may modify any permit when it is determined that:



      (1)   Federal or state law requirements have changed in a
manner that necessitates a change in the permit; or



      (2)   The permittee's discharge or the circumstances under
which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to modify
the permit's terms, conditions or requirements; or



      (3)   A change to the permit is necessary to ensure compliance
with the objectives of this chapter or to protect the quality of the
receiving waters.



   (C)   The permittee shall be informed of any change in the permit
terms and conditions at least forty-five (45) days prior to the effective
date of the modified permit.



   (D)   The determination that a permit shall be denied, suspended,
revoked or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the same 
procedures applicable to the appeal of a Compliance Order as provided in
Chapter 11.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.59  PERMIT ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Any violations of the terms, conditions or requirements of any
permit issued by the Director shall constitute a violation of this chapter
and shall subject the violator to the remedies available under this chapter.



   (B)   Compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve the permittee from
compliance with all federal, state and local laws, regulations and permit
requirements, applicable to the activity for which the permit is issued.



   (C)   Permits issued under this chapter are for the person or entity
identified therein as the "Permittee" only, and authorize the specific
operation at the specific location identified in the permit.  The issuance
of a permit does not vest the permittee with a continuing right to discharge.



   (D)   No permit may be transferred to allow:



      (1)   A discharge to the storm drain system at a location
other than the location stated in the original permit; or



      (2)   A discharge by a person or entity other than the
permittee named in the permit, provided, however, that the city may approve a
transfer if written approval is obtained, in advance, from the Director.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.60  DISCLAIMER AND SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   Full compliance by any person or entity with the provisions of
this chapter shall not preclude the need to identify and to comply with all
other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements.



   (B)   If any provisions of this chapter or the application of this
chapter to any circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or
the application of this chapter to other persons or circumstances shall not
be affected. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part or
portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City
Council declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part or portion thereof, irrespective
of the fact that any one or more section, subsections, sentences, clauses,
phrases, parts or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.61  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   The provisions of Cal. Civ. Proc. Code §§ 1094.5 and 1094.6 set forth
the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this chapter.
Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this chapter
shall file such action within ninety (90) days of the occurrence of the event
for which review is sought.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of this chapter is an infraction/misdemeanor and shall be
subject to punishment pursuant to Chapter 13 of this Code.



(Ord. 1022, passed 11-16-98)



CHAPTER 55:  UTILITY BILLING



Section



   55.01   Purpose



   55.02   Definitions



   55.03   Application for service



   55.04   Creditworthiness



   55.05   Security deposits



   55.06   Billing and collection - Generally



   55.07   Late payment of utility bills



   55.08   Disputes



   55.09   Repayment plan



   55.10   Retroactive adjustments



   55.11   Proration of charges



   55.12   Meters



   55.13   Notices



   55.14   Discontinuance of service



   55.15   Lien procedures



   55.16   Additional customer rights



   55.17   Community choice aggregation program



§ 55.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers;
applicable provisions of the Cal. Gov't Code and Cal. Health & Safety Code,
and is intended to conform with Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 10001 et seq.



(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires or indicates a different meaning.



   CUSTOMER.   Any person who makes application for utility service(s)
and is responsible for payment of the utility bill.



   DIRECTOR.  The Finance Director of the city, or other person
designated by the City Manager.



   NEW CUSTOMER.  Any customer who does not have a payment history
established with the city within the previous 24 months.




   PERSON.  Any person, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business trust, company or corporation, or any municipal, political or
governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the city.




   UTILITY. Refuse, sewer or water service, or any combination, provided
by the city.



(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.03  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.




   Each customer desiring utility service must make written application in
the form and manner prescribed by the Director.  By applying for, and using,
utilities, the customer agrees to be, and is, subject to the provisions of
this chapter and all rules and regulations of the city.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.04  CREDITWORTHINESS.




   To avoid paying a security deposit, persons seeking to establish a
utility service account must establish credit, which may be established upon
qualifying under any one of the following criteria:





   (A)   The applicant is a current utility customer with the city and
has paid all bills for service without having been temporarily or permanently
discontinued for nonpayment during a period of 12 consecutive months
immediately before applying for a new utility account;





   (B)   The applicant was a utility customer with the city in the past
two years and during the last 12 consecutive months that service was provided
paid for all bills for the service without having been temporarily or
permanently discontinued for nonpayment;





   (C)   The applicant owns the premises upon which the city is
requested to furnish utility service; or is the owner of other local real
estate.  If the applicant is seeking to open a commercial account, the real
estate must be owned by the business to which service would be provided;





   (D)   The applicant furnishes a guarantor in a form satisfactory to
the city attorney to secure payment of utility service bills; or





   (E)   The applicant otherwise establishes credit to the city's
reasonable satisfaction.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.05  SECURITY DEPOSITS.




   (A)   The city may require a customer to deposit a sum of money with
the city to guarantee payment of all utility charges.





   (B)   The Director may set the amount of the deposit up to three
times the amount of the historic average monthly bill for the property served
or for substantially similar property.  The city must credit the amount of
the deposit, without an interest payment, to the customer's account upon the
discontinuance of any service and after applying the deposit to any
outstanding customer utility bill(s).  Any balance of the deposit then
remaining with the city will be returned to the person making the deposit,
without interest.





   (C)   Any applicant who is the property owner of record, or any
applicant who has the written approval of the property owner of record, may
choose to enter into a Lien Authorization Agreement, in the form and manner
prescribed by the Director, in lieu of a cash deposit.  By doing so, the
applicant and/or the property owner of record agree that, pursuant to
applicable Cal. Gov't and Cal. Health and Safety Codes, and upon the
direction of the City Council, the city is authorized to collect and annually
transfer to the County Auditor for inclusion on the next year's tax bill of
the respective property owner any delinquent fee or charge imposed by the
provisions of this chapter, including interest and penalties. 
Alternatively, an action in the name of the city may be commenced in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent fees or
charges and if legal action is brought by the city or its assignee to enforce
collection of any amount charged and due under this chapter, any judgment
rendered in favor of the city will include costs of suit incurred by the city
or its assignee including reasonable attorneys fees.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.06  BILLING AND COLLECTION - GENERALLY.




   Utility customers must pay the service charges imposed by the city on a
periodic basis determined by the Director.  Utility bills are due and
payable at the place or places designated by the city and are legal debts of
the customer owing and payable to the city.  Failure to receive a bill does
not relieve the customer from the responsibility of paying charges and/or
penalties.  The payment for each current billing, if not received in the
cashier's office on or before the nineteenth day following the date of
presentation by the close of the business day, are delinquent.  Postmarks
will not be considered for the cancellation of delinquent charges.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.07  LATE PAYMENT OF UTILITY BILLS.




   A penalty of 10% of the current delinquent charges applicable to a
customer account will be imposed as of the date of delinquency if the
delinquency date is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the charge becomes
delinquent at the close of the next regular business day.  The city may also
charge a discontinuance processing fee on a delinquent account.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.08  DISPUTES.




   (A)   The Director will review the accounts of customers who dispute
charges within 30 days after receiving a bill or request additional time to
pay a bill because of financial need, before the city terminates service. 
If an error is found after the review, the city will promptly correct the
error and, if required and at the city's sole discretion, either credit the
customer account or give the customer a refund.





   (B)   The review conducted by the Director will include
consideration of whether to establish a payment plan for the customer to pay
any unpaid balance of delinquent account over a reasonable time not to exceed
12 months.  Unless otherwise required by this code, the city will not
terminate service for customers fully complying with such a payment plan.





   (C)   Water bills must contain information regarding dispute
resolution procedures set forth in this chapter.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.09  REPAYMENT PLAN.




   Any customer may request in writing, in the form and manner prescribed
by the Director, an extension of the payment period of a bill asserted to be
beyond the means of the customer to pay in full within the normal period for
payment.  The application for a repayment plan must be filed with the
Director before the date and time of discontinuance of service as is stated
on the discontinuance notice.  The Director must review the request for
extension of payment and consider the customer's ability to pay, past payment
history, and the amount due, and may approve a repayment plan, not to exceed
12 months.  Any customer whose request for a repayment plan has resulted in
an adverse determination by the Director may appeal the determination within
five days to the City Manager, or designee.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.10  RETROACTIVE ADJUSTMENTS.




   Retroactive adjustments will be provided to a customer's utility bill
when an error in customer billing has occurred.  The maximum period for
retroactive adjustments is 12 months before the date that the city is first
notified in writing, in the form and manner prescribed by the Director, of
the error. Any overpayment or under billing adjustments will be included as a
credit or charge on the customer's future utility bill(s), unless other
arrangements are requested by the customer and approved by the Director.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.11  PRORATION OF CHARGES.




   Computations of the flat rate portion of any monthly service charges
for less than a full billing cycle, is based on a daily rate.  The daily
rate will be determined by taking the monthly rate and dividing it by 30. 
The daily rate is carried to four decimal places.  If a customer
discontinues service and closes the customer's account, service charges will
be computed at the applicable daily rate from the last billing date to the
account closing date.  Service charges for a new customer will commence on
the account opening date.  No proration will be made on short term utility
service where the service is required for total periods of less than two
months.  These customers will be charged for two months service.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.12  METERS.




   (A)   When calculating the charges for water, the city will not
charge for water use that is less than 100 cubic feet per billing period. 
Water meters will ordinarily be read approximately every 30 days except for
holidays and weekends.  Meter readings may also be taken for any reasonable
purpose, as determined by the Director, including, without limitation, change
of customer or changes of meter size.  If a meter cannot be read or if a
meter has not registered or has registered incorrectly, the quantity of water
used will be estimated based on the average consumption at the property or
substantially similar property during a like period of time.





   (B)   Tampering with or breaking a meter or lock will result in
assessment of a penalty consisting of a fixed amount plus expenses and other
costs, as determined by the City Council.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.13  NOTICES.




   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Public Utilities Code § 10010.1, the city
will allow every customer at least 19 days from the date a bill was mailed to
pay for utility services.  The city will not discontinue service for
nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the city first gives notice of the
delinquency and impending discontinuance at least ten days before the
proposed discontinuance, by means of a notice mailed, postage prepaid, to the
customer to whom the service is billed.  The ten day period will commence
five days after the termination notice is mailed.  The city will make a
reasonable attempt to contact an adult person residing at the premises of the
utility customer by telephone or personal contact at least 24 hours before
any utility service is terminated, except that whenever telephone or personal
contact cannot be accomplished, the city will give, either by mail or in
person, a notice of discontinuance of service at least 48 hours before
discontinuance.





   (B)   The city will make available to its customers who are 65 years
of age or older, or who are dependent adults as defined in Cal. Welfare and
Institutions Code § 15610(b)(1), a third-party notification service as
specified in Cal. Public Utilities Code § 10010.1(c).  Should the customers
designate a third-party, the city will attempt to notify a person designated
by the customer to receive notification when the customer's account is past
due and subject to discontinuance.  The notification will include
information on what is required to prevent discontinuance of service.  The
residential customer must make a written request for third-party notification
on a form provided by the city, and include the written consent of the
designated third party.  The third-party notification does not obligate the
third party to pay the overdue charges nor prevent or delay service
termination.





   (C)   In accordance with Cal. Public Utilities Code § 10010.1(d),
every termination notice must include all of the following information:





      (1)   The name and address of the customer whose account is
delinquent.





      (2)   The amount of the delinquency.





      (3)   The date by which payment or arrangements for payment is
required in order to avoid discontinuance.





      (4)   The procedure by which the customer may initiate a
complaint or request an investigation concerning service or charges.





      (5)   The procedure by which the customer may request
repayment of the unpaid charges.





      (6)   The procedure for the customer to obtain information on
the availability of financial assistance, including private, local, state, or
federal sources, if applicable.





      (7)   The telephone number of a representative of the city who
can provide additional information or institute arrangements for payment.





   (D)   No termination of utility service may occur without compliance
with this section.  Any service wrongfully discontinued must be restored
without charge for the restoration of a service and a notation of the
restoration must be mailed to the customer at his or her billing address.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.14  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.




   (A)   No utility service will be discontinued by the city, by reason
of delinquency, on any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or at any time during
which the business offices of the city are not open to the public.  The city
may not discontinue service for nonpayment of a delinquent account under any
of the following situations:





      (1)   During the pendency of an investigation by the city of a
customer dispute or complaint, or request for extension of the period for the
payment of a bill;





      (2)   When a customer has been granted an extension of the
period for payment of a bill, provided the customer keeps the account current
as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period;





      (3)   On the certification of a licensed physician and surgeon
that service termination would endanger the life of the customer or a member
of the customer's household and the customer is financially unable to pay for
service within the normal payment period and is willing to enter into a
repayment agreement with the city with respect to all charges that the
customer is unable to pay before the delinquency.





   (B)   Service will be discontinued if payment has not been received
or arrangements made to pay the delinquent bill.  If payment is not made
within the specified time as identified above or for any other reason
relating to nonpayment of an outstanding bill or charge, including, without
limitation, checks returned for insufficient funds, credit card denial, or
other, similar, type of payment problems, a service charge, in an amount
determined by the City Council will be charged and due and payable with
respect to each time service is processed for discontinuance.





   (C)   Except as provided in Cal. Public Utilities Code § 10009,
where utility service is shut off, service will not be restored until all
required payments (including, without limitation, arrearage, penalties,
deposits and service charges) are paid in full.  Service will be reinstated
only during regular working hours and only after payment has been received or
special payment arrangements were made with the Director.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.15  LIEN PROCEDURES.




   (A)   On March 1 of each calendar year, the City Manager, or
designee, will prepare a complete list of delinquent charges applicable to
the service connection where the property owner is the customer for the
period ending on January 31 of each calendar year.





   (B)   The city will give at least 45 days notice before the public
hearing of the delinquencies to the customer to which each such delinquency
relates.





   (C)   The City Council will schedule a noticed public hearing for
its first meeting in May of each calendar year at which time delinquent
charges together with penalties, will be placed on the equalized assessment
roll for the fiscal year commencing on the July 1 following the conduct of
the hearing for collection.  Notice of the public hearing will be made in
accordance with Cal. Gov't Code § 6066.





   (D)   Thereafter, the delinquent charges, together with penalties,
will be collected in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same
time as, together and not separately from, general taxes collected on behalf
of the city and other taxing authorities.  The provisions of this section
will only be applicable to delinquent charges where the customer is the land
owner or has executed a Lien Authorization Agreement.





   (E)   Civil debt:  All charges and penalties imposed pursuant to
this chapter are civil debts owed to the city by the customer as to the
account to which the charges and penalties apply.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.16  ADDITIONAL CUSTOMER RIGHTS.




   When the city furnishes service to residential occupants in a
multi-unit residential structure, mobile home park, or permanent residential
structures in a labor camp, as defined in Cal. Health & Safety § 17008,
where the owner, manager, or operator is listed by the city as the customer
of record, the city will make a good faith effort to give written notice to
the residential occupants at least ten days before utility service
termination regarding the utility account delinquency and utility service
termination date.  The notice will further inform the residential occupants
that they have the right to become customers, to whom the service will then
be billed, without being required to pay any amount which may be due on the
delinquent account. The city is not required to make service available to the
residential occupants unless each residential occupant agrees to the terms
and conditions of service and meets the requirements of law.  However, if
one or more of the residential occupants are willing and able to assume
responsibility for the entire account to the satisfaction of the Director, or
if there is a physical means, legally available to the city, of selectively
discontinuing service to those residential occupants who have not met the
city's requirements, the city will make service available to those
residential occupants who have met those requirements. Any residential
occupant who becomes a customer of the city pursuant to this section whose
periodic payments, such as rental payments, include charges for water
service, where those charges are not separately stated, may deduct from the
periodic payment each payment period all reasonable charges paid to the city
for those services during the preceding payment period.




(Ord. 1023, passed 2-1-99; Am. Ord. 1071, passed 7-21-03)



§ 55.17  COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM.



   The City Council approves proceeding with the implementation of a Santa
Paula Community Choice Aggregation program within the city’s jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1277, passed 4-2-18)



CHAPTER 56:  PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS



Section



   56.01   Purpose



   56.02   Applicability



   56.03   Definitions



   56.04   Soliciting bids and awarding contracts



   56.05   Qualified contractors



   56.06   Notice inviting bids



   56.07   Bid security



   56.08   Bid opening



   56.09   Award



   56.10   Bonds and insurance



§ 56.01  PURPOSE.




   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and Cal.
Public Contract Code § 22034, and any succeeding or related statutes, for
the purpose of implementing the informal bid procedures set forth in the
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Cal. Public Contract Code
§§ 22000 et seq.).




(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03)



§ 56.02  APPLICABILITY.




   This chapter may be used for public projects with a value equal to or
less than the amount set forth in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032(b), and
any, successor statute or regulation, or, when applicable, as established
pursuant to Cal. Public Contract Code § 22020.




(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03)



§ 56.03  DEFINITIONS.




   The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.





   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or designee.





   PUBLIC PROJECT.   "Maintenance work" as defined in Cal. Public
Contract Code § 22002(d) and other work that falls outside the definition of
PUBLIC PROJECT set forth in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22002(c).




(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03)



§ 56.04  SOLICITING BIDS AND AWARDING CONTRACTS.



   The City Manager, or designee, may solicit bids and award contracts for
public works projects in accordance with the California Uniform Public
Construction Cost Accounting Act (CUPCCAA). The City Council shall approve
all public works contracts awarded by a formal bidding procedure in
accordance with the CUPCCAA.



(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 56.05  QUALIFIED CONTRACTORS.




   (A)   The city will maintain a list of qualified contractors,
identified according to categories of work.  Any licensed contractor
requesting to have its name placed on this list must be included.  The list
may be periodically revised to remove inactive names.





   (B)   A name may be deemed inactive if:





      (1)   Letters addressed to the contractor at its last known
address are returned without a forwarding address;





      (2)   The contractor does not obtain plans for, or bid on, a
public project for two years;





      (3)   The contractor's license is revoked or suspended by the
California State Licensing Board;





      (4)   The contractor removes its name; or





      (5)   For other good cause as determined by the City Manager.




(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03)



§ 56.06  NOTICE INVITING BIDS.




   (A)   The notice inviting bids must describe the project in general
terms, indicate how to obtain more detailed information regarding the
project, and state the time and place for submitting bids.





   (B)   Unless the product or service is proprietary, not less than
ten calendar days before the date set for opening bids, the City Manager must
notify contractors using one or both of the following methods:





      (1)   Mail notices to each contractor on the list for the
category of work to be performed;





      (2)   Mail notices to each of the construction trade journals
specified in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22036.




(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03)



§ 56.07  BID SECURITY.




   (A)   Bid security is required for all bids on public projects when
the Public Works Director estimates that the price will exceed $25,000.  Bid
security may be a bond issued by a licensed and duly qualified corporate
surety, or the equivalent in cash, money order, cashier's check, certified
check, unconditional letter of credit, or other form approved by the City
Attorney.  Nothing in this section prevents the city from requiring bid
security on public projects less than $25,000 when the Public Works Director
believes such security is needed to protect the city's interests.





   (B)   Bid security must equal at least 10% of the bid amount.





   (C)   If the notice inviting bids requires a bid security,
noncompliance or defective, inadequate, or incomplete security will render
the bid non-responsive.





   (D)   Bid security will be forfeited or paid to the city should the
bidder fail to execute a contract within the time specified in the notice
inviting bids.




(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03)



§ 56.08  BID OPENING.



   (A)   The City Clerk, or designee, will publicly open all bids in
the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place specified in the
invitation for bids.  Late, misplaced, or unsealed bids cannot be
considered.  If no bids are received, the city may proceed as set forth in
Cal. Public Contract Code § 22038.



   (B)   A secure, web-based system or other appropriate media may be
used in lieu of sealed bids opened in public, provided that the Purchasing
Agent has approved the system for accuracy, confidentiality and reliability.



(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1279, passed 11-7-18)



§ 56.09  AWARD.




   (A)   The contract may be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
if the city manager or city council considers the bid to be reasonable,
sufficient funds are appropriated for the public project, and the bid is
within the limits specified by Cal. Public Contract Code § 22032(b) or, if
applicable, Cal. Public Contract Code § 22020.




   (B)   Should all qualified bids exceed the limits in Cal. Public
Contract Code § 22032, the City Council may, by adopting a resolution upon
four-fifths vote, award the contract, provided the award is expressly
authorized by Cal. Public Contract Code § 22034(f).



   (C)   Nothing in this section restricts the city from taking any
action set forth in Cal. Public Contract Code § 22038.



(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03)



§ 56.10  BONDS AND INSURANCE.



   Contractors awarded a contract under this chapter are required to
provide sureties and insurance in forms approved by the City Attorney and
conforming with the contract documents.



(Ord. 1080, passed 11-17-03)



CHAPTER 57:  WATER SOFTENERS



Section



   57.01   Purpose



   57.02   Definitions



   57.03   Prohibition



   57.04   Exceptions



   57.05   Buy-back program



§ 57.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 116786, for the purpose of improving water quality,
including, without limitation, protecting beneficial uses of the Santa Clara
River downstream of the city's Wastewater Reclamation Plant.



(Ord. 1160, passed 9-5-06)



§ 57.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   RESIDENCE means a structure which is or is intended to be, in whole or
in part, a place of dwelling, whether occupied or not, whether fully
constructed or not, and includes, without limitation, homes, whether attached
to another structure or not, apartments, condominiums and mobile homes.



   SELF-REGENERATING WATER SOFTENING APPLIANCES (SRWS) means a water
softening device that removes calcium and magnesium salts from water by using
an ion-exchange resin utilizing a chloride based exchange during the
ion-exchange process. The ion-exchange resin used in SRWS's is recharged by
using a chloride based brine solution which is subsequently discharged into
the city's sewer system. SRWS's may be automatically recharged by timer or
sensor.



(Ord. 1160, passed 9-5-06)



§ 57.03  PROHIBITION.



   It is unlawful for any person to install or replace or cause to be
installed or replaced a SRWS in a residence located within the city's
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1160, passed 9-5-06)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 57.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to water softeners recharged by portable
cartridges supplied by service providers where the brine solution resulting
from a water softener recharge is not discharged into the city's sewer system.



(Ord. 1160, passed 9-5-06)



§ 57.05  BUY-BACK PROGRAM.



   The City Manager is authorized to promulgate administrative policies
and procedures designed to implement this chapter and to establish a
"buy-back" program to assist in reducing the number of existing SRWS's within
the city's jurisdiction. The amount allocated for such a buy-back program
will be determined by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1160, passed 9-5-06)



CHAPTER 58: WATER CONSERVATION



Section



   58.01   Purpose



   58.02   Definitions



   58.03   Water Conservation Program



   58.04   Repair of plumbing, sprinkler and irrigation system



   58.05   Watering/irrigation



   58.06   Miscellaneous restrictions



   58.07   Commercial car washes



   58.08   Washing/cleaning of equipment, machinery or structures



   58.09   Cleaning of surfaces



   58.10   Water spillage



   58.11   Swimming pools and spas



   58.12   Fountains, decorative basins, ponds, waterways



   58.13   Cooling systems



   58.14   Commercial laundry facilities



   58.15   Visitor-serving facilities



   58.16   Restaurants



   58.17   Construction



   58.18   Use of hydrants



   58.19   Indiscriminate use



   58.20   Public health and safety



   58.21   Water shortage contingency measures



   58.22   Relief from compliance



   58.23   Enforcement



§ 58.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Cal. Water Code § 375 for the
purpose of establishing water conservation requirements and implementing
contingency measures in the event of water shortages.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE means a constructed or modified surface that cannot
effectively percolate water. The terms includes, without limitation,
sidewalks, driveways, gutters, and roads.



   PERSON  means a natural or corporate person who receives potable water
service from the city.



   PROGRAMMED means a weather-based or sensor-based irrigation controller
that was programmed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and
site-specific conditions.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON means the person responsible for daily operations of
each residential or commercial premises located within the city's
jurisdiction including, without limitation, the property owner.



   SENSOR-BASED IRRIGATION CONTROLLER means an irrigation controller that
operates based upon input received from any combination of sensors such as
rain, light, and soil moisture, installed within or around an irrigated
landscape area.



   WEATHER-BASED IRRIGATION CONTROLLER means an irrigation controller that
operates based on evapotranspiration rates and historic or real-time weather
data.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.03  WATER CONSERVATION PROGRAM.



   All water customers are required to adopt and put into use at the
earliest possible date drought water conservation programs.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.04  REPAIR OF PLUMBING, SPRINKLER AND IRRIGATION SYSTEM.



   Responsible persons must, as soon as practicable, but not later than 48
hours after such person first discovers water leaks, commence repair of any
leaking pipes, faucets, plumbing fixtures, other water service appliances,
sprinklers, watering or irrigation systems, or distribution systems and
promptly complete such repair work, unless a waiver is obtained from the city.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.05  WATERING/IRRIGATION.



   Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is unlawful for any
person to water their lawn or landscaping or permit their lawn or landscaping
to be watered between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. It is unlawful for
any person to water their lawn or landscaping or permit their lawn or
landscaping to be watered for a period longer than 15 minutes per station
each day. Notwithstanding these prohibitions, the following is permitted:



   (A)   Persons may operate an irrigation system between 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. for the purpose of installing, repairing or routine maintenance of
the same;



   (B)   Persons may water between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
using any of the following methods:



      (1)   Properly programmed weather-based and/or sensor-based
irrigation controllers;



      (2)   Drip irrigation;



      (3)   By hand, using a bucket; or



      (4)   By hand, using a hose with an automatic shutoff nozzle.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.06  MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS.



   The following are unlawful for any person:



   (A)   Allowing grass, lawns, groundcover, shrubbery, and open ground
to be watered at any time while it is raining.



   (B)   Operating landscape irrigation system(s) that allow overspray
or excess runoff onto impervious surfaces (such as sidewalks, driveways,
v-ditches, gutters and roadways).



   (C)   To use a water hose to wash any vehicle including, without
limitation, cars, trucks, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, or campers,
or any other aircraft, tractor, or any other vehicle, or any portion thereof,
unless the hose is equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle. Except for
individual residential vehicle washing, all wash water from vehicle
washing/cleaning activity must be prevented from discharging to the
stormwater drainage system.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.07  COMMERCIAL CAR WASHES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for commercial car wash facilities to permit
the washing of any boat or vehicle in such facility or on its premises, other
than by the following methods:



      (1)   Use of mechanical automatic car wash facilities
utilizing water recycling equipment or utilizing recycled water;



      (2)   Use of a hose that operates on a timer for limited time
periods and shuts off automatically at the expiration of the time period;



      (3)   Use of a hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle;
or



      (4)   Use of bucket and hand washing.



   (B)   All wash/rinse water must be captured and recycled or
discharged into the sanitary sewer system.



   (C)   All new commercial conveyor car wash facilities must be
equipped with a water recycling system.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.08  WASHING/CLEANING OF EQUIPMENT, MACHINERY OR STRUCTURES.



   It is unlawful for any person to use a water hose to wash any type of
equipment, machinery, structure, or any portion thereof, unless the hose is
equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle. All wash water from such
washing/cleaning activity must be prevented from discharging to the
stormwater drainage system.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.09  CLEANING OF SURFACES.



   It is unlawful for any person to use water through a hose to clean any
sidewalk, driveway, roadway, parking lot, or any other outdoor paved or hard
surfaced area, unless all wash water from such activity is prevented from
discharging to the stormwater drainage system.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.10  WATER SPILLAGE.



   Every person must minimize water spillage into streets, curbs, or
gutters and minimize runoff beyond the immediate area of use. Every person is
deemed to have under his or her control at all times his or her water
distribution lines and facilities, and to know the manner and extent of his
or her water use and excess runoff.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.11  SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS.



   It is unlawful for any person to empty and refill a swimming pool or
spa except to prevent or repair structural damage or to comply with public
health regulations. Discharge of pool water, other than directly to the
sanitary sewer system, must be consistent with this code with regard to
stormwater. Discharge of pool filter backwash water to the stormwater
drainage system is prohibited. All pools and spas must be equipped with a
water recirculation device. The use of a pool/spa cover is encouraged to
prevent evaporative water loss.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.12  FOUNTAINS, DECORATIVE BASINS, PONDS, WATERWAYS.



   It is unlawful for any person to use water to operate or maintain
levels in decorative fountains, basins, ponds, and waterways unless a
recirculation device is in use. Discharge of water, other than directly to
the sanitary sewer system, must be consistent with this code with regard to
stormwater. Discharge of filter backwash water to the stormwater drainage
system is prohibited.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.13  COOLING SYSTEMS.



   No single pass cooling systems are permitted in new connections.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.14  COMMERCIAL LAUNDRY FACILITIES.



   New commercial laundry facilities must be equipped with a water
reclamation system for rinse water.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.15  VISITOR-SERVING FACILITIES.



   The owner and manager of each hotel, motel, restaurant, and other
visitor-serving facility must ensure that such facility displays, in places
visible to all customers, placards or decals approved by the city, promoting
public awareness of the need for water conservation and/or advising the
public that waste of water is prohibited.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.16  RESTAURANTS.



   Restaurants in the city cannot serve water to restaurant customers,
except upon request of the customer.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.17  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   It is unlawful to use potable water for compacting or dust
control purposes in construction activities where there is a reasonably
available source of recycled or other non-potable water approved by the
California State Department of Health Services and appropriate for such use.



   (B)   All water hoses used in connection with any construction
activities must be equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle when an
automatic shutoff nozzle can be purchased or otherwise obtained for the size
or type of hose in use.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.18  USE OF HYDRANTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to utilize any fire hydrant for any
purpose other than fire suppression or emergency aid, without first obtaining
written approval from the City Manager, or designee.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.19  INDISCRIMINATE USE.



   It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the indiscriminate
running of water not otherwise prohibited by this chapter which is wasteful
and without reasonable purpose.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.20  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   These regulations cannot be construed to limit water use which is
immediately necessary to protect public health or safety.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.21  WATER SHORTAGE CONTINGENCY MEASURES.



   The City Council by resolution is authorized to require or impose
reductions in the use of water if such reductions are necessary in order for
the city to comply with water use restrictions imposed by federal, state or
regional water agencies or to respond to emergency water shortage conditions.
Depending on the expected duration and severity of the shortage, these
measures may include, without limitation, the following:



   (A)   Prohibit the filling or emptying and refilling of swimming
pools, excluding normal maintenance of water levels due to evaporation.



   (B)   Prohibit the use of a temporary fire hydrant meter from the
city, or otherwise using water through a temporary city water service.



   (C)   Require all major water users to reduce their usage by the
percentage determined by the City Manager, or designee, to be necessary to
sustain adequate water supply for the city. Such percentage must be based
both on the rate of supply to the city and the rate of current water demand.



   (D)   Impose an additional water surcharge above and beyond the
existing city water rates on all city residents, water users and water
consumers who fail or refuse to abide by the requirements, restrictions and
priorities adopted by the city in response to the emergency water shortage
condition.



   (E)   Suspend all sales and deliveries of city water, or use of city
water, for construction or grading purposes.



   (F)   Reduce or prohibit consumption or use of city water by
residential, recreational, commercial, industrial and institutional water
users for landscape irrigation purposes.



   (G)   Initiate or implement additional or innovative actions to
increase the supply of water available to the city and to conserve the city's
existing water supply.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.22  RELIEF FROM COMPLIANCE.



   The City Manager, or designee, may grant written waivers to persons who
apply on forms supplied by the city for:



   (A)   Prohibited uses of water if it is found that a waiver is
necessary to prevent an emergency condition relating to health and safety,
and if the person seeking a waiver demonstrates that he or she implemented
water conservation measures in some other manner that achieves the objectives
of this chapter. No waiver can be granted for the filling of any decorative
fountain, basin, pond, hot tub, spa or permanent swimming or wading pool,
unless the filling occurs as the result of performing necessary leak repairs
and unless the other provisions of this section are met.



   (B)   No waiver can be granted unless the person demonstrates that
he or she has already achieved the maximum practical reduction in water
consumption as can be achieved by the affected property or business. Any
waiver granted must be based upon the water consumption rates of similar
water users, properties or businesses.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



§ 58.23  ENFORCEMENT.



   At least one written warning must be provided to persons upon the first
violation of this chapter. Second and subsequent violations may be enforced
in accordance with applicable law including, without limitation, this code.
It is the code enforcement officer's responsibility to enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 1222, passed 12-7-09)



CHAPTER 59: LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS



Section



   59.01   Purpose



   59.02   Applicability



   59.03   Definitions



   59.04   Compliance requirements



   59.05   Exceptions



   59.06   Submittals



   59.07   Determination of conforming installation



   59.08   Compliance verification



§ 59.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 65595(c) for the purpose of complying with California law and promoting
water conservation. This chapter may be referred to as the “landscape water
conservation standards.” The landscape water conservation standards are
intended to promote water conservation while allowing the maximum possible
flexibility in designing healthy, attractive, and cost effective water
efficient landscapes.



   (B)   These landscape water conservation standards must be used in
conjunction with the city land development provisions for landscaping and the
guidelines for implementation of water efficient landscape
(“guidelines”), which are incorporated by this reference and on file with
the City Clerk's office. Where conflicts in language may exist between these
landscape Water conservation standards and the city's land development
provisions for landscaping, the more restrictive water conserving language
prevails.



(Ord. 1223, passed 12-7-09)



§ 59.02  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Compliance with guidelines and landscape water conservation
standards is mandatory for all new or altered landscaping proposed as a part
of new development projects that are subject to discretionary review by the
city. These standards are not mandatory for local, state, or federal
historical sites; ecological restoration projects; public botanical or
arboretum collections; or individual private rear yards, enclosed by a
wall/fence of single-family residences, planned residential groups, and other
individual and multi-family residences with a private walled/fenced yard or
patio areas, unless required by a discretionary permit.



   (B)   Cemeteries are exempt from compliance with all provisions of
this chapter, except § 59.04(D).



   (C)   The guidelines may be adopted separately by City Council
resolution and are incorporated into this chapter by reference.



(Ord. 1223, passed 12-7-09)



§ 59.03  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the
meanings stated in the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act (Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 65591, et seq.); regulations promulgating the Water Conservation in
Landscaping Act; this code; the city land development provisions for
landscaping and the guidelines for implementation of water efficient
landscape; and any successor statutes or regulations.



   CHECK VALVE or ANTI-DRAIN VALVE means a valve located under a sprinkler
head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system
to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.



   CITY OF SANTA PAULA LAND DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS FOR LANDSCAPING AND THE
GUIDELINES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE or GUIDELINES
means regulations separately adopted by City Council resolution, and
incorporated by reference into this chapter, providing specific regulations
for water conservation.



   CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR means a person certified to
perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a
professional trade organization or other program such as the  US 
Environmental  Protection Agency's WaterSense Irrigation Auditor
Certification Program and Irrigation Association's Certified Landscape
Irrigation Auditor program.



   DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY or DU is a measure of how uniformly an
irrigation head applies water to a specific target area and theoretically
ranges from zero to 100%.



   DRIP IRRIGATION means any non-spray low volume irrigation system
utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low
volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of
water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.



   EMITTER means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water
slowly from the system to the soil.



   ESTIMATED APPLIED WATER USE or EAWU means the annual total amount of
water estimated to keep plants in a healthy state. It is based on factors
such as reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area,
plant water use factors, and the irrigation efficiency within each hydrozone.



   EVAPOTRANSPIRATION ADJUSTMENT FACTOR or ETAF means a factor of 0.7,
that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors
and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that
needs to be applied to the landscape. A combined plant mix with a site-wide
average of 0.5 is the basis of the plant factor portion of this calculation.
For purposes of the ETAF, the average irrigation efficiency is 0.71.
Therefore, the ET adjustment factor is (0.7)=(0.5/0.71). ETAF for a special
landscape area cannot exceed 1.0. ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated
landscapes is 0.8.



   EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE means the quantity of water evaporated from
adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified
time.



   FLOW RATE means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and
emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic
feet per second.



   HARDSCAPE means any durable material or feature (pervious and
non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or
walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped
area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of the city guidelines for
implementation of water efficient landscape .



   HYDROZONE means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with
similar water needs and typically irrigated by one valve/controller station.
A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.



   INFILTRATION RATE means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed
as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).



   IRRIGATION AUDIT means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an
irrigation system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An
irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up,
system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting
overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an
irrigation schedule.



   IRRIGATION MANAGEMENT EFFICIENCY or IME means the measurement used to
calculate the irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system for a landscaped
project. A 90% IME can be achieved by using evaportranspiration controllers,
soil moisture sensors, and other methods that will adjust irrigation run
times to meet plant water needs.



   LANDSCAPED AREA means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water
features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water
allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscaped area
does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways,
parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or
non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for
non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).



   LATERAL LINE means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to
the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.



   LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION means the application of irrigation water at low
pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters
such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are
specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the
root zone of plants.



   MAIN LINE means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the
water source to the valve or outlet.



   MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE or MAWA means the upper limit of annual
applied water for the established landscaped area, as specified in the city
guidelines. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the
ETAF, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use
cannot exceed the maximum applied water allowance.



   MULCH means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw or
compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed
granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial
purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil
temperature, and preventing soil erosion.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new
building with existing landscape or other new landscape, such as a park,
playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.



   OVERSPRAY means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the
target area.



   PERSON means any natural person or corporate person, or other entity
recognized by law.



   PERVIOUS means any surface or material that allows the passage of water
through the material and into the underlying soil.



   PLANT FACTOR or PLANT WATER USE FACTOR is a factor, when multiplied by
ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of
this chapter, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3;
the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the
plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors
cited in these guidelines are derived from the Department of Water Resources
2000 publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species."



   PRECIPITATION RATE means the rate of application of water measured in
inches per hour.



   REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION or ETo means a standard measurement of
environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given
expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in the city
guidelines for implementation of water efficient landscape, and is an
estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four to seven-inch
tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is
used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances.



   RUNOFF means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to
which it is applied and flows from the landscaped area. For example, runoff
may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate
exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.



   SPRINKLER HEAD means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.



   STATIC WATER PRESSURE means the pipeline or municipal water supply
pressure when water is not flowing.



   STATION means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that
operate simultaneously.



   TURF means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass,
Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are
cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St.
Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.



   VALVE means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation
system.



   WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEETS means the worksheets required to
be completed pursuant to the guidelines for implementation of water efficient
landscape.



   WATER FEATURE means a design element where open water performs an
aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes,
waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where
water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is
included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed
wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection, or storm
water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for
water treatment or storm water retention are not water features and,
therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.



(Ord. 1223, passed 12-7-09)



§ 59.04  COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Applicants for new development proposing new or altered
landscaping must comply with each of the following requirements in the
design, installation, and maintenance of the landscaped area unless an
exception is granted pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Applicants must submit a detailed landscape plan together with
construction and engineering plans including a horticultural soils report
based upon soil samples from the project with laboratory recommendations for
all soil preparation and maintenance fertilization. The landscape plan must
incorporate recommendations of the soil analysis report and depict the
landscaped area and all existing landscaping to remain on the lot as
determined by the Public Works Department. Any plant may be selected
providing that the landscaped area be designed to be irrigated at no more
than 0.70 of the reference evapotranspiration (ETo) and cannot exceed the
MAWA. The city reserves the right to modify plans in quantity and quality of
the landscape to meet the landscape water conservation standards requirements.



   (C)   Use of turf and water wise plants.



      (1)   The landscape area of projects proposing exclusively
commercial or industrial uses must be designed without the use of turf and
with 100% water wise plants. The exception to this is where a turf type is
specified for any required bio-swale or bio-filter systems or areas adjacent
to pedestrian traffic where walking travel or crossings are expected such as
corner lot locations or linear areas located along pedestrian routes.



      (2)   Turf is the appropriate choice in parkways where vehicle
parking is permitted adjacent to the parkway curb. The parkway may include
one  or a maximum of two non-permanent hardscape areas where space permits.
The non-permanent hardscape area can be pervious pavers, decomposed granite,
brick on sand, concrete pavers, or other materials approved by the Public
Works Director and may serve as a pedestrian landing between the parkway curb
and the sidewalk. Each non-permanent hardscape area may be no larger than
four feet in width and be installed and sized in such a manner that it can be
easily removed should the city or utility company need to do work in the
parkway in the future. The pedestrian landing area must be a minimum of five
feet away from any street tree and three feet away from any meter boxes,
cable boxes, transformers, street lights, or other objects that may be in the
parkway.



      (3)   Where parking is not permitted adjacent to the parkway
curb, the parkway must be designed using 100% water wise plants.



      (4)   The landscape area of single family residential,
multi-family residential, mixed use, and institutional type of projects must
be designed with no more than 40% of the landscaped area in turf or plants
that are not water wise plants. In the case of single family residences and
other residences with a rear yard that is enclosed by a wall/fence separate
from any other residence's rear yard or common area, the area to be used in
the calculation of "landscape area" can only include the front yards and any
side yard outside the individual dwelling unit's privacy area (typically, a
fenced or walled area). Approved turf parkways are not a part of the 40% turf
limitation.



      (5)   Turf is not permitted in medians or parking lot
landscape finger planters. Turf cannot be used on slopes of 20% (5:1) or
greater within the landscape area.



      (6)   Notwithstanding requirements (A) and (B) above,
additional turf areas may be approved by the city for areas designed and used
for outdoor sporting and recreational activities or for an approved
functional use. Approved turf areas may be watered at 1.0 of the reference
evapotranspiration (ETo).



      (7)   The landscape area, except those portions of the
landscaped area planted in turf must be covered with mulch material to an
average thickness of at least three inches throughout. In areas with
groundcovers planted from flats, mulch must be installed to an average
thickness of 1 1/2 inches. Additional mulch material must be added from time
to time as necessary in order to maintain the required depth of mulch.



   (D)   All new or altered irrigation systems proposed as part of a
development proposal must incorporate the following requirements in their
design, installation, and maintenance:



      (1)   Irrigation systems must be designed and installed to
avoid overspray and runoff. Valves must be separated for individual
hydrozones based on plant water needs and sun/shade requirements.



      (2)   Water budget calculations as part of the water efficient
landscape worksheets must be shown on irrigation plans.



      (3)   An automatic irrigation system is required and must
include a weather based irrigation controller with a rain shut off sensor.



      (4)   Areas less than eight feet wide are a particular
challenge and must be irrigated with appropriately selected equipment that
provides the proper amount of water coverage without causing overspray on to
paved surfaces.



      (5)   All sprinklers must have matched precipitation rates
within each valve and circuit. All irrigation systems must be designed to
include optimum distribution uniformity, head to head spacing, and setbacks
from walkways and pavement.



      (6)   All irrigation systems must provide check valves at the
low end of irrigation lines to prevent unwanted draining of irrigation lines.



      (7)   Pressure regulators may be required on the irrigation
system as determined by the Public Works Department.



(Ord. 1223, passed 12-7-09)



§ 59.05  EXCEPTIONS.



   Exceptions to these landscape water conservation standards may be
granted by the Public Works Director upon finding that the exceptions will
promote equivalent or greater water conservation than is provided for in
these standards. Requests for exceptions must be in writing and submitted to
the Public Works Director at the time the application is submitted to the
city for review. Requests for exceptions must be accompanied by documentation
demonstrating that the finding of equivalent or greater water conservation
can be made.



(Ord. 1223, passed 12-7-09)



§ 59.06  SUBMITTALS.



   (A)   Applicants must provide all relevant information on the
landscape plan including botanical names for plants and turf species;
container sizes; percentage calculations of allowable areas of turf; low,
medium or high water use plants and water-wise plants; water budget
calculations; monthly irrigation schedule; and specific requests for any
exceptions to the requirements of these landscape water conservation
standards. Areas of existing landscaping to remain unaltered must be
indicated on the landscape plan.



   (B)   The landscape plan must be prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Business and Professions Code relating to the practice of
landscape architecture (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 5641, et seq.)



   (C)   The landscape plan must include a "statement of compliance" in
a form approved by the Public Works Director certifying that the landscape
design complies with the mandatory elements of the landscape water
conservation standards. The person who prepared the plans must sign the
statement of compliance.



(Ord. 1223, passed 12-7-09)



§ 59.07  DETERMINATION OF CONFORMING INSTALLATION.



   The person who prepared the landscape plan must inspect the
installation of the landscaping and any irrigation system included in the
plan and certify in writing to the Public Works Department that the
installation substantially conforms to the approved landscape plan before a
final city landscape inspection or occupancy being requested.



(Ord. 1223, passed 12-7-09)



§ 59.08  COMPLIANCE VERIFICATION.



   (A)  Verification of compliance with the landscape water conservation
standards, as applicable, must be made by the Public Works Department in
accordance with the following requirements:



      (1)   No building permit can be issued unless the statement of
compliance is included on the final landscape plan submitted for plan check
approval.



      (2)   No building permit can be given a final landscape
inspection or issued a permanent certificate of occupancy until the Public
Works Department receives a written determination of conforming installation.



(Ord. 1223, passed 12-7-09)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC RULES



      72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



      73.   BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER WHEELED TOYS



      74.   SKATEBOARD PARKS



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Authority of Police and Fire Department officials



   70.03   Directing traffic by persons other than officials prohibited



   70.04   Applicability of regulations to persons riding bicycles or
animals



   70.05   Obedience of public employees to regulations



   70.06   Certain vehicles exempt



   70.07   Report of damage to certain property



   70.08   Conditions for removal of vehicles from street



   70.09   Objects obstructing visibility at intersections




Patrol Division




   70.20   Established



   70.21   Duties



   70.22   Traffic accident studies



   70.23   Traffic accident reports



   70.24   Submission of annual traffic safety report



   70.25   Traffic Safety Committee




Traffic-Control Devices




   70.35   Authority to install



   70.36   Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue



   70.37   Hours of operation



   70.38   Traffic-control signs required for enforcement purposes



   70.39   Installation and placement determination



   70.40   Lane marking



   70.41   Distinctive roadway markings



   70.42   Unauthorized painting of curbs prohibited



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined, but are
defined in the California Vehicle Code and amendments thereto, such
definitions shall apply.



   ALLEY.  Any unnamed street 25 feet or less in width between property
lines used primarily for service purposes.



   BICYCLE.  Any device having two or more wheels in tandem, the wheels
being 20 inches or more in diameter, propelled by human power upon which a
person may ride.



   CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT.  All streets and portions of streets within
the area described as follows:  all that area bounded by Yale Street on the
south, Eleventh Street on the east, Santa Barbara Street on the north and
Seventh Street on the west.



   COACH.  Any motor bus, motor coach, or passenger stage used as a
common carrier of passengers.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the city.



   CURB.  The lateral boundary of the roadway whether defined by curb
construction or not.



   DIVISIONAL ISLAND.  A raised island or an area defined by painted
lines located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams
of traffic.



   HIGHWAY.  See the definition for “street” in this section.



   HOLIDAYS.  Within the meaning of this title, HOLIDAYS are New Years
Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, California Admission Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and
Christmas Day.



   LOADING ZONE.  The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.



   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.  Whenever certain hours are named in this
title, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current
use in this city.



   PARK.  To stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading of passengers or materials.



   PARKWAY.  That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the Police Department of this city
or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests
for violations of traffic regulations.



   STOP.  When required, STOP means complete cessation of movement.



   STOP or STAND.  When prohibited, STOP or STAND means any stopping or
standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control device.



   STREET.  A way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   VEHICLE CODE.  The California Vehicle Code.



('81 Code, §§ 10.04.010-10.04.210)



§ 70.02  AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.



   Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police such as reserve officers and citizen patrol members, are
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in
conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require.



('81 Code, § 10.12.010)



§ 70.03  DIRECTING TRAFFIC BY PERSONS OTHER THAN OFFICIALS PROHIBITED.



   No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of
the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person
authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or
other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this
title, any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the Chief of
Police.



('81 Code, § 10.12.020)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS.



   Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a
highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no application.



('81 Code, § 10.12.030)



Cross-reference:



   Bicycles skateboards, and other wheeled toys, see Ch. 73



§ 70.05  OBEDIENCE OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state,
any county or city, and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any
of the provisions of this title or of the California Vehicle Code except as
otherwise permitted in this title or by the California Vehicle Code.



('81 Code, § 10.12.040)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.06  CERTAIN VEHICLES EXEMPT.



   (A)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the Police
or Fire Department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any
private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has
qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in
this section is operated in the manner specified by the California Vehicle
Code in response to an emergency call.



   (B)   The exemptions set forth in division (A) of this section shall
not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to
exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful
disregard of the safety of others.



   (C)   The provisions of this title regulating the parking or
standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or
public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or
any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department
while in use for the collec-tion, transportation or delivery of United States
mail.



('81 Code, § 10.12.050)



§ 70.07  REPORT OF DAMAGE TO CERTAIN PROPERTY.



   (A)   The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any
animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly
owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire
hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or
power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or
other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within
24 hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the
Police Department of this city.



   (B)   Every such report shall state the time when and the place
where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and
of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license
number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage
in such accident.



   (C)   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not
be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the
time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he
shall make a report as required in division (A) of this section within 24
hours after regaining ability to make such report.



('81 Code, § 10.12.060)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.08  CONDITIONS FOR REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM STREET.



   Any member of the Police Department designated by the Police Chief may
remove or cause to be removed:



   (A)   Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a
street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours;



   (B)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or
highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or
standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are
posted giving notice of such removal;



   (C)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or
highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is
necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway
or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the
street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other
than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or
any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or
structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or
interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that
such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to
the removal.



('81 Code, § 10.12.070)



Statutory reference:



   Removal of parked and abandoned vehicles, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22650
et seq.



§ 70.09  OBJECTS OBSTRUCTING VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   Whenever any object such as a hedge, shrub, tree, fence, wall,
and the like, within any street or highway obstructs the view of any
inter-section, or any vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon the approaches to
such intersection, or any other traffic hazard, the Chief of Police or City
Engineer may remove or may cause to be removed such object, or have such
object reduced in height.



   (B)   Whenever any object such as noted in division (A) of this
section is on property outside the street or highway, the Chief of Police or
City Engineer shall notify the occupant or owner of such property to remove
or cause to be removed such object or reduce the height of such object to
comply with the land use plan of the city. 



('81 Code, § 10.12.080)



PATROL DIVISION



§ 70.20  ESTABLISHED.



   There is established in the Police Department of this city a Patrol
Division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and
directly responsible to the Chief of Police.



('81 Code, § 10.08.010)



§ 70.21  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Patrol Division with such aid as may be
rendered by other members of the Police Department to enforce the street
traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable
to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the Chief of Police and
other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in
developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out
those duties specially imposed upon such division by this title and the
traffic ordinances of this city.



('81 Code, § 10.08.020)



§ 70.22  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Patrol Division shall cooperate with the Chief of Police in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.



('81 Code, § 10.08.030)



§ 70.23  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The Patrol Division shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports.



   (B)   Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by name.



   (C)   Such reports shall be available for the use and information of
the Chief of Police.



('81 Code, § 10.08.040)



§ 70.24  SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.



   (A)   The Patrol Division shall annually prepare a traffic report.



   (B)   Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in
this city as follows:



      (1)   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons
killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident
data;



      (2)   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other
pertinent data on the safety activities of the police;



      (3)   The plans and recommendations of the division for future
traffic activities.



('81 Code, § 10.08.050)



§ 70.25  TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Established; compensation; chairman.



      (1)   There is established a Traffic Safety Committee to serve
without compensation, consisting of the Chief of Police or his staff
designee, the City Manager or his staff designee, the Public Works Director
or his staff designee and other such persons as may be appointed by
resolution of the City Council.



      (2)   The City Manager may appoint the chairman of the
committee.



('81 Code, § 10.08.060)  (Ord. 908, passed  - -88)



   (B)   Duties.  It shall be the duty of the Traffic Safety Committee
to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all
officers and agencies of this city having authority with respect to the
administration and enforcement of traffic regulations; to stimulate and
assist in the preparation and publication of traffic reports; to receive
complaints having to do with traffic matters; and to recommend to the
legislative body of this city and to the chief of the Patrol Division and
other city officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the
administration and enforcement of traffic regulations.



('81 Code, § 10.08.070)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.35  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.



   (A)   The City Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control
devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title.



   (B)   Whenever the California Vehicle Code requires for the
effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be
installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the
City Engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary
devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law
applicable thereto.



   (C)   The City Engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be
placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he may deem
necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he
shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering
principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards,
limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this title or resolution of the
Council.



('81 Code, § 10.20.010)



Statutory reference:



   Traffic-control devices, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21351 et seq. and §§
21400 et seq.



§ 70.36  AUTHORITY TO REMOVE, RELOCATE AND DISCONTINUE.



   The City Engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the
operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the
California Vehicle Code or this title whenever he determines in any
particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the
installation no longer exist or apply.



('81 Code, § 10.20.020)



§ 70.37  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The City Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any
traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this title.



('81 Code, § 10.20.030)



§ 70.38  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.



   No provision of the California Vehicle Code or of this title for which
signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless
appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of
the traffic laws.



('81 Code, § 10.20.040)



§ 70.39  INSTALLATION AND PLACEMENT DETERMINATION.



   (A)   The City Engineer is directed to install and maintain official
traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic
conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately
interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or
to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.



   (B)   The City Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations
where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and
other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations
therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and
safety standards and instructions set forth in the “California Maintenance
Manual” issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of
Public Works.



   (C)   Whenever the City Engineer installs and maintains an official
traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at
such inter-section street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic
unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained
at any such intersection.



('81 Code, § 10.20.050)



§ 70.40  LANE MARKING.



   The City Engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines
upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by
vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the
highway.



('81 Code, § 10.20.060)



§ 70.41  DISTINCTIVE ROADWAY MARKINGS.



   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to place and maintain
distinctive roadway markings as described in the California Vehicle Code on
those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical
or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left
side of such marking or signs and markings.



   (B)   Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect
as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant
to provisions of the California Vehicle Code.



('81 Code, § 10.20.070)



§ 70.42  UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS PROHIBITED.



   No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or
curb surface.



('81 Code, § 10.20.080)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this title for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be punished according to Chapter 13 of
this code.



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section




General Provisions




   71.001   Driving through funeral procession



   71.002   Riding or driving on sidewalks



   71.003   New pavement markings



   71.004   Limited access



   71.005   Restrictions on use of freeways



   71.006   Erection of and obedience to barriers and signs



   71.007   Trains not to block crossing




Speed Limits




   71.020   Establishment of speed limits




Turning Movements




   71.030   Placement and obedience to turning markers



   71.031   Restricted turn signs



   71.032   Signs prohibiting right turn against stop signal




One-Way Streets and Alleys




   71.045   Placement of and obedience to signs




Special Stops




   71.055   Through street and intersections; City Engineer to erect
stop signs



   71.056   Emerging from alley, driveway or building




Pedestrians




   71.070   Establishment and marking of crosswalks



   71.071   Use of crosswalk required




Use Restrictions on Certain Streets




   71.080   Certain vehicles prohibited in central traffic district



   71.081   Advertising vehicles on city streets



   71.082   Animal-drawn vehicles in central traffic district



   71.083   Truck route establishment and designation



   71.084   Use of certain streets by commercial vehicles prohibited;
exception




Interstate Trucks




   71.095   Definitions



   71.096   Purpose



   71.097   Application



   71.098   Fees and costs



   71.099   Retrofitting



   71.100   Revocation of route



   71.101   Appeal process



Cross-reference:



   Regulations for motor vehicles at drive-in restaurants, see § 122.04



Statutory reference:



   Local traffic rules and regulations, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21100 et
seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 71.001  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION.



   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising
a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are
conspicuously so designated.  The directing of all vehicles and traffic on
any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall
be subject to the orders of the Police Department.



('81 Code, § 10.24.080)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.002  RIDING OR DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled
any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently
constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary
purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that
such sidewalk area is substantially protected by wooden planks two inches
thick, and permission is previously obtained from the City Engineer.



   (B)   Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such
sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



('81 Code, § 10.24.100)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.003  NEW PAVEMENT MARKINGS.



   No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across
any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a
barrier sign, conemarker or other warning device is in place warning persons
not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device
is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed.



('81 Code, § 10.24.110)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.004  LIMITED ACCESS.



   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.



('81 Code, § 10.24.120)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.005  RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF FREEWAYS.



   No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or
any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established
as a freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across
or along any such street so designated and described except in space set
aside for the use of pedestrians; provided, official signs are in place
giving notice of such restrictions.



('81 Code, § 10.24.130)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.006  ERECTION OF AND OBEDIENCE TO BARRIERS AND SIGNS.



   No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or
place any barrier or sign on any street, unless of a type approved by the
City Engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy
any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public
utility or by any department of this city.



('81 Code, § 10.24.140)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.007  TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK CROSSING.



   No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or
similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner
as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period
of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply
to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails to stop at or near the
scene of an accident.



('81 Code, § 10.24.150)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SPEED LIMITS



§ 71.020  ESTABLISHMENT OF SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   Whenever the City Engineer determines, pursuant to state law,
that a prima facie or maximum speed limit other than that established by
state law is reasonable and safe, the City Council may, by ordinance,
determine and declare such prima facie or maximum speed limit.



   (B)   The declared prima facie or maximum speed limit shall be
effective when the appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon
the street.



('81 Code, § 10.16.010)  (Ord. 745, passed  - -80)



Statutory reference:



   Speed limits, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22348  et seq.



TURNING MOVEMENTS



§ 71.030  PLACEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.



   (A)   The City Engineer may place markings, buttons or signs within
or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated
may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or this title.



   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of such indications.



('81 Code, § 10.24.010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Turning movements, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22101 and 22113



§ 71.031  RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.



   (A)   The City Engineer may determine those intersections at which
drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place
proper signs at such intersections.  The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in
which event, such hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may
be removed when such turns are permitted.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of any such sign.



('81 Code, § 10.24.020)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.032  SIGNS PROHIBITING RIGHT TURN AGAINST STOP SIGNAL.



   (A)   The City Engineer may determine those intersections within any
business district at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn
against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of
such prohibition.



   (B)   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.



('81 Code, § 10.24.030)  Penalty, see § 70.99



ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS



§ 71.045  PLACEMENT OF AND OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city
designates any one-way street or alley, the City Engineer shall place and
maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be
effective unless such signs are in place.



      (2)   Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in
the opposite direction is prohibited.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating the direction
of lawful traffic movement, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign.



('81 Code, § 10.24.040)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   One-way street designations, see Cal. Veh. Code § 21657



SPECIAL STOPS



§ 71.055  THROUGH STREETS AND INTERSECTIONS; CITY ENGINEER TO ERECT STOP
SIGNS.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates
and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any
intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances
thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to
stop, the City Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:  a
stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through
street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other
intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so
designated.  Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as
provided in the California Vehicle Code.



('81 Code, § 10.24.050)



   (B)   (1)   Those streets and parts of streets established by
resolution of the Council are declared to be through streets for the purposes
of this division.



      (2)   The provisions of this division shall also apply at one
or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections
are established by resolution of the Council.



      (3)   The provisions of this division shall apply to those
highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the Council.



('81 Code, § 10.24.060)



Statutory reference:



   Power to place stop signs and designate through  highways, see Cal
Veh. Code § 21354



   Stop signs at railroad crossings, see Cal Veh. Code § 21351.5



§ 71.056  EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into
the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway.



('81 Code, § 10.24.070)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PEDESTRIANS



§ 71.070  ESTABLISHMENT AND MARKING OF CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   The City Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain
crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:  crosswalks shall be
established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic
district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places
within or outside such district where the City Engineer determines that there
is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the
limitation contained in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be
established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length and such
crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock.



   (C)   The City Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an
intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not
cross in the crosswalk so indicated.



('81 Code, § 10.24.160)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of crosswalk, see Cal. Veh. Code § 21106



§ 71.071  USE OF CROSSWALK REQUIRED.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the
central traffic district or in any business district.



('81 Code, § 10.24.170)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Pedestrians rights and duties, see Cal. Veh.  Code §§ 21950 et seq.



USE RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS



§ 71.080  CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT.



   (A)   No person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the
central traffic district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any
day:



      (1)   Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half feet in
width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load
extends more than 20 feet to the front or rear of vehicle;



      (2)   Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been
loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the central traffic
district;



      (3)   Any vehicle conveying refuse, rubbish, garbage or dirt,
excepting those official vehicles expressly used for these purposes.



   (B)   The City Engineer may by written permit authorize the
operation of any such vehicle for the purpose of making necessary emergency
deliveries to or from points within the central traffic district.



('81 Code, § 10.32.010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.081  ADVERTISING VEHICLES ON CITY STREETS.



   No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising
purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or
loudspeaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the city
limits unless authorized to do so by the City Council.



('81 Code, § 10.32.020)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.082  ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES IN CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT.



   No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the
central traffic district at any time without a permit from the City Engineer.



('81 Code, § 10.32.030)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.083  TRUCK ROUTE ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION.



   (A)   Whenever, by ordinance of the Council, any street or portion
thereof is designated as a truck route the use of such street by any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons is thereby permitted.  The
City Engineer is authorized to post such streets, with appropriate signs or
markings which shall be visible from a distance of 200 feet, as “truck
routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit
of three tons.



   (B)   When any such truck route or routes are established and so
designated by appropriate signs or markings, the operator of any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such
route or routes.  The operation of any vehicle described herein on any
street or portion thereof which is not designated as a truck route is an
infraction under this code.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of a
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons traveling from a
truck route having ingress or egress, by a direct route, to and from
restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pick ups or
deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise to or from any building, structure
or lot located on such streets, or for the delivering of materials in the
repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure
upon such street for which a building permit has previously been issued.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public
Utilities Commission under Cal. Pub. Util. Code §§ 1031 through 1036; or



      (2)   Any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by a public
utility or licensed contractor while necessarily in use for the purpose of
construction, installation or repair of any public utility.



   (E)   Those streets or portions thereof established by ordinance of
the Council are declared to be truck routes for the purpose of movement of
vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons.



('81 Code, § 10.32.040)  (Ord. 756, passed  - -81)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Vehicle weight limits, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 35700 et seq.



§ 71.084  USE OF CERTAIN STREETS BY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTION.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes
any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by
any commercial vehicle, the City Engineer shall erect and maintain
appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance.



   (B)   Those streets and parts of streets established by ordinance of
the Council are declared to be streets, the use of which by any commercial
vehicle is prohibited.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to
passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission
under Cal. Pub. Util. Code §§ 1031 through 1036.



('81 Code, § 10.32.050)  Penalty, see § 70.99



INTERSTATE TRUCKS



§ 71.095  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
If any word or phrase used in this subchapter is not defined in this section,
it shall have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code;
provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the California
Vehicle Code, it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.



   CALTRANS.  The State Department of Transportation or its successor
agency.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works of the city or his authorized
representative.



   INTERSTATE TRUCK.  A truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor,
semitrailer and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the California
Vehicle Code.



   TERMINAL.  Any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped
or where full load consignments may be off-loaded, or at which the vehicles
are regularly maintained, stored, or manufactured.



('81 Code, § 10.48.010)  (Ord. 835, passed  - -85)



§ 71.096  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish procedures for terminal
designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks
operating on a federally designated highway system and to promote the general
health, safety, and welfare of the public.



('81 Code, § 10.48.020)  (Ord. 835, passed  - -85)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish access routes, see Cal. Veh. Code § 35401.5



§ 71.097  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the application, the Director will cause an
investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal
facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal.  Upon his
approval of that designation, he will then determine the capability of the
route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. 
Deter-mination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review
of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections and
highways and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed, and
traffic volumes.  No access off a federally designated highway system will
be approved without the approval of Caltrans.  The Director may approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the application.



   (B)   Should the requested route pass through the city to a terminal
located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with that
jurisdiction's application process as well.  Coordination of the approval of
the route through the city will be the responsibility of the entity which
controls the terminal's land use.  Costs for trailblazer signs shall be as
provided in § 71.098.



('81 Code, § 10.48.030)  (Ord. 835, passed  - -85)



§ 71.098  FEES AND COSTS.



   (A)   Upon the approval of the terminal designa-tion and route by
the city and by Caltrans, the applicant shall deposit with the city
sufficient funds as estimated by the Director to pay for the purchase and
installation of terminal trailblazer signs.



   (B)   Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in
the city on route to the terminal.  Upon completion of the installation of
the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the
actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant,
whichever the case may be.  No terminal or route may be used until such
signs as may be required are in place.  Costs for trailblazer signs may be
proportioned in accordance with the procedures in division (C) of § 71.099.



('81 Code, § 10.48.040)  (Ord. 835, passed  - -85)



§ 71.099  RETROFITTING.



   (A)   If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found
unsatisfactory by the Director, the applicant may request retrofitting of the
deficiencies.  All costs of engineering, construction, and inspection will
be the responsibility of the applicant.  Except when the retrofitting of
deficiencies is within the jurisdiction of Caltrans, the actual construction
will be done by the city or by a contractor acceptable to the city.



   (B)   When the work is to be done by the city, the applicant shall
deposit with the city the estimated cost of retrofitting.  Adjustments
between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the
work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be
billed or refunded to the applicant as the case may be.



   (C)   If at any time within five years from the date of completion
of the retrofitting by the applicant, should any applicant seek terminal
approval which would use the route upon which such retrofitting was
accomplished, any such applicant's fee may include that applicant's
proportionate share of the retrofitting, as determined by the Director, which
fee shall be disbursed by the city to the applicant who paid for the
retrofitting, as well as to any applicant who contributed to the cost of
retrofitting under this division.



('81 Code, § 10.48.050)  (Ord. 835, passed  - -85)



§ 71.100  REVOCATION OF ROUTE.



   The Director may revoke any approved terminal or route if the terminal
or route becomes a traffic hazard for vehicular traffic.  A safety hazard
includes the inability of interstate trucks to negotiate the route or said
vehicles causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or
pedestrians.



('81 Code, § 10.48.060)  (Ord. 835, passed  - -85)



§ 71.101  APPEAL PROCESS.



   (A)   If the Director denies terminal designation, route feasibility
or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, he shall notify the
applicant in writing.  The applicant, terminal owner, or other interested
person, within 10 days following the date of the decision of the Director,
may appeal said decision to the City Council in writing.  An appeal shall be
made on a form prescribed by the Director and shall be filed with the City
Clerk.  The appeal shall state specifically wherein there was an error or
abuse of discretion by the Director or wherein its decision is not supported
by the evidence in the record.  Within 10 days of the filing of an appeal,
the Director shall transmit to the City Clerk the terminal application, the
sketches of the revoked route, and all other data filed therewith, the report
of the Director, the findings of the Director, and his decision on the
application.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall make copies of the data provided by the
Director available to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is
not the appellant) for inspection and may give notice to any other interested
party who requested notice, of the time when the appeal will be considered by
the City Council.  The appeal shall be scheduled for Council consideration
at a Council meeting not later than 24 days following receipt of the
appeal.  The Council may continue consideration of the appeal for good cause.



   (C)   If Caltrans, and not the Director, denies or revokes terminal
access from federally designated highways, no appeal may be made to the City
Council, but must be made to Caltrans as may be permitted by Caltrans.



('81 Code, § 10.48.070)  (Ord. 835, passed  - -85)



CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section




General Provisions




   72.01   Applicability



   72.02   Maintenance and compliance with no stopping and no parking
zone



   72.03   No parking areas designated



   72.04   Use of streets for vehicle storage prohibited



   72.05   Parking on street for advertising prohibited



   72.06   Parking adjacent to schools



   72.07   Parking on narrow streets prohibited



   72.08   Parking on grades



   72.09   Stopping, standing or parking in parkways



   72.10   Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets



   72.11   Washing or polishing vehicles on public streets



   72.12   Emergency parking signs



   72.13   Parallel parking on one-way streets



   72.14   Parking space markings



   72.15   No stopping zones



   72.16   All night parking restrictions in central business district



   72.17   Parking of commercial vehicles in residential areas



   72.18   Fire lane regulations



   72.19   Designation of permit parking districts




Limited Parking




   72.30   Authority to sign limited time parking area



   72.31   Twenty-minute parking



   72.32   One-hour parking



   72.33   Two-hour parking




Loading and Unloading




   72.45   Authority to establish loading zones



   72.46   Curb markings to indicate no stopping and no parking



   72.47   Applicability of permission to load or unload



   72.48   Standing for loading or unloading only



   72.49   Standing in passenger loading zone



   72.50   Standing in alley



   72.51   Establishment of coach zones



Cross-reference:



   Regulations for motor vehicles in drive-in restaurants, see § 122.04



Statutory reference:



   Stopping, standing and parking, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22500 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping,
standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times
specified in this chapter except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control device.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on
standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe
other and more restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code or the
ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.



('81 Code, § 10.28.010)



§ 72.02  MAINTENANCE AND COMPLIANCE WITH NO STOPPING AND NO PARKING ZONE.



   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate
signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking
areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.



   (B)   When such curb markings or signs are in place no operator of
any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such
legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.28.020)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  NO PARKING AREAS DESIGNATED.



   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing
such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:



   (A)   Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly
indicated with appropriate signs or markings;



   (B)   On either side of any street between the projected property
lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating
at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface;



   (C)   In any area where the City Engineer determines that the
parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would
endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs
or by red paint upon the curb surface;



   (D)   In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no
parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface;



   (E)   Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to
hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;



   (F)   If any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;



   (G)   On any street or highway where the use of such street or
highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or
construction of the street or highway or the installation of under-ground
utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is
authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the
use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the
movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the
parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or
movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected
or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking.



   (H)   In any area established by resolution of the Council as a
permit parking district, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs.



('81 Code, § 10.28.030)  (Am. Ord. 1254, passed 10-6-14)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 72.04  USE OF STREETS FOR VEHICLE STORAGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is prohibited for any person possessing, owning,
controlling, or having custody of any vehicle to park such vehicle upon any
street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours.



   (B)   A person violates this section if, once a vehicle was parked
or left standing upon a street or alley for the allowable parking time, it is
not moved at least one-quarter mile from its initial parking place for a
minimum of four hours before being again parked on the same street or alley.



('81 Code, § 10.28.040)  (Ord. 1166, passed 9-18-06)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.05  PARKING ON STREET FOR ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.



   No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street in
this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale,
unless authorized by the City Council.



('81 Code, § 10.28.050)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.06  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when
such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a
hazardous situation.



   (B)   When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that
side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a
vehicle in any such designated place.



('81 Code, § 10.28.060)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  PARKING ON NARROW STREETS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The City Engineer, when authorized by appropriate resolution,
is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one
side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the
roadway does not exceed 30 feet.



   (B)   When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are
erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this chapter, no person shall
park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking.



('81 Code, § 10.28.070)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  PARKING ON GRADES.



   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a
highway when upon any grade exceeding 3%, within any business or residence
district, without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against
the curb or by other means.



('81 Code, § 10.28.080)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.09  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN PARKWAYS.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway.



('81 Code, § 10.28.100)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.10  REPAIRING OR GREASING VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause
to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased any vehicle or any part thereof
upon any public street in this city.  Temporary emergency repairs may be
made upon a public street.



('81 Code, § 10.28.110)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.11  WASHING OR POLISHING VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be
polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city,
when a charge is made for such service.



('81 Code, § 10.28.120)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.12  EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS.



   (A)   Whenever the City Engineer determines that an emergency
traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the City
Engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be
erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of
vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Engineer shall
direct during the time such temporary signs are in place.  Such signs shall
remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the City
Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.



   (B)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in
place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any
vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.



   (C)   Whenever the City Engineer establishes an emergency no parking
zone, or a temporary no parking zone, signs shall also be erected or posted
in advance, giving 24 hours notice that the vehicle parked therein may be
removed or caused to be removed by the Police Department.  Such signs shall
remain in place only during the existence of such emergency or temporary no
parking zone, and the City Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed
promptly thereafter.



('81 Code, § 10.28.130)  (Ord. 919, passed  - -89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.13  PARALLEL PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle
may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in
place prohibiting such stopping or standing.



   (B)   The City Engineer is authorized to deter-mine when standing or
parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or
when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any
one-way roadway.



   (C)   The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section
shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in
the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such
vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that such vehicle does not
extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby.



('81 Code, § 10.28.180)



§ 72.14  PARKING SPACE MARKINGS.



   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to install and maintain
parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where
authorized parking is permitted.



   (B)   When such parking space markings are placed on the street,
subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be
stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the
size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible.



('81 Code, § 10.28.190)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.15  NO STOPPING ZONES.



   (A)   The City Engineer shall designate estab-lished no stopping
zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping
of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is
prohibited.



   (B)   During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it
is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle on any of
the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as
no stopping zones.



('81 Code, § 10.28.200)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.16  ALL NIGHT PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street of the
central traffic district for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays;
provided, that this section shall not apply to a vehicle of any regularly
licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls.



('81 Code, § 10.28.210)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.17  PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle of a rated size of more
than three-fourths of one ton, special construction equipment, implement of
husbandry or any trailer not connected to a vehicle on any street or highway
in any residential area for a period exceeding five hours or more than the
time reasonably necessary to carry out such work or service as reasonably
requires the presence of such a vehicle in the residential area, whichever is
longer.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, recreational vehicles, farm
labor buses and authorized emergency vehicles may be parked for a time period
up to 24 consecutive hours. On streets less than 36 feet wide which are
beyond 25 feet from the curb return of any street intersection, such vehicles
may be parked for a time period not longer than five consecutive hours.



   (C)   A person violates this section if, once a vehicle was parked
or left standing upon a street or alley for the allowable parking time, it is
not moved at least one-quarter mile from its initial parking place for a
minimum of four hours before being again parked on the same street or alley.



('81 Code, § 10.28.220)  (Ord. 1166, passed 9-18-06)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.18  FIRE LANE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The marking of fire lanes on private property, which shall be
restricted to right-of-way and emergency access, shall be approved by the
Chief of the Fire Department and the City Engineer.



   (B)   Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes
shall be prohibited at all times.



   (C)   Fire lanes shall be 15 feet or more in width when required by
the Fire Chief to provide access for emergency equipment.



   (D)   Fire lanes shall be located in the manner approved by the Fire
Chief.



('81 Code, § 10.28.230)  (Ord. 691, passed  - -78)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.19  DESIGNATION OF PERMIT PARKING DISTRICTS.



   The City Council may, by resolution, at its discretion or upon receipt
of a petition signed by residents or merchants living or working in at least
fifty-one percent of the developed frontage of the area proposed for
designation, designate a certain area or areas to be a permit parking
district.



(Ord. 1254, passed 10-6-14)



LIMITED PARKING



§ 72.30  AUTHORITY TO SIGN LIMITED TIME PARKING AREA.



   Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes a limited
time parking area, the City Engineer shall maintain appropriate signs or curb
markings for the limited time parking areas using the specified time as
defined and described in this subchapter, or at other specific times as
defined by the City Council.



('81 Code, § 10.28.140)



§ 72.31  TWENTY-MINUTE PARKING.



   (A)   Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a
period of time longer the 20 minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on any day except Sunday(s) and holidays, unless otherwise marked.



   (B)   When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by
the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no
operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to
any such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof.



('81 Code, § 10.28.150)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.32  ONE-HOUR PARKING.



   When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City
Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator
of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays for a period
of time longer than one hour.



('81 Code, § 10.28.160)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.33  TWO-HOUR PARKING.



   When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City
Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator
of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays for a period
of time longer than two hours.



('81 Code, § 10.28.170)  Penalty, see § 70.99



LOADING AND UNLOADING



§ 72.45  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH LOADING ZONES.



   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to deter-mine and to mark
loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:



      (1)   At any place in the central traffic district or any
business district;



      (2)   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of
business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public
assembly.



   (B)   In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length
in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.



   (C)   Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top
of all curbs within such zones.



   (D)   Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon
the top of all curbs in such zones.



('81 Code, § 10.28.240)



§ 72.46  CURB MARKINGS TO INDICATE NO STOPPING AND NO PARKING.



   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this title, to place, and when require in this title shall
place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing
regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in
this section.



      (1)   Red.  Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any
time except as permitted by the California Vehicle Code, and except that a
bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a coach or bus zone.



      (2)   Yellow.  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking
at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and
holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not
consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials
more than 20 minutes.



      (3)   White.  White means no stopping, standing or parking
for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the
purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed
three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:



         (a)   When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front
of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times.



         (b)   When such zone is in front of a theater the
restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed.



      (4)   Green.  Green indicates time limit parking specified in
§§ 72.30 through 72.32.



      (5)   Blue.  Blue indicates parking limited exclusively to
the vehicles of disabled persons and disabled veterans.



   (B)   When the City Engineer as authorized under this chapter has
caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the
provisions of this section.



('81 Code, § 10.28.250)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Curb markings, see Cal. Veh. Code § 21458



§ 72.47  APPLICABILITY OF PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD.



   (A)   Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle
for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to
commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor,
and in no event for more than 20 minutes.



   (B)   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to
commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post
packages and United States mail.



   (C)   Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for
purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or
unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary
therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.



   (D)   Within the total time limits specified above in this section,
the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate
necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of
the privileges granted by this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.28.260)



§ 72.48  STANDING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading
zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material
for such time as is permitted in § 72.47.



('81 Code, § 10.28.270)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.49  STANDING IN PASSENGER LOADING ZONE.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading
zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for
such time as is specified in § 72.47.



('81 Code, § 10.28.280)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.50  STANDING IN ALLEY.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other
than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley.



('81 Code, § 10.28.290)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.51  ESTABLISHMENT OF COACH ZONES.



   The City Engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb
space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers
and to determine the location thereof.



('81 Code, § 10.28.300)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER WHEELED TOYS



Section




General Provisions




   73.01   Definition



   73.02   Applicability




Licensing Regulations




   73.15   License required



   73.16   Application; fee



   73.17   Inspection required



   73.18   Issuance not required when doubt of ownership exists



   73.19   Issuance of license; term



   73.20   License plate issuance and placement



   73.21   Records to be kept



   73.22   Transfer of ownership; notification of sale



   73.23   Rented bicycles; licensure and equipment



   73.24   Serial numbers required on new bicycles prior to sale



   73.25   Reports of person in business of buying and selling bicycles



   73.26   Retailers to supply records to purchaser



   73.27   Notification of change of address



   73.28   Where operating is prohibited




Skateboards and Other Wheeled Toys




   73.35   Definitions



   73.36   Where operating prohibited



   73.37   Posting authorized



   73.38   Exceptions



   73.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Bicycles, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21100, 21206 and 39000 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 73.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  Any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled
by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears having either two
or three wheels (one of which is at least 20 inches in diameter) or having a
frame size of at least 14 inches, or having four or more wheels.



('81 Code, § 10.40.010)



§ 73.02  APPLICABILITY.



   The regulations in this chapter applicable to bicycles shall apply
whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated
in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.40.020)



LICENSING REGULATIONS



§ 73.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person who resides within the city shall ride, propel or otherwise
operate any bicycle on any street, road, highway or other public property
within the jurisdiction of the city, unless such bicycle is licensed in
accordance with this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.40.030)  Penalty, see § 73.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21206



   State regulations on registering and licensing, see Cal. Veh. Code §§
3900 et seq.



§ 73.16  APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be
made upon a form provided by the city and shall be presented to the Chief of
Police.  An annual license fee of $1 for each new license shall be paid to
the city before each license is issued.



   (B)   The fee for any bicycle license shall be $2 for new licenses,
$1 for a transferred license, $1 for a replacement license, and $1 for a
renewal license.



('81 Code, § 10.40.040)



§ 73.17  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   The Chief of Police shall inspect each bicycle before licensing it and
shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines to be in unsafe
mechanical condition.



('81 Code, § 10.40.050)



§ 73.18  ISSUANCE NOT REQUIRED WHEN DOUBT OF OWNERSHIP EXISTS.



   The Chief of Police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he
knows or has reason to believe that the applicant is not the owner of, or
entitled to the possession of, such bicycle.



('81 Code, § 10.40.060)



§ 73.19  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; TERM.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, upon receiving proper application
therefor, may issue a bicycle license which shall be effective for a term
ending December 31.



   (B)   The Chief of Police may renew such licenses or issue new
licenses for successive terms as designated by the Director of the Department
of Motor Vehicles.



('81 Code, § 10.40.070)



§ 73.20  LICENSE PLATE ISSUANCE AND PLACEMENT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall
also issue a license plate in the form set forth in the California Vehicle
Code.  Such license shall be permanently assigned to the bicycle for which
it was issued.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall cause such license plate to be
firmly attached to the rear mud guard or frame of the bicycle for which it
was issued in such position as to be plainly visible from the rear.  No
person shall remove the license plate from a bicycle during the period for
which it was issued, except in the event that the bicycle shall no longer be
operated upon any street in the city.



('81 Code, § 10.40.080)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.21  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall maintain records of each license
issued, including, but not limited to, the license number, serial number,
make, type and model of the bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee.



   (B)   Records shall be maintained by the Chief of Police during the
period of validity of the license or upon notification that the bicycle no
longer is to be operated.



('81 Code, § 10.40.090)



§ 73.22  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; NOTIFICATION OF SALE.



   (A)   Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this
chapter sells or otherwise disposes of such bicycles, he shall within 10 days
notify the Chief of Police of such disposition.



   (B)   Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a
bicycle shall within 10 days of taking possession apply for the transfer of
license to his name.



   (C)   Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of Police shall
examine the records to determine whether or not a valid license has been
issued and, if so, shall record the transfer or change of possession in the
city records.  If a valid license has not been issued, the applicant shall
be notified that application must be made for the issuance of a valid license.



('81 Code, § 10.40.100)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.23  RENTED BICYCLES; LICENSURE AND EQUIPMENT.



   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided in
this chapter, and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment
required in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.40.110)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.24  SERIAL NUMBERS REQUIRED ON NEW BICYCLES PRIOR TO SALE.



   (A)   After December 31, 1976, no bicycle retailer shall sell any
new bicycle in this state unless such bicycle has permanently stamped or cast
on its frame a serial number unique to the particular bicycle of each
manufacturer.



   (B)   Serial numbers shall be stamped or cast in the head of the
frame, either side of the seat tube, the toeplate, or the bottom sprocket
(crank) housing.



('81 Code, § 10.40.120)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.25  REPORTS OF PERSON IN BUSINESS OF BUYING AND SELLING BICYCLES.



   Every person engaged in the business of buying and selling new or
secondhand bicycle shall make a report to the Chief of Police of every
bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving name and address of the
person from whom such bicycle was purchased or to whom it was sold, a
description of it by name or make, the frame number thereof and the number of
the license plate, if any, found thereon.



('81 Code, § 10.40.130)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.26  RETAILERS TO SUPPLY RECORDS TO PURCHASER.



   Each bicycle retailer shall supply to each purchaser a record of the
name and address of the retailer, and the year, make and serial number of the
bicycle.



('81 Code, § 10.40.140)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.27  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE OF ADDRESS.



   Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter
changes his address, he shall within 10 days notify the Chief of Police of
the old and new address.



('81 Code, § 10.40.150)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.28  WHERE OPERATING IS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk in the Central Business
District Zone.



(Ord. 1036, passed 5-15-00)  Penalty, see § 73.99



SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER WHEELED TOYS



§ 73.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  As defined by resolution of the City Council.



   PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.  All buildings or areas where people gather
from time to time, exclusive of the business district.



   SIDEWALK.  That area adjacent to a traveled roadway, whether hard
surfaced or not, upon which the public is customarily invited or permitted to
walk or to otherwise use.



   WHEELED TOY.  All wheeled objects regardless of means of propulsion,
not including bicycles or vehicles as classified in the California Vehicle
Code, and specifically includes without limitation roller skates,
skateboards, coasters, scooters and toy vehicles.



('81 Code, § 10.44.010)



§ 73.36  WHERE OPERATING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   In business districts.  No person shall use or operate any
wheeled toy upon any sidewalk or street in a business district or in or
adjacent to any place of public assembly, nor shall any person park or leave
any wheeled toy on a sidewalk or in a street in a business district or
adjacent to or in a place of public assembly.



('81 Code, § 10.44.020)



   (B)   On grades.  The operation and use of wheeled toys is
prohibited on all public streets and sidewalks located in the city having a
grade of six percent or more and which are declared by resolution of the City
Council to be hazardous to pedestrians, motorists or persons operating such
wheeled toys.



('81 Code, § 10.44.030)  Penalty, see § 73.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21967 et seq.



§ 73.37  POSTING AUTHORIZED.



   The Chief of Police is authorized and directed to erect such signs and
other notices as he may consider advisable under this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 10.44.040)



§ 73.38  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Devices designed, intended and used solely for the
transportation of infants, the elderly or the handicapped or devices designed
and intended in use for the transportation of merchandise to or from the
place of purchase are exempted from the regulations imposed by this
subchapter.



   (B)   In addition, the regulations set forth in this subchapter
shall not apply to a place of public assembly when it is not open or in use.



('81 Code, § 10.44.050)



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable
pursuant to Chapter 13 of this code.



('81 Code, §§ 10.40.310 and 10.44.060)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79)



   (B)   No fine imposed for any violation of this chapter shall exceed
$500.



('81 Code, § 10.40.300)



   (C)   Violation of any provision of §§ 73.15 through 73.27 shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $10.



CHAPTER 74:  SKATEBOARD PARKS



Section



   74.01   Purpose



   74.02   Definitions



   74.03   Protective gear required



   74.04   Signs



   74.99   Penalty



§ 74.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 115800, and any succeeding or related statutes, for
the purpose of protecting the city from claims arising from use of public
skateboard parks. Skateboarding is an inherently dangerous recreational
activity and persons using skateboards should do so at their own risk.



(Ord. 1111, passed 5-17-04)



§ 74.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter.



   DIRECTOR means the City of Santa Paula's Community Services Director,
or designee.



   SKATEBOARD PARK  means city owned and operated property designated by
the City Council to be used for skateboarding purposes.



(Ord. 1111, passed 5-17-04)



§ 74.03  PROTECTIVE GEAR REQUIRED.



   Any person skateboarding at a skateboard park must wear protective
equipment consisting of, at a minimum, a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads.



(Ord. 1111, passed 5-17-04)  Penalty, see §74.99



§ 74.04  SIGNS.



   (A)   The Director will provide notice regarding the requirements of
this chapter to individuals using the skateboard park by use of signs that
state the following:



"THIS SKATEBOARD PARK IS NOT SUPERVISED. SKATEBOARDING IS HAZARDOUS. THE
SANTA PAULA MUNICIPAL CODE REQUIRES PERSONS USING THIS SKATEBOARD PARK TO
WEAR A HELMET, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEEPADS. FAILURE TO COMPLY IS UNLAWFUL."



   (B)   These signs must be posted in at least one conspicuous
location, be made of a durable material, and posted in a permanent manner.



(Ord. 1111, passed 5-17-04)



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of § 74.03 will be prosecuted as infractions in accord with
§§ 11.01, et seq. of this code.



(Ord. 1111, passed 5-17-04)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      91.   ANIMALS



      92.   TENANT RELOCATION ASSISTANCE



      93.   NOISE



      94.   NUISANCES



      95.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      97.   TREES AND SHRUBS



      98.   ABATEMENT OF COMBUSTIBLE AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS



      99.   FILING CLAIMS FOR CITY TAX REFUNDS



      100.   SHOPPING CARTS



      101.   PERMITS AUTHORIZING EVENTS CONDUCTED IN CITY PARKS AND
PARK FACILITIES



      102.   UNRULY GATHERINGS



      103.   [RESERVED]



      104.   [RESERVED]



      105.   ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS



      106.   WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Findings



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Nonapplicability



   90.04   Regulations not exclusive



   90.05   Chief of Police to enforce provisions



   90.06   Authorization of contractor to remove vehicle



   90.07   Administrative costs



   90.08   Abatement and removal



   90.09   Form of notice to owner of land and owner of vehicle to
abate and remove



   90.10   Public hearing



   90.11   Appeals



   90.12   Removal of vehicle



   90.13   Notification of Department of Motor Vehicles



   90.14   Administrative and removal costs; assessment against property



   90.15   Violation



§ 90.01  FINDINGS.



   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state under Cal. Veh. Code § 22660 to remove
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as
public nuisances, the City Council makes the following findings and
declara-tions:  the accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public
property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to
reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to
invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive
nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a
harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety
and general welfare.  Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public
property, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to
constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.36.010)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HIGHWAY.  A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.  HIGHWAY
includes street.



   OWNER OF THE LAND.  The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or
parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.



   OWNER OF THE VEHICLE.  The last registered owner and legal owner of
record.



   VEHICLE.  A device by which any person or property may be propelled,
moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



('81 Code, § 10.36.020)



§ 90.03  NONAPPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely
enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from
the street or other public or private property;



      (2)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked
in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer or when such
storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted
business or commercial enterprise;



      (3)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is located behind a
solid fence six feet in height or which is not visible from a highway.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a
public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Cal.
Veh. Code §§ 22650 et seq. and this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.36.030)



§ 90.04  REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   (A)   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city.



   (B)   It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory
codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city,
the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdic-tion.



('81 Code, § 10.36.040)



§ 90.05  CHIEF OF POLICE TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions
of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his
deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or
parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to
remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a
nuisance pursuant to this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.36.050)



§ 90.06  AUTHORIZATION OF CONTRACTOR TO REMOVE VEHICLE.



   When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any
person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or
public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.36.060)



§ 90.07  ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.



   The City Council shall, from time to time, determine and fix an amount
to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal
of any vehicle or parts thereof under this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.36.070)



§ 90.08  ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL.



   Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property
within the city, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to cause the
abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in
this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.36.080)



§ 90.09  FORM OF NOTICE TO OWNER OF LAND AND OWNER OF VEHICLE TO ABATE AND
REMOVE.



   (A)   A 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle,
or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by certified mail to
the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is
in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine
ownership.



   (B)   The notices of intention shall be substantially the following
form:



   NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND



   REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED,



   DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE



   OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC



   NUISANCE



   (Name and address of owner of the land)



   As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land
located at                               you are hereby
notified that the undersigned pursuant to the Ordinance Code of the City of
Santa Paula has determined that there exists upon said land (an) (parts of
an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to    
                , license number               , which
constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of said code.



   You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said
(vehicle) (parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of
this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and
removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative
costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said (vehicle) (parts of
a vehicle) is located.



   As owner of the land on which said (vehicle) (parts of a vehicle) is
located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a
request is not received by the City within such 10-day period, the Chief of
Police shall abate and remove said (vehicle) (parts of a vehicle) as a public
nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing.  You
may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying
responsibility for the presence of said (vehicle) (parts of a vehicle) on
said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be
construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. 
You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the
vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement in time
for consideration at such hearing.



   Notice Mailed             s/                    



                (date)     Chief of Police



   NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND



   REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED,



   DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE



   OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC



   NUISANCE



   (Name and address of last registered and/or legal



   owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given



   to both if different)



   As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of
vehicle—make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the
undersigned pursuant to the Santa Paula Ordinance Code has determined that
said (vehicle) (parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private
property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of
(ordinance or municipal code chapter number).



   You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said
vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing
of this notice.



   As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said
parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days
after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and
if such a request is not received by the city within such 10-day period, the
Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said (vehicle)
(parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.



   Notice Mailed          



                (date)



   s/                              



   (locally designated officer)



('81 Code, § 10.36.090)  (Ord. 783, passed  - -82)



§ 90.10  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the
land received by the city within 10 days after the mailing of the notices of
intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Chief of
Police or other police officer designated by the Chief of Police, hereinafter
referred to as hearing officer, on the question of abatement and removal of
the vehicle or parts thereof as abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of
removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is
located.



      (2)   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written
statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land
within such 10-day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for
a hearing which does not require his presence.  Notice of the hearing shall
be mailed, by certified mail, at least 10 days before the hearing to the
owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in
such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine
ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within such 10 days
after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall
have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a
public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 



('81 Code, § 10.36.100)  (Ord. 783, passed  - -82)



   (B)   Procedures.



      (1)   (a)   All hearings under this chapter shall be held
before the hearing officer who shall hear all relevant facts and testimony. 
Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the
vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the
private property or public property.



         (b)   The hearing officer shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence.



         (c)   The owner of the land may appear in person at the
hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the
hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land,
with his reasons for such denial.



      (2)   (a)   The hearing officer may impose such conditions
and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to
carry out the purpose of this chapter.



         (b)   He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle
or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it.



         (c)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the
hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order
the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as
provided in this chapter and determine the administra-tive costs and the cost
of removal to be charged against the owner of the land.



         (d)   The order requiring removal shall include a
description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification
number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.



      (3)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was
placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he
has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall
not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the
property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect
such costs from such owner of the land.



      (4)   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written
statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land
but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation
to the hearing officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing
of the decision.



('81 Code, § 10.36.110)



§ 90.11  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing
officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the hearing officer within
five days after his decision.



   (B)   Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may
affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place
of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in § 90.09.



   (D)   In conducting the hearing the City Council shall not be
limited by the technical rules of evidence.



('81 Code, § 10.36.120)



§ 90.12  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or
parts thereof to be a public nuisance, or five days from the date of mailing
of notice of the decision if such notice is required by § 90.10(B) or 15
days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following
appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a
scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard.



   (B)   After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be
reconstructed or made operable.



('81 Code, § 10.36.130)



§ 90.13  NOTIFICATION OF DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Within five days after the date or removal of the vehicle or
parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles
identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed.



   (B)   At the same time there shall be transmitted to registration
certificates, certificates of title and license plates.



('81 Code, § 10.36.140)



§ 90.14  ADMINISTRATIVE AND REMOVAL COSTS; ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY.



   (A)   If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are
charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to § 90.10(B) are not
paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an
appeals therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 and shall be transmitted to the Tax
Collector for collection.



   (B)   Such assessment shall have the same priority as other city
taxes.



('81 Code, § 10.36.150)



§ 90.15  VIOLATION.



   It is unlawful and an infraction to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.



('81 Code, § 10.36.160)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



   91.01   Purpose



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Animals permitted



   91.04   Animals prohibited



   91.05   Animals at large



   91.06   Animal care



   91.07   Public nuisance



   91.08   Trespassing animal or fowl



   91.09   Permits required



   91.10   Application for permit



   91.11   Criteria for approval



   91.12   Expiration of permits



   91.13   Dog licensing requirements



   91.14   Appeal decision of animal services coordinator; fee



   91.15   Police Chief hearing; notice; decision



   91.16   Grounds for revocation



   91.17   License tags



   91.18   Applications



   91.19   Suspension or revocation of dog license



   91.20   Dogs running at large prohibited



   91.21   Dog defecation; removal



   91.22   Rabies control



   91.23   Dog park; rules



   91.24   Interfering with animal services coordinator prohibited



   91.25   Animal services coordinator; duties; impoundment fees



   91.26   Vaccination fee; redemption of stray dogs and cats



   91.27   Impounding dogs



   91.28   Impoundment of dog without tag



   91.29   Dangerous dogs; impoundment; hearing



   91.30   Release from impoundment



   91.31   Rabies suspect; impoundment procedure



§ 91.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers, and
applicable provisions of the California Code, for the purpose of protecting
public health and safety; the health and safety of animals kept within the
city's jurisdiction; and ensuring that the requirements of this Title 9 are
enforced.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions, in addition to those set forth in this chapter govern
the construction of the words and phrases used in this title:



   ANIMAL SERVICES COORDINATOR means that individual designated by the
police chief who is responsible for all duties relating to operation of an
animal pound, including, without limitation, capturing, holding and releasing
animals violating any provision of this code.



   AT LARGE means whenever an animal or dog is elsewhere than on the
premises of the owner or other person having the custody or control of such
animal or dog and is not restrained by a leash or chain six feet or less in
fixed length under the control of a person capable of controlling such animal
or dog.



   DOG means both male and female dogs.



   KENNEL means a place where six or more adult dogs or cats or any
combination thereof, are kept, whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by
persons providing activities and care, whether or not for compensation. An
adult dog or cat is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached
the age of four months.



   OWN includes the terms keep, maintain, control, harbor, or possess.



   OWNER means any natural or artificial person who owns an animal for
more than 15 days.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG means any of the following:



      (1)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two  separate
occasions within the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior that
requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the
person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog.



      (2)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a
less severe injury than as defined in Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 31604.



      (3)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate
occasions within the prior 36-month period, has killed, seriously bitten,
inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off
the property of the owner or keeper of the dog.



   VICIOUS DOG means any of the following:



      (1)   Any dog seized under Cal. Penal Code § 599aa and upon
the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under Cal. Penal Code
§ 597.5(a).



      (2)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner,
inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being.



      (3)   Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed
as a potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been
notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in the
definition of "potentially dangerous dog" in this section, or is maintained
in violation of Cal. Food & Agric. Code §§ 31641, 31642, or 31643.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.03  ANIMALS PERMITTED.



   It is lawful for a person to own the following animals within the city:



   (A)   Canaries, pigeons, doves or birds of the psittacine family
kept as household pets or as a hobby only, not exceeding ten in number, when
kept in facilities that are humane and adequate as to noise, sanitation and
security;



   (B)   Fish and turtles kept as household pets or as a hobby only;



   (C)   Hamsters, white rats or guinea pigs as household pets or as a
hobby only, not exceeding ten in number and the young thereof not exceeding
three months in age;



   (D)   Hen chickens, kept as household pets or as a hobby, not to
exceed five in number when kept in facilities that are humane and adequate as
to noise, sanitation and security;



   (E)   Rabbits as household pets or as a hobby only, not exceeding
four in number and the young thereof not exceeding four months in age; and



   (F)   In any residential dwelling, dogs and cats not to exceed three
in number for each residential living unit in any combination thereof and the
young thereof not exceeding four months in age.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.04  ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any
person to keep, maintain, possess, or control any poisonous or venomous snake
or any wild, carnivorous animal.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.05  ANIMALS AT LARGE.



   It is unlawful for any owner to allow their animal to be at large.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.06  ANIMAL CARE.



   Every owner within the city or any person, who owns, conducts, manages
or operates any kennel or animal breeding operation for which a permit is
required by this title, must comply with each of the following conditions:



   (A)   Housing facilities for animals must be structurally sound and
must be maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from injury, to
contain the animals, and to restrict the entrance of other animals.



   (B)   All animals must be supplied with sufficient good and
wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective
animals require.



   (C)   All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures must be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (D)   All animals must be maintained as to eliminate excessive and
nighttime noise.



   (E)   No animals must be without attention more than 12 consecutive
hours. Whenever an animal is left unattended at a kennel, the telephone
number of the police department, or the name, address and telephone number of
the responsible person, must be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of
the property.



   (F)   Every reasonable precaution must be used to ensure that
animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any
manner made to suffer by any person or means.



   (G)   No condition must be maintained or permitted that is or could
be injurious to the animals.



   (H)   Animal buildings and enclosures must be constructed and
maintained to prevent the escape of animals. All reasonable precautions must
be taken to protect the public from the animals and the animals from the
public.



   (I)   Every animal establishment must isolate sick animals
sufficiently to not endanger the health of other animals. Sick animals must
be isolated from the other animals at all times.



   (J)   Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained
must be constructed of material easily cleaned and must be kept in a sanitary
condition. The building must be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to
remove odors. Heating and cooling must be provided as required, according to
the physical needs of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation
of animals and sanitation.



   (K)   Such persons must take any animal to a veterinarian for
examination or treatment, if the director finds it is necessary to maintain
the health of the animal.



   (L)   All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs must be of
sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations for the animals
kept therein.



   (M)   Every violation of an applicable regulation must be corrected
within a reasonable time to be specified by the police chief.



   (N)   Such persons must provide proper shelter and protection from
the weather at all times.



   (O)   Such persons cannot give an animal any alcoholic beverage,
unless prescribed by a veterinarian.



   (P)   Such persons cannot allow animals that are natural enemies,
temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible, to be quartered
together, or near each other to cause injury, fear or torment. If two or more
animals are trained that they can be placed together and do not attack each
other or perform or attempt any hostile act to others, such animals will be
deemed not to be natural enemies.



   (Q)   Such persons cannot allow the use of any tack, equipment,
device, substance or material that is, or could be, injurious or cause
unnecessary cruelty to any animal.



   (R)   Such persons cannot allow any animal to cause a hazard, or be
a menace to the health, peace or safety of the community.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.07  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Any animal which molests passersby or passing vehicles, attacks other
animals, trespasses on school grounds, is repeatedly at large, damages or
trespasses on private or public property, barks, whines or howls in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, is a public nuisance.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.08  TRESPASSING ANIMAL OR FOWL.



   Any animal found trespassing upon private property may be captured by
the party owning, controlling or having possession of the ground or premises,
or by the agent or representative of the person, and committed to the Animal
Services Coordinator to be dealt with as provided in this chapter. Any person
taking up the stray animal or fowl found running at large or trespassing upon
any property, ground or premises owned, controlled or in possession of the
person must promptly notify the Animal Services Coordinator of such capture
and it is unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to surrender the
animal to the Animal Services Coordinator upon demand.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.09  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Compliance; permit. It is unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain, or have in possession or under control in the city any animal
except as permitted by this chapter.



   (B)   Permit for keeping animals. The Animal Services Coordinator
may issue a permit to persons wishing to keep types of animals not identified
in this chapter or a greater number of animals than allowed by this chapter.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.10  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   An application for a permit must be initiated by filing a verified
application on a form furnished by the Animal Services Coordinator. At a
minimum, the application must include the following information:



   (A)   The applicant's name, address, and telephone number;



   (B)   The type and number of animals for which a permit is requested;



   (C)   The type and number of other animals kept on the premises;



   (D)   The type and location of caging, if applicable; and



   (E)   Other information reasonably required by the Animal Services
Coordinator. The Animal Services Coordinator will investigate the permit
application as appropriate.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.11  CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL.



   The Animal Services Coordinator will issue or renew the permit if:



   (A)   Issuing a permit will not adversely affect the public peace,
health or safety;



   (B)   Keeping of the animal will not violate any applicable laws; and



   (C)   The facilities for keeping such animals are humane and
adequate under the circumstances as to noise, security and sanitation.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.12  EXPIRATION OF PERMITS.



   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter expire one year from the
date of issue.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10; Am. Ord. 1241, passed 1-17-12)



§ 91.13  DOG LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   License required; exceptions.



      (1)   Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for
any person to own any dog without obtaining an annual city license.



      (2)   It is not necessary to purchase a license or to pay a
license fee for any dog under the age of four months.



      (3)   The license fee does not apply to any dogs kept or
maintained exclusively in any dog kennel in the city.



      (4)   Any dog brought into the city which is duly licensed by
Ventura County is exempt from being licensed by the city until the county
license expires.



   (B)   Annual license fees. The annual license fee for keeping and
maintaining an unaltered dog or for a spayed or neutered dog (if a
certificate is presented from a licensed veterinarian verifying that the dog
has been spayed or neutered) will be set from time to time by Ventura County
Animal Services. As per state code, a rabies certificate for the licensed dog
must be in effect at the time of licensing and be valid for the entire
12-month period of the annual license.



   (C)   Seeing eye or guide dogs. Seeing eye or guide dogs are those
dogs that have been especially trained to lead and aid the blind or deaf. Any
blind or deaf person having custody of such a dog may keep and harbor the dog
within the city by obtaining a license to keep the dog as provided herein,
and may lawfully take the dog into any food establishment within the city.
There will be no fee charged for such dogs upon proof of anti-rabies
vaccination.



   (D)   Date payable; proration; penalty.



      (1)   License fees required to be paid by this chapter are
payable at the time a license is initially issued or upon renewal.



      (2)   Any license fee due pursuant to this chapter remaining
unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days will be charged a penalty of fifty
percent (50%) of the license fee. That penalty will be collected by the
police chief or designee at the time of the collection of the license fee,
and is in addition to the principal sum. In determining whether or not a
penalty accrued under the provisions of this chapter, the police chief or
designee may require an affidavit from any person claiming exemption from the
payment of any penalty, which affidavit will set forth the facts upon which
the claim for the exemption is based.



   (E)   Failure to pay license fee. Whenever any person owning,
harboring or having the care or custody of any dog fails to pay the license
fee provided and specified in this chapter for the dog, the director may
cause the dog to be seized and kept in the public pound for the period and in
the manner and upon the terms, conditions and requirements as specified in
this chapter.



   (F)   Exception. Animals, other than dogs, are not required to be
licensed pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10; Am. Ord. 1241, passed 1-17-12)



§ 91.14  APPEAL DECISION OF ANIMAL SERVICES COORDINATOR; FEE.



   Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Animal Services
Coordinator may file an appeal of such decision with the police chief by
filing a written notice of appeal in letter form accompanied by a filing fee
in an amount set by resolution of the city council, said fee to cover the
cost of posting, postage, advertising and other costs incident to the
proceedings. Said notice of appeal must be filed within ten days after the
Animal Services Coordinator renders a decision. Failure to appeal a decision
within this time period waives a person's appeal rights.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.15  POLICE CHIEF HEARING; NOTICE; DECISION.



   (A)   Hearing notice. When an appeal is filed, the police chief will
give notice of a public hearing by mailing a letter notice, first-class mail
with postage prepaid, to the applicant and to the owners of property abutting
the boundary of the property that is the subject of the application for an
animal permit, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such
owners as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll of the county. Such
notice will contain the address, a general explanation of the matter to be
considered, and the time and place at which the public hearing on the matter
will be held.



   (B)   Determination by Police Chief. The Police Chief or his or her
designee as hearing officer will hear evidence regarding the request for an
appeal of the decision of the Animal Services Coordinator and take the matter
under advisement.



   (C)   Notice of determination. Not later than 15 days following the
determination of the Police Chief that an appeal be granted or denied, a copy
of the determination will be mailed to the applicant and to any other person
requesting notice of the action.



   (D)   Decision final. Any action by the Police Chief on appeal will
be a final decision. There is no right of city council appeal.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.16  GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.



   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Animal Services Coordinator, if the Animal Services
Coordinator finds:



   (A)   That the permit, or a prior permit of which the permit is an
extension was obtained by fraud; or



   (B)   That the permittee violated the law in keeping such animal; or



   (C)   That the animal or animals endanger the public peace, health
or safety.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.17  LICENSE TAGS.



   (A)   Contents. Each year the city will procure a sufficient number
of suitable metallic license tags to meet the requirements of this chapter,
numbered from one upward consecutively, on which tags will be stamped the
date of their expiration and the license number, and will issue the same to
the director in consecutive order as may be required.



   (B)   Duplicate. The City Council will by resolution establish a fee
for issuing a license and metallic tag to replace a lost license or tag.



   (C)   Affixing to dog collar. The owner of any dog upon which the
license fee has been paid will securely fasten the metallic license tag upon
a suitable collar and securely fasten the collar with the tag attached
thereto upon the dog. A dog harness or other device may be substituted in
lieu of the collar, if so desired.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.18  APPLICATIONS.



   The city will print a sufficient number of applications to meet the
requirements of this chapter. The applications will provide for the
description of the dog for which the license fee is paid, the number of the
metallic license tag which has been issued for the dog and also the name and
address of the owner of the dog. The receipts will also designate the rabies
vaccination date and tag number and the sex of the dog for which the license
fee has been paid.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.19  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DOG LICENSE.



   The police chief may suspend or revoke any dog license issued under the
provisions of this chapter, if at any time the Police Chief finds that any
dog described or referred to in any dog license, or for which any dog license
has or may be issued under this chapter is vicious, dangerous or likely to
bite or injure any person.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.20  DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person owning or having charge,
custody, possession or control of any dog to cause, permit or allow the dog
to run at large in or upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court or other
public place, or in or upon any private property or premises, other than
those of the person owning or having charge, custody, possession or control
of the dog within the city, unless the dog is restrained by a leash or chain
six feet or less in fixed length and is in charge, custody, possession or
control of a competent person.



   (B)   This provision will not apply to public areas of the city
officially designated as a "dog park" or to police service dogs while such
dogs are under the control of a peace officer.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.21  DOG DEFECATION; REMOVAL.



   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any
dog to suffer, permit or allow such dog to defecate on any public or private
property in the city without the consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession of the property.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any
dog that defecates on any public or private property in the city without
consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the property or on any
public property in the city to fail to immediately remove the feces and
dispose of the feces in a sanitary manner, by placing it in a closed or
sealed container and thereafter fail to deposit the feces in a trash
receptacle.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.22  RABIES CONTROL.



   (A)   Vaccination required; exception. Every dog in the city over
the age of four months must be vaccinated against rabies.



   (B)   Revaccination. Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog
in the city that has been vaccinated with chick embryo vaccine must cause the
dog to be revaccinated within a period of not more than two years after the
prior vaccination.



   (C)   Tissue phenolized vaccine. Every person keeping, harboring or
having a dog in the city which has been vaccinated with tissue phenolized
vaccine must cause the dog to be revaccinated with rabies vaccine within a
period of not more than one year after the prior vaccination.



   (D)   Vaccination certificate issuance. Every person practicing
veterinary medicine in the city who vaccinates a dog with rabies vaccine will
issue to the person keeping, harboring or having the dog a certificate, which
is signed by the veterinarian and which states thereon the name and
description of the dog, the date of the vaccination and the type of vaccine
used.



   (E)   Certificate and tag; exhibition. Every person applying for a
dog license will exhibit a certificate and rabies vaccination tag issued by a
person licensed by the state or any other state or nation to practice
veterinary medicine, which certificate must show that the dog for which the
license will be issued either:



      (1)    Was vaccinated in accordance with this chapter; or



      (2)   Should not be vaccinated with rabies vaccine by reason
of age, infirmity or other disability, which disability is shown on the face
of the certificate and to the satisfaction of the person issuing the license
to be in effect at the time.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.23  DOG PARK; RULES.



   The City Council may, by resolution, create or designate particular
areas within the city as dog parks. Persons have custody of dogs at dog parks
will comply with the following:



   (A)   Owner present. Dogs will not be present at a dog park without
an owner or custodian.



   (B)   Hours. The dog park will be open from dawn to dusk, seven days
a week.



   (C)   Aggressive dogs. Aggressive dogs are not permitted in the dog
park.



   (D)   Food. Food is not permitted in the park; dogs are not fed in
the park.



   (E)   Clean up and supervision. Owners must supervise and clean up
after dogs.



   (F)   Children. Children under 12 years of age must be supervised by
an adult.



   (G)   Age and vaccination. Dogs must be at least four months old and
vaccinated to be permitted in the dog park.



   (H)   Dogs in heat. Dogs in heat are not permitted in the dog park.



   (I)   Spiked dog collars. Spiked dog collars are not permitted in
the dog park.



   (J)   Bikes or similar items. No bikes, rollerblades, roller skates,
strollers or similar items are permitted in the dog park.



   (K)   Leash. Owners must have a leash available at all times.



   (L)   Parking. Parking regulations must be followed at all times.



   (M)   Liability. Dog owners are liable for any injuries or damage
caused by their dog(s).



   (N)   License. All dogs must be currently licensed.



   (O)   Trainers. Professional dog trainers are not permitted to
conduct training at the dog park.



   (P)   Maximum number of dogs. No person may bring more than three
dogs to the park at one time.



   (Q)   Prohibited behavior. The following behaviors must be stopped
immediately:



      (1)   Prolonged growling;



      (2)   Mounting or pinning of other dogs.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.24  INTERFERING WITH ANIMAL SERVICES COORDINATOR PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for a person to interfere with, oppose or resist the
Animal Services Coordinator or any employee of the city, while such person is
engaged in the performance of any act authorized by this title.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.25  ANIMAL SERVICES COORDINATOR; DUTIES; IMPOUNDMENT FEES.



   (A)   Animal Services Coordinator. The Animal Services Coordinator
must keep a full, true and correct record of all animals impounded, the date
of the impoundment, and the date of release, discharge or disposal. This
documentation must be available for public inspection. The police chief may
promulgate appropriate regulations for public viewing of impounded animals.



   (B)   Care of animals and fowl. The Animal Services Coordinator must
provide the necessary subsistence and must properly care for all impounded
animals.



   (C)   Payment of fees. The Animal Services Coordinator will collect
a fee from the owners of impounded animals set by City Council resolution.
When any redemption is made under this chapter, in addition to paying any
impounding and maintenance fee or costs incurred by reason of impounding any
animal impounded under this chapter, there must also be paid the amount of
any license fee, which must be due or payable on such animal under this title
or any other section of this code or ordinance of the city, in case a current
license for the animal is not in existence at the time.



   (D)   Damage payment. When any redemption is made under this
chapter, in addition to paying any impounding fee or costs incurred by reason
of impounding any animal or fowl, there must also be paid reasonable demands
for actual damage done by any animal or fowl running at large. The damages
required to be paid by this subsection must be paid to the person whose
property was damaged.



   (E)   Right to reclaim upon payment of charges. The owner or any
person entitled to the control of any animal or fowl impounded in the public
pound has the right to reclaim the same at any time before the sale or other
actual disposal thereof, upon payment to the Animal Services Coordinator of
the costs and charges provided for in this chapter.



   (F)   Disposal, public property.  The Animal Services Coordinator
will remove and dispose of all dead animals found in or upon any of the
public highways, streets, avenues, ways, lanes, alleys, parks, squares,
sidewalks or other public places within the city.



   (G)   Disposal, private property. The Animal Services Coordinator
will remove and dispose of any abandoned dead animal found on private
property in accordance with the nuisance abatement proceedings of this code.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.26  VACCINATION FEE; REDEMPTION OF STRAY DOGS AND CATS.



   The Animal Services Coordinator will collect a fee from persons
redeeming impounded dogs and cats for administering distemper vaccinations to
stray dogs  and for vaccinating stray cats for feline diseases. This
vaccination fee will be set by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.27  IMPOUNDING DOGS.



   At any time within three days from the date of impoundment, the owner
or persons entitled to the possession of the dog may reclaim the dog upon
payment to the Animal Services Coordinator of the impounding fee;



   (A)   For the second impoundment of a dog, owned by the same person,
the pound fee will be an amount that is double the standard impoundment fee;



   (B)   For the third impoundment of a dog, owned by the same person,
the pound fee will be an amount triple the standard impoundment fee;



   (C)   In addition to the foregoing impounding fee, the daily
maintenance fee will be paid for each day or portion thereof for which the
dog was impounded.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.28  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOG WITHOUT TAG.



   (A)   The Animal Services Coordinator will capture and impound any
dog found within the city limits that is not wearing a valid license tag and
rabies tag conforming to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Animal Services Coordinator may enter private property in
accordance with applicable law to examine or capture any dog suspected of
being in violation of the provisions of this code or is suspected of being
rabid or infected with rabies.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.29  DANGEROUS DOGS; IMPOUNDMENT; HEARING.



   (A)   Filing of opinion; impoundment. Whenever any dog is, in the
written opinion of the police chief or his/her designee, vicious, dangerous,
potentially dangerous or likely to bite or injure any person, and is kept in
such manner as to constitute an apparent menace to any person, the dog must
be immediately impounded by the Animal Services Coordinator.



   (B)   Notice of impoundment. The Animal Services Coordinator must
provide written notice to the owner/custodian of the specific behavior of the
animal alleged in the petition and the date upon which, a hearing will be
held to consider the petition. The hearing must be held within the time
limits set forth by the Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 31621.



      (1)   The notice must advise the owner/custodian of the
consequences of a finding of potentially dangerous or vicious. Where the
owner/custodian's address of any animal is unknown, notice of the hearing
must be given by posting the same in the Police Department and by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice must then be deemed given on
publication of notice.



   (C)   Hearing; procedures. A hearing on whether a dog is declared
potentially dangerous or vicious must be conducted in the following manner:



      (1)   If the Police Chief or hisor her designee has
investigated and determined that probable cause exists to believe that a dog
is potentially dangerous or vicious, a hearing must be conducted. The Police
Chief or his or her designee must prepare a petition specifying the basis as
to why the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious.



      (2)   Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member
of the public which serves as the evidentiary basis for the Police Chief to
find probable cause, must be sworn to and verified by the complainant and
must be attached to the petition.



      (3)   The Police Chief or his or her designee as hearing
officer must conduct a hearing on whether a dog must be declared potentially
dangerous or vicious.



      (4)   The hearing must be open to the public and the hearing
officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, and exercise the full
scope of authority set forth in Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 31621.



      (5)   A hearing may be continued if the hearing officer deems
it necessary and proper or upon a showing of good cause.



      (6)   If the owner/guardian fails to appear at the hearing,
the hearing will nevertheless proceed and an appropriate order must be issued.



      (7)   The hearing officer must consider all relevant
responsible evidence without regard to the formal rules of evidence,
including circumstances of mitigation, and the record of any prior violations
by the owner/guardian.



      (8)   The hearing officer must issue a written determination
based upon a preponderance of the evidence, which must be mailed to the
owner/guardian within seven days after the hearing is completed.



      (9)   The hearing officer's decision is final. There is no
right to a city council appeal.



   (D)   Designation of animal. If an animal is found to be potentially
dangerous or vicious by a preponderance of the evidence, the animal must be
so designated on the records of the Animal Services Coordinator. Such a
designation must be considered in future determinations involving the animal
and/or owner/custodian.



   (E)   Micro-chipping before release. If at the conclusion of the
hearing the Police Chief determines that the dog will be released, the dog
must have a micro-chip imbedded subcutaneously in accordance with industry
standards before being released to the owner. The micro chipping will be at
the owner's expense.



   (F)   Surrender of dangerous dog. Any dog declared after a hearing
to be dangerous, if not already impounded by the Police Department, must be
immediately surrendered to the Police Department.



   (G)   Waiver. The owner of a dog for which a potentially dangerous
petition has been issued may irrevocably waive rights to a hearing and any
further appeal under Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 31622 and accept all
conditions, sanctions and penalties set forth in Cal. Food & Agric. Code §§
31641, 31642 and 61643. The police chief or his/her designee will mail a
waiver form to the dog owner/custodian. The waiver must be signed by the dog
owner/custodian and received by the police chief within 30 days from the date
of agreement to waive or a hearing will be scheduled within 30 days of the
agreement to waive.



   (H)   Additional fees.



      (1)   In accordance with Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 31641, the
owner/custodian of a potentially dangerous dog must in addition to the
regular licensing fee, pay to the city an annual fee as may be established by
city council resolution for the increased costs of maintaining the records of
the dog.



      (2)   The owner/custodian of a dog determined to be vicious
must, in addition to the regular licensing fee, pay to the city an annual fee
as may be established by separate city council resolution to provide for the
increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog.



   (I)   Registration of animal. The owner/custodian of a vicious dog
must, within ten days of such determination, upon request by the city must
present said animal to the Animal Services Coordinator and allow photographs
and measurements of the animal to be taken for purposes of identification.



   (J)   Undesignation of animal.



      (1)   The owner/custodian of a dog found potentially
dangerous, who has no additional violations of any of the provisions of this
title, within a 36-month period from the date of designation as potentially
dangerous, must be removed from the list of potentially dangerous dogs by the
Police Chief. The dog may be, but is not required to be, removed from the
list of potentially dangerous dogs before the expiration of the 36-month
period if the owner/custodian of the dog demonstrates to the Police Chief
that changes in circumstances or measures taken by the owner/custodian, such
as training of the dog has mitigated the risk to public safety.



      (2)   The owner/custodian of a dog found vicious, who has no
additional violations of any of the provisions of this title, after a
36-month period from the date of designation as vicious, may apply to the
police chief to remove the animal from the list of vicious animals. The
Police Chief has the discretion to remove the animal from the list of vicious
animals upon proof of the successful completion of at least eight weeks of
formal obedience training, other similar evidence of training, or other
rehabilitative efforts designed to mitigate the risk to public safety.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.30  RELEASE FROM IMPOUNDMENT.



   No impounded dog will be released to any person except where following
occurs:



   (A)   A current license and rabies tag is presented for the dog.



   (B)   Proof that a license fee was paid to the city pursuant to this
title.



   (C)   Impound, collection, and other fees related to the impoundment
required by this title are paid to the city.



   (D)   Proof is given that the dog is vaccinated for rabies, if
required, or a fee is paid for vaccination.



   (E)   The Animal Services Coordinator determines that the dog does
not have and is not reasonably suspected of having rabies.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



§ 91.31  RABIES SUSPECT; IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE.



   If the Animal Services Coordinator suspects that an impounded dog has
rabies, the dog will be inspected by a county health officer. Should the dog
be found to have rabies, it will be disposed of or confined for such time as
the Health Officer directs. In the event that the health officer suspects
that the dog may develop rabies, it will be confined for such time as the
health officer directs. Whenever the Health Officer determines that the dog
does not have rabies, it will be released in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. 1224, passed 2-16-10)



CHAPTER 92:  TENANT RELOCATION ASSISTANCE



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Displacement



   92.03   Owner relocation obligations



   92.04   Exemptions



   92.05   Notice to tenants



   92.06   Emergency relocation assistance



   92.07   Temporary relocation assistance



   92.08   Long-term or permanent relocation assistance



   92.09   Additional relocation obligations



   92.10   Right to reoccupy



   92.11   Rent maintenance



   92.12   Private right of action



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. The issuance and receipt by owner or owner's agent
of a notice of summary abatement, notice and order, compliance order, notice
of non-occupancy, notice of demolition, notice of administrative hearing or,
the filing of a civil complaint or criminal citation or complaint as a
consequence of the existence of substandard or other conditions in violation
of the Uniform Codes as set forth in Chapter 150 of this Code.



   OWNER.  any person who holds legal title, in whole or in part, to a
unit subject to this part.



   TENANT.  In the singular or in the plural refers to a person or
persons who rent, or are otherwise in lawful tenancy of a unit under the
terms of tenancy or with the knowledge or consent of the owner or the owner's
agent.



   UNIT.  Any dwelling or room which is the permanent or customary and
usual residence from which a tenant is displaced.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.02  DISPLACEMENT.



   A tenant is displaced for purposes of this subchapter if a unit must be
vacated:



   (A)   Following an enforcement action and either:



      (1)   The owner or owner's agent requests the vacation because
the unit is being rehabilitated to bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this Code following the initiation of an enforcement action; or



      (2)   The unit is being rehabilitated to bring it into
compliance with the provisions of this Code because substandard conditions
interfere with the habitability of the unit and the city determines that the
substandard condition affects the health and safety of the tenant; or



   (B)   The unit or the building which contains the unit has been
ordered vacated either by the city pursuant to §§ 10.080 through 10.098 or
Chapter 150 of this Code or by a court order due to the substandard condition
of the unit.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.03  OWNER RELOCATION OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   When tenants are displaced, the owner of the unit shall
provide relocation assistance to the tenants as specified in this subchapter.



   (B)   Any payments required under this part shall be made by the
owner directly to the tenants.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   An owner shall not be required to provide relocation assistance under
this subchapter if any of the following conditions are demonstrated:



   (A)   A tenant or a guest or invitee of the tenants caused or
substantially contributed to the substandard conditions cited in the notice
of violation; or



   (B)   The tenants are displaced as a direct result of a natural
disaster, as such term is defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 8680.3; and:



      (1)   The city determines that the actions or omissions of the
owner or owner's agent did not contribute to the disaster's impact on the
unit;



      (2)   The tenants were not already entitled to relocation
assistance under the provisions of this subchapter at the time of the
disaster;



   (C)   The tenants are displaced as a result of a lawful eviction
initiated prior to the notice of violation;



   (D)   The owner shall have the burden of proving that any exemption
in this section is applicable.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.05  NOTICE TO TENANTS.



   (A)   A summary of an owner's obligation and a tenant's right under
this subchapter shall be attached to or included in any order to immediately
vacate any unit, or with any notice of violation and may be included with an
enforcement action issued by the city.



   (B)   The owner shall deliver the summary of the owner's obligation
and a tenant's rights under this part to tenants of all units subject to the
enforcement action by personal delivery, or registered or certified mail
within 24 hours of the receipt by owner, or owner's agent of:



      (1)   The enforcement action; or



      (2)   The city or court order to vacate a unit.



   (C)   In addition to the notices provided for in divisions (A) and
(B) above, the city may post a copy of the summary of tenants' rights in a
visible location on the building, property or unit subject to the notice of
violation or city order to immediately vacate.



   (D)   Any notice required by this part to be delivered to tenants
shall contain the following notice in English and Spanish in type of at least
ten-point:



   “This Notice is Important. You May be Entitled to Relocation
Assistance. Please Have It Translated. For more information, please call the
City of Santa Paula.”



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.06  EMERGENCY RELOCATION ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   Where an owner is required by a city or a court order to
vacate a unit immediately, or where vacation is required to enable compliance
with an enforcement action from the city with less than 10 days notice
because of imminent potential harm to the health and safety of tenants, the
owner shall provide to the tenants the relocation assistance required by this
section until such time as the tenants are able to reoccupy the unit or until
the benefits set forth in this section or §§ 92.07 and 92.08 are provided.



   (B)   The owner, at the owner's expense, shall provide the following
relocation assistance and benefits under this section:



      (1)   Alternative safe and legal temporary housing for the
tenants at no additional rent or cost to the tenants than previously paid by
the tenants, or the advance payment of the fair market rent as estab-lished
by the most recent current U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
schedule for fair market rents, for a unit of comparable size in the same
general area as the unit and other related costs for alternative safe and
legal temporary housing for the tenants.



      (2)   Any additional necessary employment, education and
transportation costs to the tenants arising as a result of the displacement.
“Education costs” shall include any unrecoverable or additional tuition
expense, books and materials costs and fees.



      (3)   If the alternative housing required in this section does
not contain furnishings, furnishings appropriate for the tenants in the
alternative housing required in this section.



      (4)   Reasonable security for all of the tenants' furnishings
and other personal property remaining in the unit until the tenants reoccupy
the unit.



   (C)   To the extent feasible, the owner shall provide any
alternative housing required under this section in a location in the vicinity
of the unit.



   (D)   To the extent feasible, the relocation assistance required
under this section shall be provided by the owner by the time of the
displacement of the tenants.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.07  TEMPORARY RELOCATION  ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   If tenants are displaced on a non-emergency basis because of
repair or rehabilitation of a unit and the tenants are expected to be able to
reoccupy the unit within 60 days from the date of displacement, the owner
shall provide to the tenants the relocation assistance required by this
section until such time as the tenants are able to reoccupy the unit or until
the benefits set forth in § 92.08 are provided.



   (B)   The owner, at the owner's expense, shall provide the following
relocation assistance and benefits under this section:



      (1)   Alternative safe and legal temporary housing for the
tenants at no additional rent or cost than previously paid by the tenants, or
shall pay the difference between the rent paid on the unit and the fair
market rent for alternative safe and legal temporary housing as established
by the most current HUD schedule for fair market rents, for a unit of
comparable size in the same general area as the unit for the tenant for the
first 30 days of displacement and related costs and the full rent costs
thereafter until such time as the owner's obligation terminates under §
92.08.



      (2)   Any additional necessary employment and education
transportation costs to the tenants arising as a result of the displacement.



      (3)   Furnishings appropriate for the tenants in the
alternative housing required in this section.



      (4)   Reasonable security for all of the tenants' furnishings
and other personal property remaining in the unit until the tenants reoccupy
the unit.



   (C)   To the extent feasible, the owner shall provide any
alternative housing required under this section in a location in the vicinity
of the unit.



   (D)   The owner shall provide advance written notice by personal
service or by certified mail of not less than 10 business days prior to any
non-emergency short-term displacement. Displacement shall not occur during
any period for which rent was due and paid.



   (E)   The relocation assistance required under this section shall be
provided by the owner prior to the displacement of the tenants.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.08  LONG-TERM OR PERMANENT  RELOCATION ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   If the owner anticipates that displacement shall continue or
if displacement actually continues for more than 60 days, the owner shall
provide to the tenants the relocation assistance required in this section.



   (B)   The owner, at the owner's expense, shall provide the following
relocation assistance and benefits under this section:



      (1)   Alternative safe and legal housing for the tenants at no
additional rent or cost than previously paid by the tenants for a period of
three months from the date of displacement or pay to the tenants a
replacement housing payment which shall be the greater of:



         (a)   An amount equal to three months' fair market rent
for an alternative housing unit, as established by the most current HUD
schedule for fair market rents for a unit of comparable size in the same
general area as the unit; or



         (b)   An amount equal to three months of the rental
amount for the unit.



      (2)   If the tenant elects not to reoccupy the unit, return to
the tenants any security deposit or cleaning fee not permitted to be retained
by the owner under applicable law within the period specified under
applicable law.



      (3)   Moving expenses of the tenants for any displacement
under this section, which shall be the lesser of three written estimates, two
of which shall be obtained by the tenant, and the other by the owner or the
owner's agent.



      (4)   Any additional necessary employment and education
transportation costs to the tenants arising as a result of the displacement
for a maximum of three months from the date of displacement.



   (C)   To the extent feasible, the owner shall provide any
alternative housing required under this section in a location in the vicinity
of the unit.



   (D)   The relocation assistance required under this section shall be
provided by the owner at least 30 days prior to the displacement of the
tenants.



   (E)   The relocation assistance required by §§ 92.06, 92.07, and
92.08 shall be cumulative.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.09  ADDITIONAL RELOCATION OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   A displaced tenant and the owner may agree to alternatives to
the relocation assistance required under this subchapter only by a separate
written agreement signed by the tenant and the owner which contains an
acknowledgment by the tenant that the tenant has received a notice of the
rights under this subchapter and that the tenant understands those rights.



   (B)   The relocation assistance required by the owner under this
subchapter shall be a separate requirement and obligation provided to
tenants, but shall not be in addition to any other assistance, refunds or
payments available under any other provision of this Code or other applicable
law.



   (C)   The relocation assistance required of the owner under this
subchapter shall not affect any rights of the owner under any other provision
of this Code or other applicable law.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.10  RIGHT TO REOCCUPY.



   (A)   To the extent that a unit can legally accommodate the
displaced tenants, the tenants shall have the right to reoccupy the unit from
which the tenants were displaced when the substandard conditions of the unit
are corrected.



   (B)   On or before the time the tenant vacates the unit, the owner
shall provide written notice by personal delivery, or registered or certified
mail, advising the tenant of the right to reoccupy the unit once the
substandard condition is corrected. The notice shall include a statement
regarding the tenant's obligation to provide the owner with the information
requested in division (C) below and the consequences of the failure to do so.



   (C)   Unless the owner has provided the alterna-tive temporary
housing, within seven days after vacating the unit the tenants shall provide
the owner with their current address to be used for future notification by
the owner. Failure to provide such information in writing to the owner shall
terminate their right to reoccupy the unit.



   (D)   As soon as possible after the unit is available for the
tenants to reoccupy the unit, the owner shall provide written notice to the
tenants by personal delivery, or registered or certified mail, advising the
tenants of the availability of the unit. The owner shall make the unit
available to the tenant for a period of 30 days following the date the
tenants receive notice of the availability of the unit. The notice shall
include the current address of the owner or owner's agent to which the
tenants must send a written statement of their desire to exercise the right
to reoccupy the unit. The notice shall include a statement regarding the
tenant's obligation to provide the owner with the information requested in
division (E) below, and the consequences of the failure to do so.



   (E)   Within seven days after receipt of the notice of the
availability of the unit; the tenants shall notify the owner in writing that
the tenants are exercising the right to reoccupy the unit. Failure to so
notify the owner shall terminate their right to reoccupy the unit.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.11  RENT MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   If tenants exercise the right to reoccupy a unit as provided
in § 92.10, the owner shall not increase the amount of rent paid by the
tenants prior to the date of their displacement for a period of 12 months
after the date the tenants reoccupy the unit.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any unit:



      (1)   That is subject to the provisions of §§ 152.01 through
152.15 of this Code; or



      (2)   For which rent is subsidized by any government agency.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



§ 92.12  PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION.



   (A)   Tenants who are displaced may bring an action against an owner
for damages, injunctive or declaratory relief or any other appropriate
action, in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (B)   Tenants who prevail in such an action shall be entitled to
recover from the owner damages, including the relocation assistance provided
for under this subchapter; costs, including reasonable attorney fees; and
such other relief as determined by the court. In addition, to all other
damages or other relief the court may award the tenants a civil penalty of up
to $1,000 for each violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   The remedies provided by this subchapter are in addition to
any other legal or equitable remedies and are not intended to be exclusive.



(Ord. 1011, passed 11-4-96)



CHAPTER 93:  NOISE



Section




   General Provisions




   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Definitions



   93.03   Administration



   93.04   Noise disturbance - Generally



   93.05   Noise disturbances - Exemptions



   93.06   Temporary noise permits




   Sound Level Limits




   93.20   Noise limitations



   93.21   Sound level limits - Established



   93.22   Sound level limits - Adjustments



   93.23   Sound level limits - Exceptions




   Second Responses




   93.35   Notice of disturbance; host signature



   93.36   Notice of disturbance; signature unavailable



   93.37   Second response; cost of special police services



   93.38   Collection of fees



Statutory reference:



   Noise Control Act, see Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 46000 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with California Constitution Art.
XI, § 7 for the purpose of regulating noise, and sources of noise, which
jeopardizes public health and welfare. These regulations are intended to
implement objective criteria for protecting the community's well-being and
tranquility. This chapter also establishes standards and controls over events
on private property which create noise, or other disturbances, and require
more than one police response in order to remove the source of noise or other
disturbance including, without limitation, dispersing event participants.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   A-WEIGHTING means a filter network designed to transform a frequency
spectrum to that which is heard by the human ear.



   AMBIENT NOISE means the composite of all noises constituting the normal
or existing level of environmental noise at a given location.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES  means the grading, demolition, alteration,
repair or remodeling of existing structures and construction of new
structures including the use of power equipment in connection with
activities. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES does not include radios or other forms of
amplified music on a construction site.



   DAYTIME  means a time period between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   DECIBEL or its symbol of measurement (dB) means a unit for measuring
the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the
ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which
is 20 micropascals.



   DELIVERY  means the delivery or pickup or the arrival for delivery or
pickup of goods, wares and merchandise by the use of a motorized vehicle,
other than an automobile or train.



   EQUIVALENT-ENERGY LEVEL (Leq)  means the level of a steady-state noise
that has the same sound energy as a given time-varying noise.



   EVENT means a party, gathering or assemblage.



   HOLIDAYS means New Years Day, Martin Luther King Day, President's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving, and
Christmas Day.



   HOST means any person conducting and/or permitting an event including,
without limitation:



      (1)   Owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the property where an event
is being given;



      (2)   Person(s) hosting an event;



      (3)   Person(s) receiving money or other consideration for
granting access to an event;



      (4)   Person(s) serving, furnishing, or making available
alcoholic beverages at an event;



      (5)   Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor who is also a
host.



   IMPULSIVE SOUND  means sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of IMPULSIVE SOUNDS
include explosions and firearm discharge.



   MOTOR VEHICLES  means any and all self- propelled vehicles as defined
in the Cal. Veh. Code.



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING  means any housing unit where two or more
dwellings are separated by a common wall, floor, or ceiling, including,
without limitation, apartments, condominiums and townhouses.



   NIGHTTIME  means the time period between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   NOISE DISTURBANCE  means any loud, raucous, annoying, or unusual
noises that offend the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities
and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property and affects
at the same time an entire neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons. A NOISE DISTURBANCE includes, without limitation, any source of
sound exceeding the sound level limitations established by this chapter.



   NOISE LEVEL  means the amplitude of sound pressure referenced to 20
micropascals, measured in decibels.



   NOISE LEVEL MEASUREMENT  means the procedure of measuring sound
consisting of the usage of a Precision Sound Level Meter (SLM) set to "fast"
response. If the Sound Level Meter is analog with a VU meter, then the
response must be "slow" unless the noise issue is impulsive. The meter must
be calibrated before any measurements and the microphone must be a minimum of
3-1/2 feet from any wall, floor or other large sound reflecting surface. The
meter must be protected from wind or other extraneous noise by the use of
screens, shields or other appropriate devices.



   POLICE OFFICER  means a sworn peace officer.



   POWERED EQUIPMENT  means a motorized device powered by electricity or
fuel used for construction, demolition and property or landscape maintenance
or repairs. POWERED EQUIPMENT includes, without limitation, lawn mowers,
saws, generators, blowers, wood chippers, drills and nail guns.



   PRECISION SOUND LEVEL METER  means a sound pressure level measuring
instrument which conforms to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
specification S1.4 for Type 1 or Type 2 measuring instruments.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means any property legally used for a single
family or multi- family dwelling.



   SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT  means any machine or equipment or device
for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound.
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT does not include automobile radios regulated by
the Cal. Veh. Code, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, horns,
or other warning devices on vehicles used for traffic safety purposes.



   SOURCES OF SOUND includes, without limitation, amplified music, radios,
televisions, musical instruments, toys or models, industrial machinery,
construction equipment, animals, human voices, electrical appliances, or
motor vehicles.



   WORK PERSONALLY DONE BY RESIDENT OR PROPERTY OWNER  means work
undertaken by the property owner/resident and that person's family or
acquaintances.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.03  ADMINISTRATION.



   The City Manager, or designee, will receive applications, issue and
revoke temporary noise permits, and otherwise implement this chapter.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.04  NOISE DISTURBANCE - GENERALLY.



   It is unlawful for any person to allow, maintain, or cause any noise
disturbance.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.05  NOISE DISTURBANCES - EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are not noise disturbances for purposes of this chapter:



   (A)   Sound generated by motor vehicles. Sound generated by motor
vehicles, trucks and buses operated on streets and highways, aircraft,
trains, and other public transport. This exemption does not apply to the
following:



      (1)   Operation of any vehicle, including any equipment
attached to any vehicle (such as attached refrigeration and/or heating units
or any attached auxiliary equipment), for a period in excess of ten minutes
in any hour while the vehicle is stationary for reasons other than traffic
congestion.



      (2)   No person must operate or drive any vehicle or cause any
vehicle to be operated or driven, or otherwise used, on any public street,
which vehicle is equipped with a sound amplifying device or other machine or
device for the production or reproduction of sound, which causes sound to
carry onto private property or causes sound to be heard by others using the
public streets or thoroughfares which exceeds the sound level limits
established by this chapter.



   (B)   Emergencies. Emergency repairs that deal with health or safety
risk and emergency generators or powered equipment used during a power outage
or other emergency.



   (C)   Emergency warning devices. Emergency warning devices such as
fire alarms, burglar alarms, warning devices on emergency vehicles and train
horns. This exemption does not apply to burglar or fire alarms or any motor
vehicle burglar alarms, except for emergency purposes, unless such alarm is
terminated within ten minutes of activation and no more than two false
activations within a four hour period.



   (D)   Public works projects. Public works projects performed by
public agencies, or their contractors, which cannot be performed from 7 a.m.
to 6 p.m. Monday through Friday.



   (E)   Special events. Any event or use allowed by a special event
permit issued pursuant to this Code that specifically allows noise levels to
be exceeded.



   (F)   Use permits. Any use allowed by a use permit issued pursuant
to this code that specifically allows sound level limits to be exceeded.



   (G)   Athletic fields, playgrounds, parks, public tennis courts,
public recreation facilities. From 7 a.m. to 10 p.m., any organized athletic
events or activities occurring on athletic fields, playgrounds, parks, tennis
courts or other public recreation facilities owned or operated by a school
district, the city, or the county, provided no amplified music or sound
system is utilized.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.06  TEMPORARY NOISE PERMITS.



   If an applicant can demonstrate that a diligent investigation of
available noise abatement techniques indicates that compliance with this
chapter would be impractical or unreasonable, the City Manager, or designee,
may issue a permit to allow an exemption from this chapter with appropriate
conditions. Any such permit must be of as short duration as possible not to
exceed three months.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



SOUND LEVEL LIMITS



§ 93.20  NOISE LIMITATIONS.



   Except as otherwise permitted in this Code, any source of sound
exceeding the sound level limits set forth in this chapter constitutes a
noise disturbance. For purposes of determining sound levels from any source
of sound, sound level measurements must be made at a point on the receiving
property nearest where the sound source at issue generates the highest sound
level. Sound level measurements must be made with a precision Sound Level
Meter (Type 1 or 2) set to A-weighting, and "fast" response for fluctuating
sound. Slow or fast response may be used for continual sources. For
repetitive, impulsive sound, the 1 second rms maximum level (Lmax) must be
used. For continuous sound, use the average level or Leq. In multi-family
residential structures, the microphone must be placed no closer than 3-1/2
feet from the wall through which the source of sound at issue is
transmitting. The microphone must also be placed 5 feet above the floor
regardless of whether the source of sound at issue transmits through the
floor, ceiling or wall.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.21  SOUND LEVEL LIMITS - ESTABLISHED.



   It is unlawful for a source of sound to exceed the following sound
level limits:



 


Land Use

 

Time Period

 

Level




Residential

 

Nighttime (10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.)

 

60 dbA




Daytime (7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.)

 

65 dbA




Neighborhood Commercial

 

Anytime

 

65 dbA




Commercial & Office

 

Anytime

 

70 dbA




Industrial

 

Anytime

 

75 dbA




Schools, Libraries, Hospitals, Community Care facility, and Assembly Halls

 

Anytime

 

65 dbA




 



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.22  SOUND LEVEL LIMITS - ADJUSTMENTS.



   Should an alleged noise disturbance contain a steady, audible tone,
such as a whine, screech, beating, pulsating, throbbing, or hum, the sound
level limits set forth in this chapter will be reduced by five dB for
purposes of determining whether a violation exists.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.23  SOUND LEVEL LIMITS - EXCEPTIONS.



   The following are not subject to the sound level limits established by
this chapter but must comply with the conditions set forth in this section:



   (A)   Construction activities. Construction activities between 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Persons responsible for such
construction activities, for example and without limitation, the general
contractor or property owner, must post notice at all entrances to the
construction site listing the noise limitations on construction set forth in
this chapter. Such notice must be titled in letters at least one inch in
height and be placed at least five feet above ground level.



   (B)   Residents/property owners personally undertaking construction
activities to maintain or improve their property on Saturdays, Sundays, or
holidays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.



   (C)   Powered equipment. Powered equipment used on a temporary,
occasional or infrequent basis operated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. No piece of equipment may generate noise in
excess of 5 dBA at 50 feet.



   (D)   Residents/property owners personally using powered equipment
to maintain their property and/or residence on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. No piece of equipment must
generate noise in excess of 85 dBA at 50 feet.



   (E)   Deliveries. Deliveries to food retailers and restaurants.



   (F)   Deliveries to other commercial and industrial businesses
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.



   (G)   Occasional social gatherings. Occasional social gatherings
between 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., provided the noise level for the
occasional social gathering measured from any adjacent residential property
does not exceed 65 dBA.



   (H)   Animals. Sounds from animals or birds unless such animal or
bird howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes other noises continuously and/or
incessantly for a period of five minutes or intermittently for one-half hour.
For the purposes of this section, the animal or bird noise is not a noise
disturbance if a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon
private property in or upon which the animal or bird is situated or if the
noise is for any other legitimate cause, such as someone teasing or provoking
the animal or bird.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



SECOND RESPONSES



§ 93.35  NOTICE OF DISTURBANCE; HOST SIGNATURE.



   (A)   When police officers respond to a noise, or other, disturbance
complaint where the noise source is an event, the police officers may, but
are not required to, issue written notice to the host stating as follows:



      (1)   If police officers are required to return to the same
event within the following 12-hour period in response to a complaint
involving a noise, or other, disturbance resulting from the event; or



      (2)   If police officers are required to return to the same
property hosting an event a total of three times or more within a six-month
period in response to a complaint involving a noise, or other, disturbance
resulting from an event involving the same host; and



      (3)   The responding police officers determine there is a
threat to public peace, health, safety or general welfare including, without
limitation, a violation of this chapter; then



      (4)   Such additional responses by police officers will
constitute special police services the cost of which must be paid by the
host. Any such costs will become the host's personal obligation and be a debt
to the city.



   (B)   Notices issued pursuant to this section must be signed by the
host which acknowledges receipt of the warning and a signed copy will be left
with the host. If a second or subsequent response is required, police
officers must have the available host sign a "second response" voucher
acknowledging the special police services and additional vouchers for any
further responses.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.36  NOTICE OF DISTURBANCE; SIGNATURE UNAVAILABLE.



   If no host is available on the premises when the police are present, or
the host refuses to sign receipt of the notice, a copy of the notice must be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises on each occasion the police
respond.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.37  SECOND RESPONSE; COST OF SPECIAL POLICE SERVICES.



   Utilization of police personnel during any response after the first
warning to any event where the responding officers determine there is a
threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare is a special
police service over and above the services generally provided for law
enforcement services within the city's jurisdiction. The cost of this special
police service includes, without limitation, damages to city property and/or
injuries to city personnel.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



§ 93.38  COLLECTION OF FEES.



   (A)   All fees and charges levied for special police services are
due and payable upon presentation.



   (B)   All fees and charges for special police services constitute a
valid debt to the city and against the host or, if the host is a minor, the
host's parents and guardians. If any amount remains unpaid after reasonable
and practical attempts have been made by the city to obtain payment, the city
manager, or designee, is authorized to take all legal and practicable
collection efforts to recover the outstanding debt, together with any
penalties, any related charges and fees accrued due to nonpayment and all
fees and charges required to file and pursue such civil action including,
without limitation, attorney's fees.



   (C)   Fees and charges to be levied for recovering city costs for
notification and collection of delinquent accounts will be established by
City Council resolution. Such fees and charges are part of fees and charges
established for the special police services rendered.



(Ord. 1109, passed 6-21-04)



CHAPTER 94:  NUISANCES



Section




Nuisances Generally





   94.01   Purpose





   94.02   Definitions





   94.03   Nuisances generally





   94.04   Nuisances designated





   94.05   Abatement authority





Graffiti





   94.06   Findings





   94.07   Graffiti prohibited





   94.08   Possession by minors





   94.09   Possession in designated public places





   94.10   Possession with intent to deface, mark or damage property





   94.11   Parental liability





   94.12   Accessibility to graffiti implements





   94.13   Authorization to remove





   94.14   Notice to abate graffiti





   94.15   Recovery of costs from land owner





   94.16   Failure to remove graffiti upon notice





   94.17   Recovery of costs from minor or parent or guardian





   94.18   Community service





   94.19   Suspension or delay of driving privileges





   94.20   Penalty





Nuisances and Abatement Procedures





   94.21   Abatement of nuisance





   94.22   Responsibility for abatement





   94.23   Notice of hearings for nuisance abatement





   94.24   Hearing procedure





   94.25   Compliance with abatement order





   94.26   City expenses; record of costs





   94.27   Hearing on the cost of abatement





   94.28   Nuisance abatement lien and special assessment procedures





   94.29   Order for treble costs of abatement





   94.30   Judicial remedies





   94.31   Emergency abatement




NUISANCES GENERALLY



§ 94.01  PURPOSE.




   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers,
Cal. Gov't Code §§ 38771-38773.7 and 53069.3, including any successor
statutes, and Cal. Civil Procedure Code § 731, including any successor
statutes, for the purposes of:





      (1)   Identifying public nuisances;





      (2)   Authorizing abatement of the nuisances; and





      (3)   Imposing criminal and civil penalties upon persons for
causing or permitting public nuisances.





   (B)   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to, nor will it,
preclude the city from pursuing any other available civil or criminal
remedies concurrently or in addition to the proceedings established by this
chapter to enforce this code.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.





   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER .  Any aerosol container which is adapted or
made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of
defacing property.





   FELT TIP MARKER.  Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip
which at its broadest width is 1/8 inch or greater, containing an ink that is
not water-soluble.





   GLASS CUTTERS.  Any tools or instruments designed, or intended, to cut
or etch glass surfaces.





   GRAFFITI.  Any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked,
etched, pasted, or otherwise placed on property without the prior approval of
the property owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property,
except as otherwise provided in division 2.





   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.  Any implement capable of marking a surface to
create graffiti including, without limitation, any aerosol paint container,
paint stick, felt tip marker, marking pen, gum label, marking instrument,
drill bit, grinding stone, scribe, glass cutter, or etching tool, or other
implements capable of marking or scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood.





   GRAFFITI REMOVAL COSTS.  All costs that would be considered abatement
costs in the context of a nuisance abatement proceeding pursuant to this
chapter.  In addition, the costs expressly include, without limitation,
costs of removal of graffiti or other material, costs of repair and
replacement of the defaced property, all city staff time, costs of the police
investigation, attorney time and fees, and any court costs incurred.





   GUM LABEL.  Any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance
with an adhesive backing which, when placed on a surface, is not easily
removed.





   HEARING OFFICER.  The City Manager or designee.





   INCIDENTAL EXPENSES.  This term includes, without limitation, actual
expenses, city administrative costs and other costs of the city of all
previous code enforcement efforts, the preparation of the abatement work
specifications, contracts, and staff time in inspecting the work, as well as
the costs of printing, posting and mailings required by this chapter.





   MINOR.  Except as otherwise provided, a person under 18 years of age.





   PAINT or GRAFFITI STICK.  A device containing a solid form of paint,
chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a
surface by pressure and, upon application, leaving a mark at least 1/8 of an
inch in width, visible from a distance of 20 feet, and not water soluble.





   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  Any person or persons creating, causing,
committing or maintaining any public nuisance as defined by this code
including, without limitation, any person owning, leasing, occupying or
having charge or possession of real property and any parent or legal guardian
of a minor creating graffiti.





   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.  Open display of graffiti implements to
which the public has access without the intervention of any employee.





   SPRAY ACTUATOR.  An object, such as a spray tip, nozzle, or button,
which is capable of being attached to an aerosol paint container for the
purpose of spraying the substance contained therein.





   VENDOR-ASSISTED.  Only an employee has access to the graffiti
implement and assists the customer by supplying the product.  The customer
does not take possession of the product until it is purchased.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.03  NUISANCES GENERALLY.




   Anything that is injurious to health, is indecent, offensive to the
senses, obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or obstructs the free passage or
use in the customary manner of any public park, square, street or highway, is
a public nuisance.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.04  NUISANCES DESIGNATED.




   (A)   It is unlawful and it is declared to be a public nuisance for
any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any
property within the city to maintain such property in a manner that any of
the conditions listed below are found to exist.





   (B)   This section is not the exclusive definition or designation of
what constitutes a nuisance within this city.  It supplements and is in
addition to other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances enacted by the
city, state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.





   (C)   Designated public nuisances include the following:





      (1)   A violation of any provision of applicable law
including, without limitation, the Santa Paula Municipal Code;





      (2)   Any land, the topography, geology, or configuration of
which, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations,
excavations, fill, or other alteration, interferes with the established
drainage pattern over the property or from adjoining or other properties
which does or may result in erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage
problems of such magnitude as to be injurious to public health, safety and
welfare or to neighboring properties;





      (3)   Any building or structure which is partially destroyed,
damaged, abandoned, boarded up, dilapidated, or permitted to remain in a
state of partial construction;





      (4)   The failure to secure and maintain against public access
all doorways, windows, and other openings into vacant or abandoned buildings
or structures;





      (5)   Painted buildings and walls, retaining walls, fences or
structures that require repainting, or buildings, walls, fences, or
structures upon which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated
as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot,
warping or termite infestation;





      (6)   Any premises, building or structure, wall, fence,
pavement, or walkway which is painted in a garish manner or is out of harmony
or conformity with the standards of adjacent properties;





      (7)   Any building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, or
walkway upon which any graffiti, including paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other
similar marking substances, is allowed to remain for more than 24 consecutive
hours;





      (8)   Any wall, fence, gate, or hedge that is damaged, broken,
or a hazard or is maintained in violation of this code;





      (9)   Broken windows;





      (10)   Any overgrown, dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous
tree, weeds, vegetation, or debris which:





         (a)   May harbor rats, vermin, or other disease carriers;





         (b)   Is maintained so as to cause an obstruction to the
vision of motorists or a hazardous condition to pedestrians or vehicle
traffic;





         (c)   Creates a danger or attractive nuisance to the
public;





         (d)   Detrimentally affects neighboring properties or
property values; or





         (e)   Constitutes a fire hazard.





      (11)   Building exteriors, roofs, landscaping, grounds, walls,
retaining and crib walls, fences, driveways, parking lots, planters,
sidewalks, or walkways which are maintained in a condition so as to become
defective, unsightly, cracked or no longer viable;





      (12)   The accumulation of dirt, litter, trash, junk, feces,
or debris in doorways, adjoining sidewalks, walkways, courtyards, patios,
parking lots, planters, landscaped or other areas;





      (13)   Any premises upon which there is or is permitted to be:





         (a)   Lumber, building materials, rubble, broken asphalt
or concrete, containers, or other similar materials, except where
construction is occurring under a valid permit;





         (b)   Junk, solid waste, vegetation, salvage materials,
scrap metals, hazardous waste, broken or neglected machinery, dirt or fill
material deposited or stored contrary to any law, automobile parts, except
within a commercial business lawfully engaged in retail sales;





         (c)   Sinks, fixtures or equipment, appliances or
furniture, except lawn furniture in residential yards and new or used
furniture lawfully stored or displayed in connection with a valid business
engaged in the sale or purchase of the same;





         (d)   Inoperative vehicles, except where permitted by
the zoning code;





         (e)   Deteriorated driveways and parking lots, including
those containing pot holes, or cracks;





         (f)   Abandoned, broken, unused, neglected or
unprotected equipment and machinery, ponds, reservoirs and pools, whether or
not the same contains any water or liquid, excavations, abandoned wells,
shafts, basements, foundations, or other holes, abandoned refrigerators or
other appliances, abandoned motor vehicles, any unsound structure, skateboard
ramps, or accumulated lumber, solid waste, junk, or vegetation which may
reasonably attract children to the abandoned or neglected conditions;





         (g)   Temporary service bins or construction debris
storage bins stored on a public street or on private property, except where
permitted by this code;





         (h)   Any garbage can, solid waste container, solid
waste, packing box or junk placed or maintained so as to be visible from
neighboring properties or the public right-of-way, except for those times
scheduled for collection, in accordance with this code;





         (i)   Any property with accumulations of grease, oil, or
other hazardous material on paved or unpaved surfaces, driveways, buildings,
walls, or fences, or from which any material flows or seeps on to any public
street or other public or private property, or which is likely to seep or
migrate into the underground water table;





         (j)   Any front yard, parkway, or landscaped setback
area which lacks turf, other planted material, decorative rock, bark, or
planted ground cover or covering, so as to cause excessive dust or allow the
accumulation of debris;





         (k)   Any condition of vegetation overgrowth which
encroaches into, over, or upon any public right-of-way including, without
limitation, streets, alleys, or sidewalks, so as to constitute either a
danger to the public safety or property or any impediment to public travel;





         (l)   Animals, livestock, poultry, or bees kept, bred,
or maintained for any purpose and in violation of this code;





         (m)   Any property, or any building or structure
thereon, maintained in such condition so that it is defective, unsightly or
in a condition of deterioration or disrepair that it causes or will cause an
ascertainable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or
be otherwise materially detrimental to adjacent and nearby properties and
improvements;





         (n)   Any building or portion thereof maintained in a
manner which constitutes a substandard building pursuant to Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 17920.3.




      (14)   Unruly gatherings as defined by this code.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06) Penalty, see §
94.20




§ 94.05  ABATEMENT AUTHORITY.




   The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to abate public nuisances
summarily or otherwise in the manner provided by this chapter.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



GRAFFITI



§ 94.06  FINDINGS.




   The City Council finds as follows:





   (A)   Graffiti on either public or private property, results in
blight, decreases property values and deprives surrounding residents and
owners of the right to comfortable enjoyment of life and property.





   (B)   Graffiti is obnoxious, constitutes a public nuisance, and is a
threat to public safety which must be abated to prevent its proliferation.





   (C)   Graffiti must be removed as quickly as possible to minimize
harm to persons and property in the community.





   (D)   This division is intended to be complementary to, and not in
conflict with, Cal. Penal Code § 594, which provides that any person who
maliciously defaces property is guilty of vandalism, and Cal. Penal Code §
594.1, which provides that certain activities involving the possession, sale
and use of aerosol paint containers are misdemeanors.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.07  GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.




   It is unlawful for any person to mark, apply, or etch graffiti on any
structure located on public or private real property within the city.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)  Penalty, see § 94.20



§ 94.08  POSSESSION BY MINORS.




   It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implement while on
public or private property without the consent of the property owner, or the
person in lawful possession or control of the property.  Any law enforcement
officer who observes a violation of this section may take immediate
possession of the graffiti implements.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)  Penalty, see § 94.20



§ 94.09  POSSESSION IN DESIGNATED PUBLIC PLACES.




   Except as may be authorized by the City Manager, or designee, no person
may possess any graffiti implement while on any property owned or operated by
the city.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)  Penalty, see § 94.20



§ 94.10  POSSESSION WITH INTENT TO DEFACE, MARK OR DAMAGE PROPERTY.




   It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement for the
purpose of defacing, marking, or damaging any public or private property
without the express consent of the property owner or the person in lawful
possession or control of the property.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)  Penalty, see § 94.20



§ 94.11  PARENTAL LIABILITY.




   Any parent or other legal guardian of a minor is personally liable for
any and all graffiti removal costs associated with graffiti caused by the
minor.  This section does not limit the amount of recovery against the
parent or other legal guardian for their own common law negligence.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)  Penalty, see § 94.20



§ 94.12  ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS.




   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or otherwise
furnish any graffiti implement to any minor without the consent of the
minor's parent or legal guardian.  Evidence that a person, his or her
employee, or agent, demanded and was shown bona fide evidence of majority and
acted upon the  evidence of majority in a transaction or sale is a defense
to any criminal prosecution.





   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, permit to be sold,
offer for sale, or display for sale any graffiti implement by means of
self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)  Penalty, see § 94.20



§ 94.13  AUTHORIZATION TO REMOVE.




   Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods:





   (A)   Wherever the city manager, or designee, determines that
graffiti, as defined in this subchapter, is located on public or privately
owned property within the city so as to be capable of being viewed by a
person utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, the City Manager is
authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti upon the following
conditions:





      (1)   If the graffiti is located on property owned by the
city, the City Manager, or designee, may immediately remove the graffiti by
any practicable means.





      (2)   If graffiti is located on property owned by a public
entity, graffiti removal is authorized only after securing the consent of the
public entity having jurisdiction over the property and such entity executes
a release and waiver, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and agrees to
an assumption of costs incurred by the city for the removal of the graffiti.





      (3)   Except as provided below, where a structure is privately
owned, the removal of graffiti may be authorized only after securing the
consent of the owner and the owner having executed a release and waiver
approved as to form by the City Attorney.





   (B)   Graffiti located on privately owned structures or privately
owned real property in the city and which can be viewed by a person utilizing
any public right-of-way within the city may be removed by the city at the
owner's expense as a public nuisance. This section applies under the
following circumstances:





      (1)   The private property owner persuaded, allowed or
encouraged the graffiti problem;





      (2)   The private property owners consent cannot be obtained;
or





      (3)   The City Manager determines that the removal of graffiti
or other inscribed material from a privately owned property exceeded three
occurrences per privately owned real property during one calendar year.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.14  NOTICE TO ABATE GRAFFITI.




   Whenever the City Manager, or designee, determines that graffiti is
located on privately owned structures or privately owned real property in the
city in violation of this chapter, the City Manager, or designee, may abate
the public nuisance in the manner set forth in this chapter.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.15  RECOVERY OF COSTS FROM LAND OWNER.




   The costs of graffiti abatement may be recovered as set forth in
division 3.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.16  FAILURE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI UPON NOTICE.




   In addition to any graffiti removal costs incurred by the city for the
abatement of graffiti from private property, failure to voluntarily abate
graffiti after notification will result in the penalties set out in division
3.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)  Penalty, see § 94.20



§ 94.17  RECOVERY OF COSTS FROM MINOR OR PARENT OR GUARDIAN.




   (A)   If the City Manager, or designee, abates graffiti in accord
with this chapter, the city may recover the graffiti removal costs by making
the costs a lien against the property of the minor creating, causing, or
committing the nuisance.  Further, the costs may be recovered against the
property of the parent or guardian having custody or control of the minor up
to and including the sum of $25,000.





   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the terms EXPENSE OF
ABATEMENT, GRAFFITI and MINOR have the same meaning set forth in Cal. Gov't
Code § 38772.





   (C)   The cost recovery procedures against the property of a minor
or a parent or guardian of the minor are the same as set forth in §§ 94.21
et seq.





   (D)   The graffiti removal costs are also a personal obligation of
the minor and his or her parent or legal guardian.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.18  COMMUNITY SERVICE.




   (A)   After the conviction of any person for violation of division
3, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti
implement, the city may petition the sentencing court to impose community
service time, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 640.6.  The sentencing court
may require the performance of community service within the city in addition
to any monetary penalties imposed.  In the event the sentencing court
approves community service, the city will request any adult or emancipated
minor convicted of vandalism, as defined by Cal. Penal Code § 594(a)(1), to:





      (1)   Complete a minimum of 24 hours, but not more than 48
hours, of community services cleaning up, removing and repairing property
damaged by graffiti for the first conviction; and





      (2)   Complete 48 hours, but not more than 96 hours of
community services cleaning up, removing, and repairing property damaged by
graffiti for each subsequent conviction.





   (B)   Any minor violating any provision of division 3 or any state
law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement who is
found to be a person described in Cal. Welfare & Institutions Code § 602 by
reason of the commission of vandalism, may be required to perform community
service time pursuant to Cal. Welfare & Institutions Code § 742.16.  For
any minor adjudicated guilty of vandalism, the city will petition the
juvenile court and the court may, in addition to any other penalties imposed
by the city, require the unemancipated minor to provide the necessary labor
to clean up, repair, or replace defaced, damaged or destroyed property, or
otherwise make restitution to the property owner.





   (C)   If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine levied for
violating any provision of division 3 or is otherwise unable to make
restitution for damages, the minor's parent or legal guardian are liable for
payment of the fine or restitution.  If the parent or legal guardian cannot
make restitution, the sentencing court may waive payment of the fine or
community service time by the parent or legal guardian upon finding good
cause.  If the sentencing court waives payment of the fine by the parent or
legal guardian, the city will petition the sentencing court, and the court,
at the court's option, may order the parent or legal guardian to provide the
necessary labor, equal to the number of hours assigned to the minor
adjudicated guilty of violating any provision of division 3, to clean up,
repair, or replace property damaged by the unemancipated minor.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.19  SUSPENSION OR DELAY OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES.




   For each conviction of a person aged 13 to 21 for violating this
division, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a
graffiti implement, the city may petition the sentencing court to suspend
driving privileges or delay the issuance of driving privileges in accordance
with Cal. Vehicle Code § 13202.6.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.20  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is otherwise provided is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any person failing to remove graffiti within the prescribed
time period is guilty of an infraction and may be punished with a fine of
$100 for a first conviction, $300 for the second conviction, and $500 for
each subsequent violation.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)




NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES



§ 94.21  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.




   All or any part of a use or the condition of any property, including,
without limitation, any use, or improvement, found to constitute a public
nuisance, will be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, cessation of
use or a combination thereof, or in another manner as designated in a
nuisance abatement order, which is reasonably required to abate the public
nuisance, pursuant to the procedures set forth in this division.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.22  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ABATEMENT.




   Whenever the City Manager, or designee, reasonably believes a public
nuisance exists, the City Manager, or designee, may commence abatement
proceedings under division 3.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.23  NOTICE OF HEARINGS FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT.




   (A)   Notices. To initiate abatement proceedings, the City Manager,
or designee, will cause written notice to be mailed and conspicuously posted
on the property containing a nuisance.  Notice will be titled in letters at
least one inch in height and read substantially as follows:





Notice of Public Nuisance Hearing





On _____, 20___, the City of Santa Paula will determine whether this property
known and designated as, constitutes a public nuisance.  If this property is
found to constitute a public nuisance as defined by the Santa Paula Municipal
Code ("SPMC"), and if the public nuisance is not promptly abated by the
responsible person as ordered by the hearing officer, then the City will
abate the nuisance.  If the City abates the nuisance, the cost of these
proceedings, all previous code enforcement efforts concerning this condition
of the property, and the cleaning, clearing, rehabilitation, repair, or
demolition by the City will constitute a special assessment and a Nuisance
Abatement Lien upon such land until paid.  The City may foreclose on any
such lien in order to reimburse the City for these costs.





The alleged violations consist of the following:





The methods of abatement available are: 





All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters should
attend a hearing to be conducted by the City Manager or designee, to be held
at _______ on _____, ____ at the hour of _____.m., when their testimony and
evidence will be heard and given due consideration.





Dated:





___________________




Department Officer




   (B)   Mailing/posting.  Notice of the hearing will be served by
posting the subject property and by registered or certified mail (postage
fully prepaid) addressed to the owner of the property at the address
appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll,
whichever is more current before the hearing notice is mailed.  The notice
will be posted on the property and mailed at least ten days before the
hearing date.  Proof of posting and mailing will be by declaration. 
Failure of any person to receive the notice will not affect the validity of
any set forth in this chapter.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.24  HEARING PROCEDURE.




   (A)   The hearing must be conducted by a hearing officer selected by
the City Manager.  At the time set for the hearing, the hearing officer will
conduct a hearing to determine, based upon the evidence presented, whether a
public nuisance exists on the subject property.  At the hearing, the hearing
officer will accept reliable evidence from any person if the  evidence bears
on the issue of whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. 
The hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and is authorized to
administer oaths or affirmations under the Cal. Civil Procedure Code §
2093(a).  Based upon the evidence submitted including, without limitation,
any written staff reports regarding the alleged nuisance, the hearing officer
will determine whether or not a public nuisance exists on the subject
property.





   (B)   As soon as is practicable following the close of the hearing,
the hearing officer will render a decision on the matter.  If a public
nuisance is found to exist, the hearing officer will issue an order requiring
the abatement of the public nuisance in a reasonable time and manner as set
forth in the order.  The hearing officer will promptly give written notice
to the responsible person and any other interested person who requests, in
writing, notice of the decision, including, a copy of the order.  The order
issued by the hearing officer will be deemed a final order and may be
judicially reviewed pursuant to Cal. Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6.  There
is no right to a City Council appeal.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.25  COMPLIANCE WITH ABATEMENT ORDER.




   At no cost to the city, the responsible person will comply with all of
the provisions of an abatement order.  If the responsible person fails, for
any reason, to comply with an abatement order within the time required in the
order, the city manager, or designee, will cause the nuisance described in
the abatement order to be abated by city forces or by private contractor. The
City Attorney is authorized to take action as needed to gain entry upon the
property where the public nuisance exists for purposes of abating a public
nuisance.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.26  CITY EXPENSES; RECORD OF COSTS.




   The department director or designee will keep an account of the costs,
including incidental expenses, of abating nuisance on each separate lot or
parcel of land where the work is done.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.27  HEARING ON THE COST OF ABATEMENT.




   (A)   The department director or designee will give notice of the
cost of abatement by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid)
addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last
equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current
before mailing of the cost notice.  The cost notice will include a statement
of the hearing rights of the property owner concerning the cost of
abatement.  Upon written request for a hearing by the property owner
received by the City Manager within ten days after mailing the cost notice, a
hearing will be held by the City Manager, or designee, on the question of the
cost of the abatement.





   (B)   Notice of the hearing will be mailed at least ten days before
the hearing by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land.  The
City Manager or designee will either confirm the cost of abatement or modify
the amount.  The decision of the City Manager or designee is final.  The
City Manager or designee will give notice of the decision on the cost of
abatement by registered or certified mail to the property owner.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.28  NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES.




   (A)   Lien.  Pursuant to Cal. Govt' Code §§ 38773, 38773.1, and
38773.5, and any successor statutes, persons failing to abate a public
nuisance as ordered pursuant to this division, will be obligated to pay all
city expenses of abating the nuisance and all administrative costs associated
therewith.  A nuisance abatement lien in favor of the city for the expenses
of the city will be created and recorded, pursuant to this section, against
the property on which the nuisance is maintained.  The lien will specify the
amount of the lien, the name of the city, the date of the abatement order,
the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the
parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded
owner of the parcel.





   (B)   Notice of proposed recordings.  Notice will be sent by
certified mail at least ten days before recording the lien, an itemized
notice of the lien amount and proposed recording will be sent by certified
mail to the property owner of record of the parcel of land on which the
nuisance was abated by the city, based on the last equalized assessment roll
or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before recordation of the
lien.  The notice will be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil
action in accordance with Cal. Civil Procedure Code §§ 415.10 et seq.  If
the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may
be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property
for a period of ten days, and publication thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the county in which the property is located.





   (C)   Recording. The city's nuisance abatement lien will then be
recorded in the Ventura County Recorder's Office, and from the date of
recording, will have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.





   (D)   Special assessment. The city's total costs described in this
subchapter may also be collected as a special assessment against the lot or
parcel on which the nuisance existed.  After recordation of the nuisance
abatement lien the city may provide a copy of the notice of proposed
recordation, proof of service, and the recorded lien to the tax collector and
the tax collector will add the described special assessment payments to the
next regular tax bill levied against the respective lots or parcels and the
amounts will be collected and subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure under foreclosure and sale as in the case of tax delinquencies. 
However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been
transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a
bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attached thereon, before
the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent,
then the cost of abatement will not result in a lien against the real
property but instead will be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.





   (E)   Satisfaction. In the event that the lien or special assessment
is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure,
a notice of the discharge containing the information specified in the lien
will be recorded by the city.





   (F)   Fees. Any fees incurred by the city for processing, recording
of the lien and providing notice to the property owner may be recovered by
the city as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.29  ORDER FOR TREBLE COSTS OF ABATEMENT.




   Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within
a two year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a
condition that may be abated in accordance with division 3, except conditions
abated pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17980, the court may order
the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.30  JUDICIAL REMEDIES.




   (A)   Nothing in this chapter will be deemed to prevent the City
Attorney from:





      (1)   Commencing a civil action in the superior court to
enforce all or any of the provisions of any abatement order;





      (2)   Commencing a civil action to abate a public nuisance as
an alternative to or in conjunction with an administrative proceeding
pursuant to this chapter;





      (3)   Filing a civil action to recover the amount of a
confirmed accounting from an owner or occupant of the lot to which it
relates; or





      (4)   Filing a criminal action to enforce this code.





   (B)   Where a civil action is filed, if the court issues an order or
a judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist, and orders or approves the
abatement of the public nuisance, or where the court validates an accounting,
the court will also award the city its actual costs of abatement, including,
without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the
judicial proceeding.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



§ 94.31  EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.




   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever the City
Manager, or designee, determines that a public nuisance, as defined in this
chapter, or in any other applicable law, exists upon a lot, and that the
public nuisance constitutes an immediate threat or hazard or danger to
persons or property, the City Manager, without observing procedures set forth
in this chapter with reference to public nuisance abatement, will forthwith
immediately cause the abatement of the public nuisance in such manner as the
City Manager, or designee, determines is reasonably required.  If the City
Manager, or designee, deems it feasible, the City Manager, or designee, will
attempt to give the owner and occupant, verbal notice of the existence of the
public nuisance, and the proposed timing and method of abatement thereof. 
The City Manager will, forthwith, report the circumstances to the City
Council.  Where the abatement is ordered by the City Manager, the person
abating the nuisance will, after completing the abatement of the public
nuisance, comply with the provisions of this chapter.




(Ord. 1072, passed 9-15-03)



CHAPTER 95:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   95.01   Posting of signs required



   95.02   Definitions



   95.03   Prohibited actions



   95.04   Closure time; violation



   95.05   Application to be in city parks after closure time



   95.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Filming on public property, see § 118.05



Statutory reference:



   Municipal parks, see Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 5181 et seq.



§ 95.01  POSTING OF SIGNS REQUIRED.



   Except where other signs are required, whenever in this code smoking is
prohibited, conspicuous signs must be posted so stating, containing all
capital lettering not less than one inch in height on a contrasting
background. It is the Director's duty to post such signs or to cause such
signs to be posted.



(Ord. 1125, passed 11-8-04)



§ 95.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.



   DIRECTOR  means the Community Services Director, or designee.



   PLAYGROUND, for purposes of Cal. Health & Safety Code § 104495, means
25 feet from the edge of a sand area within a city park or recreational area
specifically designed to be used by children and that has play equipment
installed in it.



   SMOKING  means the combustion of any cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any
similar article, using any form of tobacco or other combustible substance in
any form.



(Ord. 1125, passed 11-8-04)



§ 95.03  PROHIBITED ACTIONS.



   The following actions are prohibited within the limits of any public
park within the city:



   (A)   Cutting, breaking, injuring, defacing or disturbing any tree,
shrub, plant, rock, building, monument, fence, bench or other structure,
apparatus or property, or marking or writing upon any building, monument,
fence, bench or other structure;



   (B)   Cutting or removing any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or
gravel without first obtaining permission of the City Council;



   (C)   Posting, placing or erecting any bills, notices, paper or
advertising device or matter of any kind without first obtaining permission
of the City Council;



   (D)   Hitching or fastening any horse or other animal, except at a
place especially designated or provided for such purpose;



   (E)   Riding or driving any horse or other animal or propelling any
vehicle, cycle or automobile elsewhere than on the roads or drives provided
for such purpose;



   (F)   Making or kindling a fire at places other than those
designated and set apart by the City Council for such purposes;



   (G)   Permitting or allowing any livestock or other animals to run
at large within the boundaries of any city park;



   (H)   Discharging any firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, or
other fireworks, or air guns or slingshots without first obtaining written
permission of the City Council;



   (I)   Except as otherwise allowed by a valid permit issued pursuant
to this code, possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverage at any time
or location;



   (J)   Possession or breakage of any glass beverage container;



   (K)   Wilfully or negligently discarding, depositing, dropping,
placing or spilling of any garbage, paper, rubbish, refuse, waste matter,
leftover substance, carcass or any nauseous or offensive material of any
kind, except into a waste receptacle;



   (L)   Possession or use of any powered model airplane;



   (M)   Possession or use of any golf club or golf ball;



   (N)   Playing of hardball or softball or baseball at any location
where prohibited by a resolution of the City Council.  A sign shall be
posted notifying the public of such prohibition;



   (O)   Permitting any animal to defecate unless the waste is
immediately collected and disposed of in a waste receptacle, or removed from
public property.



   (P)   Smoking a cigarette, cigar, or use any tobacco or
tobacco-related product within 25 feet of any playground or tot-lot sandbox
area, pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 104495; or



   (Q)   Disposing cigarette butts, cigar butts, or any other
tobacco-related waste within 25 feet of a playground or a tot-lot sandbox
area, pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 104495.



(‘81 Code, § 12.24.020)  (Ord. 952, passed  - -92; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
11-8-04; Am. Ord. 1127, passed 12-20-04)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.04  CLOSURE TIME; VIOLATION.



   (A)   Except when different hours must be established by resolution
of the City Council and notice of those hours posted in the particular park
area or recreation ground affected, all public parks and recreation grounds
in the city owned or operated by the city must be closed to the public from
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



(‘81 Code, § 12.24.030)



   (B)   Any person or persons who enter or are on the premises of any
public park or recreation ground owned or operated by the city between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or during such hours as must be
established by resolution of the City Council, must be guilty of an
infraction.



(‘81 Code, § 12.24.040)  (Ord. 679, passed  - -77; Ord. 726, passed 
--79; Am. Ord. 1125, passed 11-8-04)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.05  APPLICATION TO BE IN CITY PARKS AFTER CLOSURE TIME.



   (A)   Application; filing fee.



      (1)   Any person, persons, groups, associa-tions or
organizations wishing to be in or otherwise use any public park or recreation
ground, owned or operated by the city, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., may apply in writing to the City Council for permission therefor.



      (2)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish a filing
fee for such applications, or may establish a fee for such use.



('81 Code, § 12.24.050)



   (B)   Contents.  The application must contain the name or names of
the person or persons, group or organization who wish to be in or otherwise
use any city park or recreation ground, the number of persons who must be in
or use the park, the name of the park to be occupied, the reason for such
use, the specific activities to take place and the hours of use. ('81 Code,
§ 12.24.060)



   (C)   Decision of City Council.



      (1)   The City Council may grant the application of any
applicant if, in its discretion, it finds that the use of public park or
recreation ground owned or operated by the city between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is in the best interests of the citizens of the city and
will not unduly disturb the residents immediately adjoining the park.



      (2)   The decision of the City Council shall be final.



('81 Code, § 12.24.070)  (Ord. 679, passed  - -77; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
11-8-04)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter is guilty
of an infraction and upon conviction will be fined not less than $50 for a
first violation. Fines for successive violations will be set by the court in
an amount not less than the fine for the first offense unless the court finds
unusual circumstances to exist.



(‘81 Code, § 12.24.080)  (Ord. 952, passed  - -92; Am. Ord. 1125, passed
11-8-04)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   96.01   Depositing matter



   96.02   Dripping oil



   96.03   Storage of personal property



   96.04   Bench or chair on sidewalk



   96.05   Locating other objects on sidewalk



   96.07   Burning of waste on streets prohibited



   96.08   Playing ball or shooting in streets



   96.09   Violations constitute nuisance



   96.10   Abatement of nuisance; costs



   96.11   Fees




Encroachments Upon Public Streets




   96.20   Definitions



   96.21   Permits



   96.22   Bonds



   96.23   Fees



   96.24   Revocation of permit



   96.25   Notice of commencement of encroachment work



   96.26   Protection and repair of facilities



   96.27   Restoration of right-of-way



   96.28   Uncovered excavation deemed nuisance; abatement



   96.29   Conditions by which department to do work; charge to owner



   96.30   Delay of encroachment work



   96.31   Emergency work



   96.32   Construction standards



   96.33   Open trench work



   96.34   Cleanup



   96.35   Erection and maintenance of safety devices



   96.36   Assumption of liability



   96.37   Persons performing work not to be relieved from liability



   96.38   Appeal



   96.39   Excavation in recently resurfaced public streets




Street Width




   96.50   Right-of-way defined; placement of structures within



   96.51   Street dedications and standard improvements



   96.52   Exemptions



   96.53   Permits




Building Numbering




   96.65   Numbers to be placed on all entrances



   96.66   Apportionment of numbers



   96.67   Placement of odd and even numbers



   96.68   Use of fractional numbers



   96.69   Adoption of official house and building numbering map



   96.70   Vacant lots not required to be numbered



   96.71   Building Inspector to enforce provisions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  DEPOSITING MATTER.



   It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow any wastewater
or irrigation water, any industrial waste or chemical, any filthy or
unsanitary fluid, matter or substance, any garbage, offal or rubbish, or any
glass, tack, wire, nail, paper, refuse, debris, sand, gravel or dirt to flow,
discharge or be deposited or blown on, spilled over, into or upon any public
gutter, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, or to permit any of
the same to remain thereon.



('81 Code, § 12.04.010)  Penalty, see Ch. 12



§ 96.02  DRIPPING OIL.



   It is unlawful for any person to pour, spill or permit to drip from any
tank vehicle upon any public street, alley or sidewalk any oil, petroleum,
kerosene, benzene or other similar oil or oily substance or liquid or to
permit any such substances to remain thereon.



('81 Code, § 12.04.020)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.03  STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful for any person to pack, unpack, store or deposit any
merchandise or any article of personal property on any public street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place.



('81 Code, § 12.04.030)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.04  BENCH OR CHAIR ON SIDEWALK.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to locate or maintain any
bench or chair upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place
without first obtaining from the Council a written permit to do so.



      (2)   Any permit granted under this subchapter may be revoked
at any time without notice.



('81 Code, § 12.04.040)



   (B)   Duty to maintain.  It shall be the duty of the permittee
under division (A) of this section to maintain each bench at all times in a
safe condition and at its proper and lawful location and to inspect it at
reasonable intervals.



('81 Code, § 12.04.050)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.05  LOCATING OTHER OBJECTS ON SIDEWALK.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall locate any other object on
or over any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, except
under a public franchise or under the express provisions of some other
ordinance of the city, without first obtaining from the Council a permit to
do so.



('81 Code, § 12.04.060)



   (B)   Issuance for charitable purposes.  The Council shall not
issue a permit required by division (A) of this section, except for a
religious, charitable, benevolent, patriotic or other nonprofit purpose or to
celebrate or announce an event which is of civic or public interest.



('81 Code, § 12.04.070)



   (C)   Issuance for political purposes prohibited.  No permit
required by division (A) of this section shall be issued for, and no persons
shall install or maintain any street banner or maintain any decorative light
or other decoration or any banner, wire pennant or sign of a political nature.



('81 Code, § 12.04.080)



   (D)   Installation prescribed by Building Inspector.  All banners
and other decorations and objects for which a permit is issued under this
chapter shall be installed and maintained in the manner prescribed by the
Building Inspector.



('81 Code, § 12.04.090)



   (E)   Revocation of permit.  Any permit issued under division (A)
of this section may be summarily revoked by the Council for noncompliance
with the requirements of the Building Inspector.



('81 Code, § 12.04.100)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.07  BURNING OF WASTE ON STREETS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall burn any combustible waste or other material on any
public street, alley, sidewalk or other property owned or controlled by the
public, which has not been set aside by public authority therefor.



('81 Code, § 12.04.120)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.08  PLAYING BALL OR SHOOTING IN STREETS.



   No person shall play ball or any game of sport with a ball or football
or throw, cast, shoot or discharge any stone, pallet, bullet, arrow or any
other missile in, over, across, along or upon any street or sidewalk or in
any public park, except on a portion of such a park set apart for such
purposes.



('81 Code, § 12.04.130) Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.09  VIOLATIONS CONSTITUTE NUISANCE.



   Any substance, object or thing which is placed, deposited, located or
caused to be or allowed on, upon, over or across any public street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place in violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter or which is maintained thereon or thereover after a permit has
been revoked or in violation of the conditions of a permit is a public
nuisance.



('81 Code, § 12.04.140)



§ 96.10  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE; COSTS.



   The Building Inspector and the Superintendent of Streets or any other
public officer to whose attention any nuisance referred to in § 96.09 shall
come, shall summarily remove and abate such, and the person responsible
therefor shall be liable to the city for the reasonable cost of such
abatement, in addition to all of the other penalties provided by law.



('81 Code, § 12.04.150)



§ 96.11  FEES.



   The schedule of permit fees and charges shall be those adopted by
resolution of the City Council from time to time.



('81 Code, § 12.04.160)  (Ord. 829, passed  - -85)



ENCROACHMENTS UPON PUBLIC STREETS



§ 96.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENCROACHMENT  means any pole, conduit, cable, pipeline, fence, sign,
building, or any temporary or permanent structure or object of any kind or
character which is placed in, under or over any portion of the street
right-of-way; also, the taking, placing, moving, or using on a right-of-way,
any vehicle or combination of vehicles or other objects of a dimension,
weight, or other characteristic prohibited by the California Vehicle Code.



   EXCAVATION means removal of any concrete, asphalt, road, earth, or
other, similar, surface materials covering a public right-of-way or public
service easement.



   STREET  means any part of the entire width of the right-of-way of a
public street, highway, road, lane, way or alley whether or not such area is
actually improved and used for street purposes.



(‘81 Code, § 12.08.010) (Am. Ord. 1063, passed 10-6-03)



Statutory reference:



   Obstructions and encroachments on public ways, see Cal. Gov't Code §
38775



§ 96.21  PERMITS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to encroach, or to make or cause
to be made any encroachment, upon, over, under or within a street
right-of-way within the city without first obtaining a permit from the Public
Works Director.



   (B)   If the department finds that the excavation is for a purpose
required or permitted by law and can be performed without undue hazard or
inconvenience to the public and that the applicant is qualified and
financially able to fulfill his obligations and liabilities under this
subchapter, the department shall thereupon issue a permit.  The permit shall
specify the nature, extent and location of the work permitted and shall
impose such reasonable time limits and other conditions as the department may
prescribe, including the erection and placement of barricades, lights and
warning signs and such other conditions as may promote public convenience and
safety.



   (C)   The Public Works Director shall prescribe and provide a
regular form of application for permit as required by this subchapter.  The
permit application shall contain such information as is deemed necessary by
the Public Works Director.  The application form shall be completed and
filed with the Public Works Director, together with all fees, cash deposits,
bonds, and other documents which are required by this subchapter and by the
Public Works Director.



   (D)   Blanket permits, renewable annually, may be issued by the
Public Works Director.  The Public Works Director may revoke any such
blanket permit if the permittee fails to comply with any provisions of this
subchapter.  Blanket permits shall be limited to excavations 16 feet in
length or a maximum of 32 square feet in area.



   (E)   Before issuing a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
object with a rolling height of over 16 feet, the Director shall require
evidence of approval of height clearance from the public utility companies
having overhead lines crossing the proposed route.



('81 Code, § 12.08.020) Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.22  BONDS.



   (A)   Unless exempt from this requirement by law or by the Public
Works Director, each applicant shall, before a permit is issued, deposit with
the city a cash deposit, surety bond or file a certificate of deposit or
savings and loan share assignment in an amount, fixed by the Public Works
Director, sufficient to restore the right-of-way to its original condition.



   (B)   No bond or any part thereof shall be released or exonerated
until the department has certified to the treasurer that the work has been
performed to the satisfaction of the department and that all costs and
liabilities incurred by the city have been paid or fully secured.



('81 Code, § 12.08.030)



§ 96.23  FEES.



   The schedule of fees and charges shall be those adopted by the
resolution of the City Council from time to time.



('81 Code, § 12.08.040)



§ 96.24  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   If any of the provisions of the permit or this subchapter are
violated the Public Works Director may serve written notice upon the
permittee in violation giving the permittee 12 hours in which to correct the
violation.



   (B)   If the violation results in a danger to life or property, the
notice shall state that all encroachment work must stop until the violation
is corrected.



   (C)   If after 12 hours from the issuance of the notice the
violation is not corrected, or there is no evidence that diligence is being
used to correct the violation, the Public Works Director may revoke the
encroachment permit.



('81 Code, § 12.08.050)



§ 96.25  NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF ENCROACHMENT WORK.



   At least 24 hours before commencing any encroachment work authorized by
any permit, the permittee shall notify the Public Works Director of the time
of commencing work and provide the name, address, telephone number and
license number of the contractor, if any, who will perform the work.



('81 Code, § 12.08.060)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.26  PROTECTION AND REPAIR OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   The permittee shall support and protect all wires, cables,
pipes, conduits, poles, and other apparatus both aerial and underground.



   (B)   This expense of repairs to any damaged facilities shall be
borne by the permittee.



('81 Code, § 12.08.070) Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.27  RESTORATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Upon completion of the encroachment work authorized by a
permit, the permittee shall restore the right-of-way by replacing, repairing,
or rebuilding it to its original condition before the encroachment work was
commenced.  The permittee shall remove all obstructions, materials, and
debris upon the right-of-way and shall do any other work necessary to restore
the right-of-way to a safe and usable condition, as directed by the Public
Works Director.  Where excavation occurs within areas already paved, the
Public Works Director may require temporary paving to be installed within 24
hours after the excavated area is backfilled.



   (B)   In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly to
restore the right-of-way as provided in this subchapter, or should the nature
of any damage to the right-of-way require restoration before the permittee
can be notified or can respond to notification, the Public Works Director
may, at his option, make the necessary restoration.  The permittee shall
reimburse the city in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by
the City Council.



('81 Code, § 12.08.080)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.28  UNCOVERED EXCAVATION DEEMED NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.



   Every person who excavates in any street without a permit or who fails
to fill and cover an excavation within the time permitted by the department
shall be guilty of committing a public nuisance and the department may
summarily abate such nuisance and the cost of such abatement shall be the
personal obligation of every person creating, causing, committing or
maintaining such nuisance.



('81 Code, § 12.08.090)



§ 96.29  CONDITIONS BY WHICH DEPARTMENT TO DO WORK; CHARGE TO OWNER.



   (A)   When the department finds that all or part of any work of
backfilling or surfacing should be done by the department or under its
supervision by reason of the location of the work or of unusual hazard, undue
delay, failure to conform to its specifications or for other good cause, the
department may itself perform the work or may employ a contractor to perform
it and may thereupon proceed to collect the cost thereof from the person
primarily obligated to perform the work, from the person for whose benefit
the work was done or the owner of the land benefited by the work, or from all
of them; and the department shall take such action to collect such cost and
to impose and enforce liens, including mechanics' liens, as may be authorized
or permitted by law.



   (B)   (1)   The cost of abating nuisances, filling and covering
excavations and backfilling, done by the city or the performance by the city
of any other work which any contractor or other person may have failed to
perform shall be a lien on the property of the person who created the
nuisance or failed to properly perform the work and shall be a personal
obligation of that person.



      (2)   The cost of such work or abatement shall be submitted to
the City Council for confirmation and notice of the time and place fixed for
the City Council to consider the cost shall be made by mail to the person
liable for payment thereof at least five days prior to the time of
consideration by the Council of such cost.



      (3)   After confirmation of the cost, the cost shall become a
lien on the property of the person chargeable with such cost and may be added
to the next regular tax bill levied against that person's property for
municipal purposes.



      (4)   A certified copy of the action of the City Council
confirming the cost shall be filed with the County Auditor on or before
August 10.



      (5)   The County Auditor shall enter the cost of abatement or
of the work performed on the county tax roll for whatever land is owned by
the person charge able with such cost.



      (6)   The amount of the cost shall be collected at the time
and in the manner ordinary municipal taxes are collected.



      (7)   If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same
penalties and procedures for foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary
municipal taxes.



('81 Code, § 12.08.100)



§ 96.30  DELAY OF ENCROACHMENT WORK.



   (A)   If the encroachment work is not completed within the time
specified in the permit or if at any time the Public Works Director finds
that delay in commencing or prosecuting the encroachment work is caused by
lack of diligence on the part of the permittee, he may cancel the permit and
restore the right-of-way to its original condition before the encroachment is
commenced.



   (B)   The Public Works Director may, at the request of the
permittee, renew or extend the time limit specified in the permit.



   (C)   The permittee shall reimburse the city in accordance with the
schedule of charges as adopted by the City Council.



('81 Code, § 12.08.110)



§ 96.31  EMERGENCY WORK.



   (A)   This subchapter shall not prevent any person from performing
emergency maintenance on any substructure lawfully on or under any public
street, or from making an emergency use as may be necessary for the
preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity arises.



   (B)   If an emergency encroachment in the street necessitates the
closing of the street, then the Police Department and Fire Department shall
be notified.  The person making an emergency use or encroach-ment upon
public street shall apply for a written permit therefor on the first working
day thereafter.



('81 Code, § 12.08.120)



§ 96.32  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   All encroachment work shall conform to standards established by the
Public Works Director.



('81 Code, § 12.08.130)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.33  OPEN TRENCH WORK.



   (A)   In any trenching operation, the open trench shall not be in
excess of one day's work ahead of the trench work proper, unless specifically
authorized by the Public Works Director.



   (B)   Backfilling shall commence immediately after work in a trench
is completed and any portion of the work which is under the jurisdiction of
the city is inspected and approved by the Public Works Director.



('81 Code, § 12.08.140)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.34  CLEANUP.



   (A)   Except for materials properly stored, the permittee shall at
all times keep the public highway and sidewalk area clear of all materials,
earth and debris.  Immediately after completion of the work, the permittee
shall clean up and remove all materials, earth and debris of any kind.



   (B)   If the permittee fails within 24 hours after having been
notified to do so by the Public Works Director, work may be done by the city
and the permittee charged for all expenses incurred.



('81 Code, § 12.08.150)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.35  ERECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SAFETY DEVICES.



   (A)   In the conduct of the encroachment work, the permittee shall
provide and maintain such safety devices, including but not limited to
lights, barricades, signs, and watchmen as are necessary to protect the
public.  Any omission on the part of the Public Works Director to specify in
the permit what safety devices shall be provided by the permittee shall not
excuse the permittee from complying with all laws, regulations, and
ordinances relating to the protection of persons under the circumstances. 
If the Public Works Director finds that suitable safeguards are not being
provided, he may provide, maintain and relocate such safety devices as are
deemed necessary, or he may cancel the permit and restore the right-of-way in
accordance with existing standards, charging the permittee the entire cost of
the work.



   (B)   A permittee making any excavation or leaving any obstruction
which could be a hazard to persons using a right-of-way shall provide and
maintain warning lights far enough away from the excavation or obstruction to
give adequate warning to such persons from one-half hour before sunset of
each day to one-half hour after sunrise the next day, until the work is
completed and the right-of-way made safe for use.



('81 Code, § 12.08.160)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.36  ASSUMPTION OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   Every person who files an application under § 96.21 shall be
deemed thereby to agree to all of the provisions of this subchapter and of
the permit issued under § 96.21 and to assume and agree to pay all costs,
obligations, and liabilities arising out of the performance of the work of
excavation, removal, backfilling and surfacing, whether such work is
performed by the applicant or by the city.



   (B)   However, no provision of this subchapter shall be construed to
impose upon the permittee or any of the permittee's agents, servants or
independent contractors, a greater or different duty of care to third persons
than would otherwise be imposed by law in the absence of such provisions.



('81 Code, § 12.08.170)



§ 96.37  PERSONS PERFORMING WORK NOT TO BE RELIEVED FROM LIABILITY.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to relieve any person from
liability for any damages caused by him in performing any work under this
subchapter, or to impose such liability upon the city; nor shall any person
by reason of compliance with the minimum requirements of the Public Works
Director be relieved of liability to the city and others for damage resulting
from the subsidence of any street surface following work performed under this
subchapter; and all persons performing work under this subchapter or for whom
work is performed under this subchapter, shall compensate the city for the
cost of such subsidence, and shall save the city harmless from all costs and
liabilities sustained by the city on account of such work. 



('81 Code, § 12.08.180)



§ 96.38  APPEAL.



   (A)   If any person or party is dissatisfied with any act or
decision of the Public Works Director under this subchapter, then that party
may appeal to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the
City Clerk.



   (B)   Upon receiving the notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall have
the matter set for hearing before the City Council.



   (C)   The hearing may be continued from time to time at the
discretion of the Mayor.



   (D)   The decision of the City Council to approve, modify or
disapprove the decision or act of the Public Works Director shall be final.



('81 Code, § 12.08.190)



§ 96.39  EXCAVATION IN RECENTLY RESURFACED PUBLIC STREETS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise allowed by this chapter, public streets
that were resurfaced with an emulsified asphalt "slurry" or asphalt "cape
seal" within the previous two years, or improved with asphalt/concrete within
the previous five years, of the proposed excavation may not be excavated for
utilities or for other reasons.



   (B)   A permit may be issued to allow a permittee to encroach within
a public street to install utility facilities, or for other purposes, if such
work can be accomplished by boring under the public street section or by
other trenchless technologies. Alternative methods for such work including,
without limitation, relocating utility facilities to areas other than the
public street (for example, under public sidewalks and/or parkways) will be
considered and determined not to be feasible before a permit may be issued
pursuant to this chapter. Any additional costs for, without limitation,
relocating utility facilities outside of the public street or boring under
the public street must be borne by the permittee.



   (C)   Excavation of a public street will be allowed by permit under
only the most unusual circumstances if the Public Works Director determines
that relocation or boring is not feasible. Under such circumstances, the
Public Works Director will require a permittee to meet the city's
construction standards for excavating in recently resurfaced streets, pay all
costs associated with such excavation, and provide such additional security
to ensure the integrity of the recently resurfaced public street as may be
reasonably required by the Public Works Director.



(Ord. 1063, passed 10-6-03)



STREET WIDTH



§ 96.50  RIGHT-OF-WAY DEFINED; PLACEMENT OF STRUCTURES WITHIN.



   (A)    ULTIMATE STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY is defined as the right-of-way
shown on that street map adopted by the City Council and identified as
“Ultimate Street Right of Way Widths,” the street right-of-way shown
within the boundary of a recorded tract map, a recorded parcel map or a
recorded planned development plan.  The latest adopted or recorded document
in the above cases shall take precedence.  If none of these exists, the
ultimate street right-of-way shall be considered the right-of-way required by
the standard highway classifications as have been approved by the City
Council.



   (B)   No building or structure or part of any building or structure
shall be placed or constructed within any ultimate street right-of-way.



('81 Code, § 12.12.010)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.51  STREET DEDICATIONS AND STANDARD IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   It is found that increased vehicular traffic results from
construction of new buildings and extensive reconstruction, remodeling and
enlarging of existing buildings.  The following street dedications and
standard improvements are determined to be necessary to prevent vehicular
congestion and the other hazards related to the intensified use of the land,
and for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   The following requirements shall be met or complied with
before a building permit is issued for any complex or building or, in the
alternative, before the complex or building is accepted for use and occupancy:



      (1)   All required streets, highways and alleys which abut the
subject property shall be dedicated to the full width designated by the
“Ultimate Street Right-of-Way Widths Map” or other official plans or
standards adopted by the City Council.



      (2)   All street, highways and alley improve-ments shall have
been installed and in good repair or street improvement plans shall be
prepared to city standards and said improvements constructed.  Such
improvements shall consist of, but not necessarily be limited to, excavation,
concrete curbs and gutters, concrete sidewalks, pavement, drainage facilities
or any other engineering requirement.



      (3)   Whenever reconstruction, remodeling, enlarging or
modifications to existing structures are involved, the street dedication and
improvements described under this section shall be required at the time of
issuance of a building permit when the value of such reconstruction,
remodeling, enlarging or modification exceeds 50% of the market value of the
existing structure.  The market value as used in this section shall be that
value as based on the official assessed valuation of the current County
Assessor roll.  In addition, whenever there has been a cumulative value of
improvements made during the preceding five years, with or without the
addition of proposed new construction, amounting to a value which exceeds 50%
of the market value of the existing building structure or improvements, the
required street dedication and improvements shall also be required.



('81 Code, § 12.12.020)



§ 96.52  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following are exempt from the require-ment to construct
standard street improvements, as provided in this subchapter:



      (1)   Property which fronts public streets upon which standard
street improvements already exist;



      (2)   Reconstruction, remodeling, enlarging or construction of
a single-family unit, regardless of the zoning.



   (B)   When substantiated by a traffic engineering evaluation, the
exemptions set forth in division (A) of this section do not apply in any one
of the following circumstances:



      (1)   When the development consists of five or more lots;



      (2)   In a development consisting of the construction of a
structure of 2,500 square feet or more.



   (C)   The City Council may determine that any provisions of this
subchapter shall be modified or omitted and the City Council is authorized
and empowered to deviate from the full requirements for the construction of
improvements as required in this subchapter and may authorize other
modifications as conditions may warrant.



('81 Code, § 12.12.030)  (Ord. 703, passed  - -78)



§ 96.53  PERMITS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to construct improvements within
a public right-of-way or easement, or any right-of-way or easement offered
for dedication to the city without first obtaining a permit from the Public
Works Director.



   (B)   The schedule of permit fees and charges shall be those adopted
by resolution of the City Council from time to time.



('81 Code, § 12.12.040)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



BUILDING NUMBERING



§ 96.65  NUMBERS TO BE PLACED ON ALLEN TRANCES.



   Every person having, controlling or occupying any house, storeroom,
building or structure situated on premises fronting on any of the public
streets within the city shall procure and place in a conspicuous position
immediately over, upon or adjacent to each and every door or entryway to any
such premises from such street, a suitable number with figures of the
denominations stated in this subchapter, and of sufficient size to be seen
from the adjoining sidewalk.



('81 Code, § 12.16.010)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 96.66  APPORTIONMENT OF NUMBERS.



   There is apportioned to each 25 feet and separate fractional part
thereof of frontage on each street in the city, except Palm Court and
McKevett Heights, its certain number as described in this subchapter, and in
Palm Court and McKevett Heights, each separate lot, irrespective of its
frontage, shall be apportioned its certain number as described in this
subchapter.



('81 Code, § 12.16.020)



§ 96.67  PLACEMENT OF ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS.



   (A)   East and west streets.  On streets running in an easterly and
westerly direction the even numbers shall be placed on the south side and the
odd numbers on the north side of each such street.



('81 Code, § 12.16.030)



   (B)   North and south streets.  On all streets running in a
northerly and southerly direction, the even numbers shall be placed on the
west side and the odd numbers on the east side of each such street.



('81 Code, § 12.16.040)



   (C)   Streets intersecting Main or Mupu Streets.  All premises
fronting on streets intersecting Main or Mupu Street shall be numbered from
Main or Mupu Street and north and south thereof and the even numbers shall be
placed on the west side of each street and the odd numbers on the east side
of each street.



('81 Code, § 12.16.050)



§ 96.68  USE OF FRACTIONAL NUMBERS.



   If more than one door or entryway to any premises exists, it shall be
numbered by adding its proper fractional number to its appropriate number.



('81 Code, § 12.16.060)



§ 96.69  ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING MAP.



   There is adopted as the official house and building numbering map of
the city that certain map on file in the office of the City Clerk entitled
“the official house and building numbering map of the city” and the
numbers appearing on such map in red ink are declared to be the proper
numbers to be placed upon the houses, stores, business places or entryways
actually upon the premises located on the properties shown upon such map.



('81 Code, § 12.16.070)



§ 96.70  VACANT LOTS NOT REQUIRED TO BE NUMBERED.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to require the numbering of any
premises whereon no building exists, but shall be construed to require the
numbering of all entryways to all premises whereon any house or other
structure to be occupied by a human being or any place of business exists.



('81 Code, § 12.16.080)



§ 96.71  BUILDING INSPECTOR TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.



   The Building Inspector shall, from time to time, notify the owners or
occupants of all structures that may be without numbers from any cause or
that may be improperly numbered to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter and he shall enforce this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 12.16.090)



CHAPTER 97:  TREES AND SHRUBS



Section



   97.01   Permit required to plant in public places



   97.02   Permit required to remove or prune in public places



   97.03   Certain trees constitute public nuisance



   97.04   Abatement of nuisance



   97.05   Tree removal



   97.06   Fees



Statutory reference:



   Injuring city improvements or trees, see Cal. Penal Code § 622



§ 97.01  PERMIT REQUIRED TO PLANT IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   No tree or shrub shall be planted in any public street,
parkway or other public place, except under a written permit issued by the
Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Application for a permit shall be made in writing.



   (C)   The permit shall state the kind, variety and location of
planting permitted and shall set forth such conditions and rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the Director of Public Works.



('81 Code, § 12.20.010)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



Statutory reference:



   Tree planting, see Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§ 22000 et seq.



§ 97.02  PERMIT REQUIRED TO REMOVE OR PRUNE IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   No tree, shrub, plant or flower planted or growing in any
public street, parkway or other public place shall be removed, cut, pruned,
trimmed or trenched around, nor shall any root thereof be cut, except by the
written permission of the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Any person desiring such written permission shall make written
application therefor to the Director of Public Works.



('81 Code, § 12.20.020)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 97.03  CERTAIN TREES CONSTITUTE PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Every tree, shrub, plant, fence, wall or other structure, or any
branch, limb or part thereof, whether located upon public or private
property, which is, or is likely to become, dangerous to the public by reason
of the fact that it is diseased or encroaches upon or overhangs or may fall
upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or which
encroaches upon or is likely to damage any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public place or any sewer or water conduit or any public drain or work is a
public nuisance.



('81 Code, § 12.20.030)



§ 97.04  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall abate or cause to be abated
the public nuisances defined in § 97.03 in the manner prescribed for the
repair of sidewalks by Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§ 5611 to 5629, inclusive,
and the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected in the same
manner as prescribed thereby.



   (B)   Such state law provisions are incorporated in this chapter and
made a part of this chapter and the abatement of such nuisances shall be
deemed substituted therein for the work of repairing the sidewalks therein
described.



   (C)   Payment of the cost of such abatement shall also be the
personal obligation of the property owner or of any other person responsible
for the creation or maintenance of the nuisance, enforceable in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



('81 Code, § 12.20.040)



§ 97.05  TREE REMOVAL.



   (A)   Expense allocation.  Any tree, shrub or plant removed from
any public street, alley or other public place at the request of any person
shall be removed at the expense of such person.



('81 Code, § 12.20.050)



   (B)   Power not limited by chapter.  Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to limit the powers of the Council to cause the removal of
trees, shrubs or flowers for the protection of the public health or safety or
for the purpose of opening, widening or improving any public street, alley or
parkway.



('81 Code, § 12.20.060)



§ 97.06  FEES.



   The schedule of permit fees and charges shall be those adopted by
resolution of the City Council from time to time.



('81 Code, § 12.20.070)  (Ord. 829, passed  - -85)



CHAPTER 98:  ABATEMENT OF COMBUSTIBLE AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS



Section



   98.01   Fire hazard



   98.02   Unlawful disposal



   98.03   Clearance of brush, vegetative growth and combustible
material from lots and structures



   98.04   Prosecution



   98.05   Clearance upon default of owner or lessee



   98.06   Collection of the cost of abatement



§ 98.01  FIRE HAZARD.



   (A)   When in the opinion of the Chief, the presence of combustible
material on a lot creates a hazard, such material shall constitute a fire
hazard.



   (B)   Definitions.



   COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL as used in this chapter means and includes weeds,
stubble, brush, rubbish, litter, dry grass, dry leaves, or flammable material
of any kind.



   LOT as used in chapter means and includes any parcel of land, whether
or not occupied by any building or structure.



('81 Code § 15.18.020) 



§ 98.02  UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL.



   Every person who places, deposits or dumps combustible material on a
lot, or on land lying within 100 feet thereof, whether or not be owns such
lot or land, or whether or not he so places, deposits or dumps on such lot or
land with the consent of the owner thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



('81 Code § 15.18.030) 



§ 98.03  CLEARANCE OF BRUSH, VEGETATIVE GROWTH AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL
FROM LOTS AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   All lots shall be cleared entirely of combustible material. If
the Chief or his agent declares this to be impractical, the guidelines set up
in Section 11.504 shall be used.



   (B)   Any person owning, leasing, controlling, operating or
maintaining any building or structure in, upon, or adjoining any hazardous
fire area, and any person owning, leasing or controlling any land adjacent to
such buildings or structures, shall at all times maintain around and adjacent
to such building or structure an effective fire-break made by removing and
clearing away, all combustible material for a distance not less than 100 feet
from all portions of the structure. This section shall not apply to single
specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants used as ground
covers, provided that they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting fire
from the native growth to any structure.



('81 Code § 15.18.040)



§ 98.04  PROSECUTION.



   The Fire Chief may serve a written order personally upon the owner or
possessor of a lot, when, in his opinion, a fire hazard exists thereon. The
order shall direct such owner or possessor to remove or abate the fire hazard
within 10 days after such personal service. Every owner or possessor who
fails or refuses to remove the said nuisance from such lot or land within 10
days after being personally served with such order is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Evidence that the current assessment roll of the county shows
real property assessed to a person shall constitute prima facie evidence that
such person is the owner of such property.



('81 Code § 15.18.050)



§ 98.05  CLEARANCE UPON DEFAULT OF OWNER OR LESSEE.



   (A)   Notice.  The Chief may, instead of, or in addition to,
following the procedure set forth in § 98.04, cause a notice to be mailed.



   (B)   Mailed notice. If notice is to be mailed, the Chief shall mail
a copy of the notice in the form provided above except that such copy shall,
in addition, include an address, assessor' s parcel number, or other
description of the property according to that set forth on the county
assessment roll, to the last assessee of the property at the address given on
the said roll. The Chief shall also post such notice, including the
description, in some conspicuous place in City Hall. The notice shall be
mailed by regular 1st class mail at least 10 days before the City Council
meets to hear the report of the Chief regarding the alleged fire hazard. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner of record in the current assessment
roll to notify any new owner or possessor of the property of the notice that
was received and forward the notice to the new owner or possessor of the
property. it shall also be the responsibility of the current owner of record
to notify the Fire Department of this change in ownership on the form
provided.



   (C)   Hearing.  At the time and place stated in the notices, the
City Council shall meet to hear the report of the Chief and any objections
thereto. The Chief or his designated representative shall attend, inform the
Council as to the alleged fire hazard, and supply the description of the lot
upon which it exists, the name and address of the last known assessee
thereof, and state what he has done in order to give notice of the hearing
according to the provisions of this Code. The Council may continue the
hearing from time to time as it sees fit.



   (D)   Clean-up order.  If, after a hearing, the City Council finds
that a fire hazard exists upon a lot, the Council may direct the Chief to
abate the fire hazard. The Council shall maintain a record of its proceedings
at such hearing and retain therewith the report of the Chief and a
description of such lot or land and, where available, the name and address of
its last know assessee.



   (E)   Abatement.  If the City Council directs the Chief to abate a
fire hazard, he shall proceed to abate such fire hazard unless it has been
abated, completely, before his agents arrive to begin such abatement. The
Fire Chief may expend department funds for such abatement and may contract
with a person or persons for the performance of the work of such abatement.



('81 Code § 15.18.060) 



§ 98.06  COLLECTION OF THE COST OF ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Account of expenses.  The Chief shall keep an account of his
expenses when abating a fire hazard pursuant to an order of the City Council
and file the account thereof with the Council which account shall include a
description, according to the county assessment roll, or the lot or land upon
which such fire hazard existed and, when available, the name and address of
the last known assessee.



   (B)   Confirmation of expense account.  The account of expenses
shall be maintained on file, open to public inspection, in the office of the
Clerk of the City Council for at least 10 days before a hearing of the
Council to confirm such account. If any person shall, before the expiration
of such 10 days, file a written request for notice of the address supplied in
any such written request. At the time fixed for such hearing, the Council
shall meet to hear any objectionS to the account of expenses filed by the
Chief. At such hearing, the Council may make any modification in the amount
it deems just, after which the account shall be confirmed.



   (C)   Special assessment and lien.  The amount of expenses incurred
by the Chief for abating a fire hazard when confirmed by the City Council
shall constitute a special assessment against the lot or land from which the
said fire hazard was removed and a lien thereon for the amount of such
assessment.



   (D)   Transmittal of account.  The City Council shall deliver a
copy of the account, as confirmed, to the Auditor of the county on or before
the 10th day of August following such confirmation.



   (E)   Inclusion of assessment.  The County Auditor shall enter the
amount stated in the account as a special assessment against the property
described in the account. The Tax Collector of the county shall include the
amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the property.
All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes
are applicable to such special assessments. All special assessments collected
shall be paid into the county treasury to be used on behalf of the Fire
Department.



('81 Code § 15.18.070)



CHAPTER 99:  FILING CLAIMS FOR CITY TAX REFUNDS



Section



   99.01   Authority



   99.02   Claims required



   99.03   Time limits of presentation of claims



   99.04   Form of claim



   99.05   Claim prerequisite to suit



   99.06   Suit



Statutory reference:



   See Cal. Gov't Code § 935



§ 99.01  AUTHORITY.



   The chapter is enacted pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 935.



(Ord. 1045, passed 11-19-01)



§ 99.02  CLAIMS REQUIRED.



   All claims against the city for money or damages excepted by Cal. Gov't
Code § 905 or not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, Cal. Gov't Code
§ 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this chapter "claims")
shall be presented within the time, and in the manner prescribed by Title 1,
Division 3.6, Part 3 of the Cal. Gov't Code (commencing with § 900 thereof)
as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further
provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 1045, passed 11-19-01)



§ 99.03  TIME LIMITS OF PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS.



   The time for the presentation of claims shall be one year after the
accrual of the cause of action.



(Ord. 1045, passed 11-19-01)



§ 99.04  FORM OF CLAIM.



   All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by
his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be
filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that
class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the
information required by Cal. Gov't Code § 910.



(Ord. 1045, passed 11-19-01)



§ 99.05  CLAIM PREREQUISITE TO SUIT.



   In accordance with Cal. Gov't Code §§ 935(b) and 945.6, all claims
shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the City
Council of Supervisors prior to the filing of any action on such claims and
no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the
requirements of § 99.02.



(Ord. 1045, passed 11-19-01)



§ 99.06  SUIT.



   Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall
conform to the requirements of  Cal. Gov't Code §§ 940-949. Any action
brought against any employee of the city shall confirm with the requirements
of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 950 and 951.



(Ord. 1045, passed 11-19-01)



CHAPTER 100:  SHOPPING CARTS



Section



   100.01   Purpose



   100.02   Definitions



   100.03   Inapplicability



   100.04   Administration



   100.05   Required signs on shopping carts



   100.06   Prohibition on removing or possessing shopping carts off
premises



   100.07   Abandonment prohibited



   100.08   Mandatory plan



   100.09   Impoundment; three-day notice



   100.10   Immediate impoundment



   100.11   Disposal of abandoned shopping carts



   100.12   Emergency services



   100.13   Enforcement provisions



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  PURPOSE.




   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code
§ 22435.8 and the city's police powers for the purpose of regulating and
prohibiting the removal of shopping carts from the premises of retail
establishments.  Abandoned shopping carts are a public nuisance because they
constitute an eyesore, interfere with pedestrian and vehicle traffic, and
contribute to blight.  Accordingly, they detrimentally affect public health,
safety and welfare.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.02  DEFINITIONS.




   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires or indicates a different meaning.





   ABANDONED SHOPPING CART.   Any shopping cart removed from the premises
of an owner without the owner's written consent, whether the shopping cart is
located on private or public property.





   CITY MANAGER. The city's City Manager or designee.





   LAUNDRY CART.  A basket mounted on wheels and used in a coinoperated
laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by customers or attendants for
the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process
them.





   OWNER.  The person owning, or exercising possession and control over,
shopping carts for the use of the owner's customers in connection with the
management and operation of the owner's business enterprise.  OWNER
includes, without limitation, officer, employees, and agents of an owner.





   PREMISES.  The entire area owned and utilized by a business
establishment that provides shopping carts for use by customers, including
any parking lot or other off-street area provided by or for an owner for use
by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle.





   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  The outdoor common area of any building, business
premises, apartment building or complex, or other premises or portion thereof
which is adjacent to public property, open to the public, and which contains
a shopping cart or shopping carts visible at street or ground level from the
adjacent public property.





   SHOPPING CART.  A basket mounted on wheels or a similar device
generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of
transporting goods of any kind, including a laundry cart.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.03  INAPPLICABILITY.




   This chapter does not apply to:





   (A)   Shopping carts removed from an owner's premises for purposes
of repair or maintenance that are in the possession or custody of the party
to whom they have been released;





   (B)   Shopping carts located on private property owned or occupied
by the person who has been granted written permission by the shopping cart
owner to posses the shopping cart for not more than 72 consecutive hours when
the shopping cart is not visible at street or ground level from the public
property adjacent to the private property.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.04  ADMINISTRATION.




   The City Manager is authorized to administer this chapter which
includes, without limitation, the ability to promulgate administrative
policies and procedures to implement and enforce this chapter.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.05  REQUIRED SIGNS ON SHOPPING CARTS.




   (A)   Every owner must affix to each shopping cart owned or provided
by the owner a sign that includes the following information:





      (1)   Identification of the owner of the shopping cart or the
business establishment to which it pertains, or both.





      (2)   Notification that the unauthorized removal of the
shopping cart from the premises of the business establishment, or the
unauthorized possession of the shopping cart, is a violation of law.





      (3)   Notification of the procedure for authorized removal of
the shopping cart from the premises.





      (4)   A telephone number or address for returning the shopping
cart to its owner or to the business establishment identified thereon. 
Although not required, the city urges owners to place current telephone
numbers on each sign for effective implementation of this chapter.




   (B)   Violation of this section constitutes an infraction.



(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.06  PROHIBITION ON REMOVING OR POSSESSING SHOPPING CARTS OFF PREMISES.




   It is unlawful to possess a shopping cart off the premises of a
business establishment without the express prior written approval of its
owner, unless the person is in the process of immediately returning the
shopping cart to the owner.  Written permission to remove a shopping cart is
valid for not more than 72 consecutive hours.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.07  ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.




   It is unlawful for any person to leave, or cause to be left, a shopping
cart that was in his or her possession or custody on any public property or
upon private property such that it becomes an abandoned  shopping cart.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.08  MANDATORY PLAN.




   (A)   Every owner must prepare, implement, and submit by April 5,
2004, a specific written plan to prevent customers from removing shopping
carts from the owner's premises and to retrieve shopping carts that were
removed from the premises.  Plans may include the following elements and are
subject to the specified approvals below:





      (1)   Notice to customers.  Written notice may be provided to
customers that removing shopping carts from the premises is unlawful.  The
notice must be provided in both English and Spanish.





      (2)   Signs.  Signs may be placed in appropriate places near
customer exits and near parking area exits to inform customers that shopping
cart removal is unlawful.





      (3)   Preventive measures.  Specific physical measures may be
implemented to prevent removal of shopping carts from the owner's premises. 
These measures may include, without limitation, devices on shopping carts
that automatically disable them if they are removed from the premises;
employing personnel to advise and deter customers from removing shopping
carts; installing obstacles to prevent shopping cart removal; collecting
security deposits for use of shopping carts; renting or selling shopping
carts to customers; and similar or like measures.





      (4)   Retrieval measures.  Specific measures may be
implemented to retrieve shopping carts that are removed from the owner's
premises.  The measures may include, without limitation, employment of
personnel or contractors to retrieve shopping carts.





   (B)   Every plan submitted is subject for the City Manager's
reasonable approval.  In the event a plan demonstrates problems for
implementation or is otherwise flawed, the City Manager will notify the owner
to submit a revised plan to the City Manager within 30 days.  The City
Manager may also require an evaluation report detailing the measures used
during the prior year to prevent shopping carts from being removed from the
owner's premises and measures used to retrieve the shopping carts.  The
report may also include an inventory of shopping carts owned or used by the
owner, the number of shopping carts which were retrieved after removal from
the owner's premises during the previous 12 months, and the number of
shopping carts replaced due to loss, theft or abandonment during the previous
12 months.





   (C)   Whenever an owner makes revisions to a plan, the revised plan
must be submitted to the City Manager for approval.





   (D)   Violation of this section constitutes an infraction.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.09  IMPOUNDMENT; THREE-DAY NOTICE.




   The City Manager may retrieve and impound any abandoned shopping
cart.  Three days after notifying the owner, the City Manager may also
retrieve and impound shopping carts observed in a location outside the
owner's premises when the owner has not retrieved it.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.10  IMMEDIATE IMPOUNDMENT.




   (A)   The City Manager may retrieve and impound any abandoned
shopping cart without providing the three-day notice provided the City
Manager gives actual notice to the owner of the impounded shopping cart
within 24 hours following the impound.  The notice must inform the owner of
the location where the shopping cart may be claimed.  Any shopping cart
reclaimed by the owner within three business days after the date of the
notice must be released and surrendered to the owner at no charge, including
waiver of any impound and storage fees or fines which otherwise would be
applicable.





   (B)   The owner of any shopping cart not reclaimed within three
business days after the date of actual notice is subject to prosecution or
the imposition of any administrative costs, fees, fines, interest and other
penalties applicable under this chapter commencing four business days after
the date of notice.





   (C)   Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner within 30 days
after receiving actual notice may be sold or disposed of pursuant to this
chapter.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.11  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS.




   Pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code § 22435.7, the City
Manager may sell or otherwise dispose of any shopping cart impounded by the
City Manager that has not been reclaimed by its owner within 30 days after
the owner receives notice.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.12  EMERGENCY SERVICES.




   Pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code § 22435.7(c), the City
Manager or any city officer, employee, or agent may immediately retrieve any
shopping cart from public or private property if its location impedes
emergency services.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.13  ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.




   In addition to any other enforcement provision of this code, the City
Manager may obtain compliance with this chapter by issuing administrative
orders which are enforceable in a court or by direct court action.  Without
limitation, the City Manager is authorized to require installation of
disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent their removal from an
owner's premises with respect to any owner who fails to prepare and implement
a written plan.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



§ 100.99  PENALTY.




   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code § 22435.7(f),
any owner failing to retrieve the owner's shopping carts within three days
after being notified regarding such shopping cart being off the owner's
premises, is guilty of a violation of the Cal. Business and Professions Code
and this chapter and may be punished with an administrative fine of $50 for
each occurrence in excess of three during the six month periods ending on
June 30 and December 31 of each calendar year.





   (B)   Pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 22435.7(i), any
owner failing to reclaim the shopping carts impounded by the city within
three business days from the date of actual notice of impoundment is guilty
of a violation of the Cal. Business and Professions Code and this chapter and
may be punished with an administrative fine of $50 for each occurrence in
excess of three during the six month periods ending on June 30 and December
31 of each calendar year.





   (C)   For purposes of this section, an occurrence includes the
retrieval of all shopping carts of an owner in a one day period.





   (D)   In addition to the fines imposed above, the owner is required
to pay the city's actual costs for retrieving and storing the owner's
shopping carts except when reclaimed by the owner within three business days.




(Ord. 1094, passed 2-17-04)



CHAPTER 101: PERMITS AUTHORIZING EVENTS CONDUCTED IN CITY PARKS AND PARK
FACILITIES



Section



   101.01   Purpose



   101.02   Definitions



   101.03   Administration by Community Services Director



   101.04   Permit required



   101.05   Notices



   101.06   Establishing fees



   101.07   Application fee



   101.08   Free speech events



   101.09   Basic rate



   101.10   Additional use fee



   101.11   Time for depositing fees



   101.12   Refunds



   101.13   Applications -Time requirements



   101.14   Applications for free speech event - Time requirements



   101.15   Application form and content



   101.16   Supplemental information required by the Director



   101.17   Action on permit application--Review by city officers



   101.18   Permit issuance



   101.19   Permit denial



   101.20   Alternative times, place, or manner



   101.21   Notice of denial



   101.22   Indemnification agreement



   101.23   Liability insurance



   101.24   Waiver of insurance requirements



   101.25   Special permit conditions



   101.26   Subsequent conditions



   101.27   Right of administrative review



   101.28   Time for administrative review



   101.29   Commencement of administrative review



   101.30   Administrative review



   101.31   City Council appeal



   101.32   Free speech events



   101.33   Permit revocation



   101.34   Emergency suspension of event



   101.35   Cordoning off the site of an event



   101.36   Public conduct during events



§ 101.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating public events
conducted in city parks and facilities that are operated and maintained by
the City Community Services Department. This chapter is intended to ensure
that such events are safe, do not unreasonably interfere with the general
public's use of parks and park facilities, and do not damage public property
beyond ordinary wear and tear. In addition, this chapter is intended to
require any person or organization sponsoring or conducting an event to
compensate the general public for all costs incurred in connection with
operating and maintaining the parks or park facilities reasonably
attributable to that event.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   BASIC RATE  means the fee established by City Council resolution for
using park property or facilities. The BASIC RATE is based on a fair share of
that part of the overall cost of operating and maintaining the city's parks
and facilities reasonably attributable to a permittee's use of city park
facilities.



   DIRECTOR means the Community Services Director, or designee.



   EVENT means any of the following:



      (1)   Any activity in a park that is planned for, or carried
out in a manner to attract, more than 100 people to attend or participate in
the activity;



      (2)   Any activity in which the persons participating in or
viewing the activity are charged a fee or solicited for donations;



      (3)   Any activity which includes the sale of food, beverages
or merchandise, and/or the rental of equipment or other things; and



      (4)   Any activity where the nature of the activity
necessitates reservation of a park, or portion thereof, before the activity
for the applicant's exclusive use or where a permit applicant otherwise seeks
to reserve a park, or portion thereof, before the activity for the
applicant's exclusive use.



   EVENT does not mean any of the following:



      (1)   Any activity conducted in a park or portion of such park
that is sponsored or carried out by another public agency, a private
organization, or an individual pursuant to a lease or other agreement between
the city and such public agency, private organization, or individual;



      (2)   Filming at a park where the person filming possesses a
filming permit issued pursuant to this Code; and



      (3)   Special events that use a park where the person
conducting or sponsoring the special event possesses a special event permit
issued pursuant to the Special Events Permit chapter of this Code.



   FREE SPEECH  means activity protected by the First Amendment of the
United States Constitution and/or Article 1, Section 2 of the California
Constitution provided that such activity is a significant part of the event.



   IN WRITING  means a telegram, facsimile, or any other written document.



   PARK means any city park or park facility operated or maintained by the
recreation and parks department including, without limitation, baseball
fields and playgrounds, but does not include golf courses.



   PERMITTEE  means a person or entity to which the city issues a permit
pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.03  ADMINISTRATION BY COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR.



   The city's Community Services Director is authorized to receive
applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise implement this chapter.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to sponsor
or conduct an event in a park unless authorized by a permit issued by the
Director pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.05  NOTICES.



   (A)   Where the provisions of this chapter require that an
applicant/permittee be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when
personally delivered to the applicant/permittee; when deposited in first
class U.S. Mail, addressed to the applicant/permittee's last known address;
or when sent via facsimile to the applicant/permittee's last known facsimile
number.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a
permittee/applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the
basis for such decision.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.06  ESTABLISHING FEES.



   All fees applicable to this chapter including, without limitation, the
basic rate, are established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.07  APPLICATION FEE.



   Applications for a permit authorizing an event in a park must be
accompanied by an application fee based on the estimated administrative costs
incurred by the city for processing applications and issuing permits.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.08  FREE SPEECH EVENTS.



   The Director must waive any fee required by this chapter for any permit
authorizing a free speech event upon proof of the applicant's inability to
pay, which must be supported by a financial declaration.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.09  BASIC RATE.



   (A)   Category 1 permittees do not pay the basic rates.  Permittees
in this category are:  City of Santa Paula co-sponsored events, programs and
activities; sponsored activity or event which all proceeds provide a direct
financial benefit to the City of Santa Paula or Santa Paula Redevelopment
Agency program; non-profit 501(c)(3) corporations consisting of less than 20
people where city staff is already present at the facility during regular
operating hours.  Non-profit organizations must provide evidence of their
status to the Director’s satisfaction.  Examples of such



evidence include, without limitation, articles of incorporation, by-laws, or
proof of Internal Revenue Code § 501(c)(3) status.



   (B)   Category 2 permittees pay a rate in an amount established by
City Council resolution.  Permittees in this category include:  Non-profit
501(c) youth sports organizations of at least 75 individuals of whom at least
85% of Santa Paula residents.  These organizations must provide evidence of
their status to the Director’s satisfaction.  Examples of such evidence
include, without limitation, articles of incorporation, by-laws, or proof of
Internal Revenue Code § 501(c) status and application materials.



   (C)   Category 3 permittees pay the basic rates.  Permittees in
this category are: Non-profits 501(c), School Districts and Public
Agencies.  Non-profit organizations must provide evidence of their status to
the Director’s satisfaction.  Examples of such evidence include, without
limitation, articles of incorporation, by-laws, or proof of Internal Revenue
Code § 501(c) status.



   (D)   Category 4 permittees pay the basic rate plus an amount
determined by City Council resolution.  Permittees in this category
include:  Individuals, youth and adult groups and private parties that
reside within the city’s jurisdiction using parks for personal use (not for
profit).



   (E)   Category 5 permittees pay the basic rate plus an amount
determined by City Council resolution.  Permittees in this category are
commercial businesses that have a primary place of business within the
city’s jurisdiction.



   (F)   Category 6 permittees pay the basic rate plus an amount
determined by City Council resolution.  An additional 25% of gross receipts
or a negotiated flat fee will be applied to this category.  Included in this
category are permittees located inside the city’s jurisdiction, using parks
commercially and for financial gain.  In determining whether an event is
commercial and for financial gain, the Director may rely upon any reasonable
evidence including, without limitation, advertisements, documentation of
entrance fees, or requests to restrict public access to the event.



   (G)   Category 7 adds an additional 40% to categories (1-5), which
are permittees, located outside of the city’s jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04; Am. Ord. 1243, passed 6-18-12)



§ 101.10  ADDITIONAL USE FEE.



   A condition of issuing a permit is that the permittee must pay the city
additional park use fees equal to the city's total estimated cost for
providing city personnel and/or equipment, if any, needed to monitor an event
or otherwise provide city services for, or in connection with, the event.
These fees will be determined by the Director based on the estimate of the
Police Chief, Fire Chief, and/or Director as to the number and hours of
employment of city personnel necessary to control the event or otherwise
provide city services for or in connection with such event.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.11  TIME FOR DEPOSITING FEES.



   A permit is not valid unless, in addition to the other conditions
contained in this chapter, the permittee pays all additional use fees to the
city within five business days after a permit is issued.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.12  REFUNDS.



   (A)   The Director will refund all fees submitted pursuant to this
chapter, except for the application fee, if a permittee cancels a permit more
than ten business days before the date of an event.



   (B)   If a permittee cancels a permit less than ten business days
before the event, the Director will refund 50% the basic rate fees and all
other fees excluding the initial application fee and any fees for cancelled
services such as security, police or insurance incurred by the city.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.13  APPLICATIONS - TIME REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for
a permit authorizing an event must be filed in the Director's office at least:



      (1)   Sixty days before the date of such event to ensure
administrative review and City Council appeal;



      (2)   Twenty business days before the date of such event, in
which case the opportunity for a City Council appeal is deemed waived; or



      (3)   A lesser time period approved by the Director provided
that there is sufficient time to process the application pursuant to this
chapter. Any applicant submitting an application pursuant to this section
less than 20 days before an event is deemed to have waived the administrative
review and City Council appeal.



   (B)   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for
a permit authorizing an event will be denied, approved, or conditionally
approved by the Director within seven business days after receiving the
completed application. Following his/her decision, the Director must promptly
attempt to notify the applicant orally, and will provide written notification
to the applicant.



   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, the Director must receive the
applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval within five
business days after the applicant was served with notification of the
decision. Failure to receive actual notice does not invalidate the permit.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.14  APPLICATIONS FOR FREE SPEECH EVENT - TIME REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Completed applications for a permit authorizing a free speech
event must be filed in the Director's office at least:



      (1)   Thirty-five days before the date of such event to ensure
administrative review and City Council appeal;



      (2)   Two business days before the date of such event in which
case the opportunity for a City Council appeal is deemed waived; or



      (3)   A time period less than two business days before the
date of such event upon good cause shown. Applications will not be accepted
less than 24 hours before an event.



   (B)   Completed applications will be denied, approved, or
conditionally approved by the Director within one business day after
receiving the application. The Director must promptly attempt to notify the
applicant orally, and provide written notification to the applicant and
Director. Such notice must provide detailed facts and reasons for any denial
or conditional approval. The Director must consult with the City Attorney
before denying, or specially conditioning, a permit for a free speech event.



   (C)   The Director must receive applicant's acceptance of the
approval or conditional approval at least 24 hours before the event. Failure
to accept the Director's decision or to timely file an administrative review
request is deemed a withdrawal of the application.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.15  APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENT.



   Permit applications will be in a form prescribed by the Director and
contain all of the following information:



   (A)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone
numbers of the person filing the application;



   (B)   If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the name,
mailing address, and daytime



telephone number of the organization; and, if requested by the Director,
written documentation of the authority under which the applicant is applying
for the permit on behalf of the organization;



   (C)   The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the
person who will be present during, and responsible for, the event;



   (D)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone
number of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and the
applicant is unavailable;



   (E)   The nature of the event;



   (F)   The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of
the event, including assembly and removal;



   (G)   The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries
and activity locations;



   (H)   The estimated number of participants in the event;



   (I)   Unless the use is prohibited by this code, the type and
estimated number of vehicles, animals and/or structures that will be used in
the event;



   (J)   A description of any sound amplification equipment to be
employed at the event;



   (K)   The number, size, and material of construction of any signs or
banners to be used in the event;



   (L)   The event's parking requirements;



   (M)   The location of any water, first aid, or comfort stations to
be provided at the event;



   (N)   The type and number of any vendors who will sell or prepare
food, beverages or other goods or services at the event for which a business
license is required by this code;



   (O)   Whether alcohol will be served at the event; and



   (P)   The type of entertainment.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.16  SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIRECTOR.



   In addition to the information required in this chapter, applications
for all permits authorizing an event must include such supplemental
information which the Director may find reasonably necessary, given the
nature of the event, in order to determine whether to approve or deny a
permit.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.17  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION –REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS.



   (A)   After an event permit application is filed, the Director will
promptly forward the application to directors, or designees (collectively
"reviewing officers"), whose departments are affected by the proposed event
for their recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without
limitation:



      (1)   The Fire Chief;



      (2)   The Police Chief; and/or



      (3)   The Public Works Director.



   (B)   Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers will
consider the application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide
the Director with written recommendations regarding:



      (1)   Any special conditions for a permit;



      (2)   Whether, based on the scope of the proposed event, a
pre-event operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be
necessary, the Director will notify the applicant of the time and place of
the meeting within a reasonable time before the event; and



      (3)   Any additional recommendations.



   (C)   The reviewing officers should complete their review before
when the Director must make a decision on the application.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.18  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Director must issue a permit if:



      (1)   The application was complete in accordance with this
chapter;



      (2)   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and



      (3)   The applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional
approval in writing.



   (B)   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform
to the general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special
permit conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the Director to protect
public safety, and/or welfare.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.19  PERMIT DENIAL.



   A permit may be denied for the following reasons:



   (A)   The application is incomplete;



   (B)   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental
application information requested by the Director;



   (C)   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;



   (D)   The event's time and/or method will unreasonably interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site of the event;



   (E)   The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles at the
event prevents public safety and/or emergency services from reaching areas at
or contiguous to the event;



   (F)   The size of the event will overextend public safety and/or
emergency services to the extent that the safety of event participants,
attendees, and/or the remainder of the city will be seriously jeopardized;
provided, however, that this does not authorize denying a permit because of
the need to protect participants from the conduct of others;



   (G)   The location of the event will substantially interfere with
previously scheduled construction or maintenance work at the event site;



   (H)   The application was not timely submitted and there is
insufficient time to investigate and process the application pursuant to the
timelines herein;



   (I)   The proposed event conflicts or interferes with an event
previously permitted, or about to be permitted, for the same location, date,
and time; or



   (J)   The nature or size of the event threatens to cause significant
damage to a park or park property, including, without limitation, landscaping
or natural vegetation; provided, however, this does not authorize denying a
permit because of threatened damage to a park or park property caused by the
actions of persons not conducting such event.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.20  ALTERNATIVE TIME, PLACE, OR MANNER.



   If the Director denies a permit for an event that would be acceptable
by changing the event's time, place, or manner, then the Director will inform
the applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the
alternative time, place, or manner then the Director will issue a permit in
accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.21  NOTICE OF DENIAL.



   Where the Director denies a permit, the Director will serve notice to
the applicant and provide copies to the City Attorney.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.22  INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.



   Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement, in a form
approved by the City Attorney, with the city which will, in part, indemnify
the city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any liability arising
from the permittee's event. Such an agreement will be filed with the Director
before a permit is issued.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.23  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   (A)   Insurance requirements. Except as otherwise provided by this
chapter, permittees must obtain public liability insurance from an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of California and having a
financial rating in Best's Insurance Guide of not less than "A:VII." Such
insurance must provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for death,
personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way connected
with such event. The amount of such insurance will be based upon the city's
insurance guidelines and reflect the size and nature of the event and the
risks foreseeably involved. Such insurance will name the city and the city's
officers, employees, and agents as additional insureds under the coverage
afforded. In addition, such insurance must be primary and noncontributing
with respect to any other insurance available to the city and will include a
severability of interest (cross-liability) clause. If alcoholic beverages are
sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for
liquor liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00.



   (B)   Certificates of insurance. A copy of the policy or a
certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form
approved by the city's risk manager, must be filed with the Director not less
than ten business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before
the date of the event unless the Director for good cause waives the filing
deadline.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.24  WAIVER OF INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   The Director for a free speech permit must waive the insurance required
by this section.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.25  SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The Director may condition a permit with reasonable
requirements concerning the time, place, or manner of holding such event as
necessary to protect the safety of persons and property or to control
vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the site of the event,
provided that these requirements are not imposed in a manner that will
unreasonably restrict the exercise of free speech rights.



   (B)   Conditions may include, without limitation:



      (1)   Accommodating an event's pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, including restriction of events to a particular park;



      (2)   Avoiding substantial interference with public safety
and/or emergency service access;



      (3)   Limiting the number and type of vehicles, animals, or
structures to be displayed or used in the event;



      (4)   Having city personnel inspecting and approving stages,
booths, and other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the event,
in order to ensure that such structures or vehicles are safely constructed
and can be safely operated;



      (5)   Providing the city a security deposit for repair and/or
additional maintenance if the event uses structures, displays or uses large
animals, operates water stations, food sales, beverage sales, and/or sales of
other goods or services;



      (6)   Providing and using traffic cones and barricades;



      (7)   Providing and operating first aid stations or sanitary
facilities, including sanitary facilities accessible to the disabled;



      (8)   Providing and using garbage containers, and cleaning and
restoring the event site upon termination of the event;



      (9)    Using sound amplification equipment, and restricting
the amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the
course of the event;



      (10)   The manner for providing notice of permit conditions to
event participants;



      (11)   Providing and using emergency services;



      (12)   Obtaining any and all licenses or permits required by
this Code or California law for the sale or distribution of food, beverages,
or other goods or services at the event, including, without limitation, a
valid health permit as required by Cal. Health & Safety Code § 113920, and
any successor statute or regulation, if food is distributed to the public
more than three days in any 90-day period;



      (13)   Providing electricity, gas, and water for the event;



      (14)   Providing signage and barricades that may be necessary
to avoid conflicts between persons participating in the event and other
persons using the park in and around the site of the event or which may be
necessary to protect the park, landscaping, or natural vegetation in and
around the site of the event;



      (15)   Providing monitors and security personnel that may be
necessary to safely carry out the event;



      (16)   Permitting access to the site of the event through park
gates at times when gates are normally closed in order to prepare for an
event or to clean up and remove equipment and structures at the conclusion of
the event;



      (17)   Permitting overnight camping by persons engaged in
preparing for the event or providing overnight security for equipment and
structures utilized in such event; and



      (18)   Providing for the manner in which alcohol sales and
service, if any, are conducted.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.26  SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The Director may add additional conditions to previously
issued permits upon learning or discovering facts not previously disclosed or
reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   Should subsequent conditions be required, the Director must
serve written notice on the permittee of this decision. When acting upon
information obtained 24 hours before an event, the Director may orally inform
the permittee, and city personnel overseeing the event, of the new conditions.



   (C)   Except where otherwise provided, a permittee may seek review
of imposition of subsequent conditions to the Director as provided in this
chapter. The City Manager's decision is a final determination. There is no
right of City Council appeal.



   (D)   Except where otherwise provided, an applicant conducting a
free speech event may appeal the decision to impose subsequent conditions
through a hearing before the City Manager. The City Manager's decision is a
final determination. There is no right of City Council appeal.



      (1)   An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing provided
the applicant appeals the Director's decision within 24 hours of receiving
notice of such conditions and the event's purpose is for free speech.



      (2)   The hearing will be at the City Manager's office at 4:00
p.m. the next business day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise
agreed upon. The City Manager must issue a decision orally at the conclusion
of the hearing and also notify the applicant and the Director in writing of
the City Manager's decision. Any notification will describe, with
particularity, the facts and reasons supporting the decision.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.27  RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative
review of the Director's decision pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.28  TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be
commenced within five days from the date on which written notice of the
Director's decision is served on the applicant/permittee.



   (B)   If the request is untimely, the Director may, nevertheless,
extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.29  COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   A request for administrative review must be on a form provided by the
Director and contain the following information:



   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the person making
the request;



   (B)   A description of the decision, determination or order which is
the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order
was made or issued;



   (C)   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and



   (D)   Such other information as the Director may require.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.30  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the
Director must promptly provide a copy of the notice to the City Manager.



   (B)   Upon receiving a request for review from the Director, the
City Manager must review the request and, within ten days of receiving the
request notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:



      (1)   The Director's decision is affirmed;



      (2)   The Director's decision is modified;



      (3)   The Director's decision is reversed and a permit is
issued or issued without special conditions.



   (C)   The City Manager may, but is not required to, conduct a
hearing at a time and place mutually agreeable to the parties. If the parties
cannot agree on the time or place, then it will be held the next business day
at 4:00 p.m. at the City Manager's office.



   (D)   In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any
notification to the requestor must set forth any modifications of the
Director's decision.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.31  CITY COUNCIL APPEAL.



   Unless otherwise provided, an applicant may appeal the City Manager's
decision to the City Council within ten days of that decision as provided
elsewhere in this Code or by city policy and procedure.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.32  FREE SPEECH EVENTS.



   (A)   The applicant may seek, in writing, administrative review by
the City Manager within one business day of the Director's oral or written
notification, whichever is first, of a denial, revocation, or subsequent
conditioning. An administrative hearing will be held at a time and place
mutually agreeable to the parties. If the parties cannot agree on the time or
place, then it will be held the next business day after the Director's
decision at 4:00 p.m. in the City Manager's office. The City Manager may
issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing, but must notify the
applicant and the Director in writing of the City Manager's decision. Any
notification will describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons
supporting the decision.



   (B)   The City Manager's decision:



      (1)   Is a final determination without right to City Council
appeal if applicant waived the applicant's right to City Council appeal as
provided in this chapter;



      (2)   If the right to City Council appeal is not waived, may
be appealed to the City Council in writing within two business days of either
oral or written notification of the City Manager's decision, whichever is
first.



   (C)   Applicant will be deemed to have waived administrative review
rights should the applicant fail to:



      (1)   File a completed application at least two days before an
event;



      (2)   Seek review of the Director's decision; or



      (3)   Attend the administrative hearing personally or through
an authorized representative.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.33  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Director may revoke a permit upon learning or discovering
facts requiring permit denial not previously disclosed or reasonably
discoverable.



   (B)   The Director may revoke an event permit when the permittee
and/or event violates the permit's terms and conditions, or when event
participants violate applicable laws or regulations; provided, however, that
this subsection will not authorize revoking a permit because of the need to
protect participants from the conduct of others; and, provided further, that
the Director will not revoke a permit without warning the permittee and
allowing him/her to correct the violation(s) within a reasonable time.



   (C)   If the Director revokes a permit before the date of the event,
the Director must immediately serve written notice of revocation on the
permittee and provide copies of the notice to all city personnel charged with
carrying out any responsibility under this chapter. If the Director revokes a
permit on the day of the event after learning of facts justifying revocation
less than 24 hours before the event commences, the Director must announce
such action to the event participants, to those city officers and employees
monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the person in
charge of the event, if such person can be located at the site of the event.
Written notice must be delivered after such action to the permittee and
Director.



   (D)   An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing before the City
Manager provided:



      (1)   The applicant appeals the Director’s decision within
24 hours of receiving notice of such conditions; and



      (2)   The event is scheduled at least 48 hours after the
hearing time.



      (3)   The hearing will be at the City Manager's office at 4:00
p.m. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed upon.
The City Manager must issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the
hearing and also notify the applicant and the Director in writing of the City
Manager's decision.



   (E)   The City Manager's decision is a final determination. There is
no right of City Council appeal.



   (F)   The Director or City Manager can only revoke a permit for a
free speech event after consulting with the City Attorney.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.34  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF EVENT.



   The Director and any sworn public safety officer may temporarily
suspend an event whenever there is an emergency that requires such action to
protect public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and event
participants must immediately comply with the suspending officer's
instructions. The Director will immediately attempt to notify the applicant
orally and will notify the applicant and the City Manager in writing, within
24 hours after the suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the
reasons for the suspension.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.35  CORDONING OFF THE SITE OF AN EVENT.



   The City Manager, or designee, is authorized and directed to establish
traffic and/or crowd control devices on or within the city's streets, parking
facilities, sidewalks, or other public rights-of-way, and to undertake other
actions necessary to cordon off the site of an event. In addition, the City
Manager, or Director, will, when appropriate, cause the route or site of such
event to be posted as a no-parking zone for the duration of the event and
sufficiently in advance thereof as may be necessary to prevent vehicles from
parking along the site of the event.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



§ 101.36  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING EVENTS.



   (A)   Interference with event. It is unlawful to physically
obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise interfere with any event authorized by
a permit or with any person, animal, or vehicle participating or used in such
event.



   (B)   Prohibited parking. It is unlawful to park vehicles along or
within any portion of the site of an event authorized by a permit, when the
route or site had been posted as a no-parking zone by the Director in the
manner authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. 1128, passed 12-20-04)



CHAPTER 102:  UNRULY GATHERINGS



Section



   102.01   Purpose



   102.02   Definitions



   102.03   Prohibitions



   102.04   Administration; policies and procedures



   102.05   Second response; response costs



   102.06   Notice; responsible person signature



   102.07   Notice; signature unavailable



   102.08   Response cost invoice



   102.09   Collection of fees



   102.10   Administrative appeals



   102.11   Advance deposit; hardship waiver



   102.12   Conduct of hearings



   102.13   Hearing officer decision



   102.14   Right to judicial review



   102.15   Disposition of response costs



   102.16   Recovery of response costs; liens



   102.17   Lien procedure



   102.18   Recording a lien



   102.19   Administrative fee



   102.20   Satisfaction of lien



   102.21   Enforcement



§ 102.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers for the
purpose of prohibiting and deterring unruly events that constitute a public
nuisance and, accordingly, threaten public health, safety, and welfare.
Persons who actively or passively aid, allow, or tolerate such nuisances will
be held strictly liable for the city's abatement costs. It is in the public
interest to require persons responsible for such nuisances to pay the costs
of special public services rather than to burden the general public.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.



   ALCOHOL has the same meaning as set forth in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §
23003.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE has the same meaning as set forth in Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code §23004.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor,
as listed in the Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Cal. Health & Safety Code
§§ 11000, et seq.).



   ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY means a violation of any of the provisions of
Cal. Health & Safety Code, Chapter 6 (commencing with § 11350) or Chapter
6.5 (commencing with §11400), and any successor statute or regulation.



   MINOR means any person under the age of 18.



   PREMISES means any unimproved or improved real property, including,
without limitation, dwelling units, rental units, garage facilities, streets,
alleyways, stairwells, elevators, and, as the context permits or requires,
any public or private property which abuts any of such areas.



   RENTAL UNIT includes:



      (1)   Any dwelling unit as defined in this Code, including,
without limitation, any single- and multi-family residence, duplex, or
condominium located in the city;



      (2)   Any hotel or motel room;



      (3)   Any assembly hall;



      (4)   Any mobile home, whether rent is paid for the mobile
home, the land upon which the mobile home is located, or both; and



      (5)   Any recreational vehicle, as defined in Cal. Civ. Code
§ 799.24, if located in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park,
whether rent is paid for the recreation vehicle, the land upon which it is
located, or both.



   RESPONSE COSTS means the cost associated with responses by law
enforcement, fire, and other public services (for example, and not
limitation, public works or building safety) to unruly gatherings including,
without limitation:



      (1)   Salaries and benefits of personnel for the amount of
time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise addressing unruly
gatherings and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s);



      (2)   The cost of any medical treatment to or for any
personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving an unruly gathering;



      (3)   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property
damage, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to,
remaining at or leaving unruly gatherings; and



      (4)   Any other costs recoverable in compliance with Cal. Civ.
Code § 1714.9.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON means any person owning, leasing, maintaining, or
otherwise controlling a premises including, without limitation, the agent or
representative of a person with possessory interest in a premises who
organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts, or controls unruly gatherings. A
responsible person need not be present at unruly gatherings in order to be
liable for response costs as set forth in this chapter. Prior knowledge of
unruly gatherings is not required for a finding that an individual is a
responsible person. This chapter applies to a responsible person whether or
not that person paid compensation for use of a premises.



   UNRULY GATHERING means any activity involving two or more persons on a
premises which includes any of the following and interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life, public or private property, or public safety:



      (1)   Violations of this Code with regard to noise;



      (2)   Interference with the normal flow of pedestrian or
vehicle traffic in violation of this Code or other applicable law;



      (3)   Curfew violations of this Code by minors;



      (4)   Consumption of alcohol and alcoholic beverages in
violation of this Code or other applicable law including, without limitation,
consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors or individuals younger than 21
years; or



      (5)   Illegal drug activity or use of controlled substances in
violation of any applicable law.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.03  PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for a responsible person to cause, knowingly permit, or
by insufficient control to allow any premises under the responsible person's
control to be used or maintained for an unruly event.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.04  ADMINISTRATION; POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.



   The Police Chief will administer this chapter under the direction of
the City Manager. The City Manager may promulgate such administrative
procedures as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.05  SECOND RESPONSE; RESPONSE COSTS.



   Utilization of any public employee during any response to unruly
gatherings after the first warning, where responding police officers
determine there is a violation of this chapter, is a public service over and
above the services generally provided within the city's jurisdiction and,
accordingly, constitutes a special public service.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.06  NOTICE; RESPONSIBLE PERSON SIGNATURE.



   (A)   When police officers respond to unruly gatherings, the police
officers can, but are not required to, issue written notice to the
responsible person stating as follows:



      (1)   If police officers are required to return to the same
premises within the following 12-hour period in response to a complaint; or



      (2)   If police officers are required to return to the same
premises hosting an unruly gathering a total of three times or more within a
six month period in response to a complaint; and



      (3)   The responding police officers determine there is a
violation of this chapter; then



      (4)   Such additional responses by police officers, or other
public employees, will constitute response costs the cost of which must be
paid by the responsible person. Any such costs will become the responsible
person's personal obligation and be a debt to the city.



   (B)   Notices issued pursuant to this section must be signed by the
responsible person which acknowledges receipt of the warning. A signed copy
may be left with the responsible person. If a second or subsequent response
is required, police officers must have a responsible person sign a response
cost invoice acknowledging the special public services and additional
invoices for any further responses.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.07  NOTICE; SIGNATURE UNAVAILABLE.



   If no responsible person is available on the premises when the police
are present, or the responsible person refuses to sign receipt of the notice,
a copy of the notice must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises on
each occasion the police respond.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.08  RESPONSE COST INVOICE.



   (A)   The Police Chief must provide a written response cost invoice
to the responsible person by certified mail. The response cost invoice must
state the following:



      (1)   The identification of the responsible person;



      (2)   The address of the premises;



      (3)   The factual circumstances constituting the unruly
gathering;



      (4)   The date(s) and time(s) that special public services
were provided; and



      (5)   A copy of the warning notice(s) provided to the
responsible person.



   (B)   The response cost invoice must also state that the responsible
person may file a written appeal of the determination within ten days after
receiving the notice and describe the procedure required for such an appeal.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.09  COLLECTION OF FEES.



   (A)   All fees and charges levied for response costs are due and
payable upon presentation.



   (B)   All response costs constitute a valid debt to the city and
against the responsible person or, if the responsible person is a minor, the
responsible person's parents and guardians.



   (C)   If a responsible person does not timely appeal the response
cost invoice in accordance with this chapter, and if any amount remains
unpaid after reasonable and practical attempts have been made by the city to
obtain payment, the City Manager, or designee, is authorized to take all
legal and practicable collection efforts to recover the outstanding debt,
together with any penalties, any related charges and fees accrued due to
nonpayment.



   (D)   The City Attorney is authorized to file an action on the
city's behalf for injunctive relief, or other appropriate civil action, to
require the responsible person to comply with this chapter.



   (E)   Fees and charges to be levied for recovering city costs for
notification and collection of delinquent accounts will be established by
City Council resolution. Such fees and charges are part of the response costs.



   (F)   A court rendering a judgment pursuant to this section may, in
addition to any other order provided by law, require the payment of
reasonable attorney's fees, and costs of investigation, discovery and court
costs.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.10  ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.



   Responsible persons served with a response cost invoice in accordance
with this chapter may appeal the response cost invoice to the City Manager,
provided:



   (A)   A request for review must be commenced within ten days from
the date on which the response cost invoice is served on the responsible
person. If an appeals request is untimely, the City Manager may,
nevertheless, extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.



   (B)   A request for appeal must be on a form provided by the city
and contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
making the request;



      (2)   A copy of the response cost invoice or, if that document
is unavailable, the approximate date, time, address, and amount of response
costs;



      (3)   A brief description of all grounds for making the
request;



      (4)   Whether an administrative hearing is requested;



      (5)   Be accompanied by an advance deposit of the response
costs or a request for a hardship waiver; and



      (6)   Such other information as the city may require.



   (C)   Upon receiving an appeal, the City Manager must appoint an
independent hearing officer to review the request.



   (D)   If a responsible person requests a hearing, the City Clerk
will schedule a hearing on a date not less than 15 nor more than 60 days from
the date the hearing is requested. Written notice of the date, time and
location of the administrative hearing must be provided to the responsible
person at least 15 days before the hearing date.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.11  ADVANCE DEPOSIT; HARDSHIP WAIVER.



   (A)   Responsible persons financially unable to make an advance
deposit of the response costs, may file for a hardship waiver. The request
for a hardship waiver must be filed with the City Clerk's office on a form
containing information that may be required by the City Clerk. The City Clerk
will review the request and determine whether a waiver is justified. A waiver
may only be approved if the request for waiver is accompanied by a sworn
affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating
the responsible person's actual financial inability to deposit the full
amount of the fine.



   (B)   The City Clerk will inform the responsible person in writing
regarding whether the City Clerk approved the waiver. This determination must
be served upon the responsible person by mail at the address provided in the
waiver application. The City Clerk's determination is final.



   (C)   Should the Clerk determine that a waiver is unjustified, the
responsible person must deposit the response cost amount with the city not
later than ten days after the date of that decision. Failure to make a
deposit within ten days after waiver denial is deemed a waiver of the
responsible person's right to an administrative appeal and the response costs
will be deemed delinquent.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.12  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   Waiver of personal appearance at hearing. In lieu of
personally appearing at an administrative hearing, the responsible person may
request that the hearing officer decide the matter based on the written
appeal and any other documentary evidence submitted by the responsible person
or Police Chief, or designee, before the hearing date.



   (B)   Failure to appear at hearing. Failure of a responsible person
to appear at the hearing is deemed a waiver of the right to be personally
present at the hearing. The hearing officer must then decide the matter based
upon the written appeal, the response cost invoice, any documentary evidence
previously submitted, and any additional evidence that may be presented at
the hearing by the Police Chief or designee.



   (C)   Continuation of hearings. The hearing officer may continue any
hearing and request additional information from the Police Chief, or
designee, or responsible person before issuing a written decision.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.13  HEARING OFFICER DECISION.



   (A)   Within ten days of receiving the appeal or, if a hearing is
requested, after a hearing, the hearing officer must provide the responsible
person with a written notification that:



      (1)   The response cost invoice is affirmed;



      (2)   The response cost invoice is modified; or



      (3)   The response cost invoice is vacated.



   (B)   The hearing officer's decision is a final determination. There
is no right of City Council appeal.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.14  RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   A responsible person may appeal the hearing officer's decision
by filing an appeal with the Superior Court pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §
53069.4, or any successor statute, within 20 days from service of the hearing
officer's decision.



   (B)   Should the responsible person file a timely appeal with the
Superior Court, the requirement to pay the response costs is suspended and
the payment of the response costs, if any, will be in accordance with the
Superior Court decision.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.15  DISPOSITION OF RESPONSE COSTS.



   (A)   Should the hearing officer uphold the response cost invoice,
then the city can retain the deposited response costs.



   (B)   Should the hearing officer vacate the response cost invoice,
then the city must promptly refund the amount of the deposited amount, if any.



   (C)   Should the hearing officer uphold the response cost invoice
and a hardship waiver was previously granted, the due date for paying the
response costs will be 30 days from the date of the notice of the hearing
officer's decision.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.16  RECOVERY OF RESPONSE COSTS; LIENS.



   In addition to any other legal remedy, the city may place a lien on
property owned by the responsible person in an amount equal to the sum of the
response costs delinquent for more than 90 days, plus penalties and interest.
If multiple responsible persons exist, they will be jointly and severally
liable for any payments so ordered.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.17  LIEN PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The City Manager, or designee, may initiate proceedings to
record a lien conforming with this chapter if the decision is not appealed.



   (B)   Before recording the lien, the City Manager, or designee, must
submit a report to the City Clerk stating the amounts due and owing.



   (C)   The City Clerk will fix a time, date, and place for the City
Council to consider the report and any protests or objections to it.



   (D)   The City Clerk must serve the responsible person with a
hearing notice not less than ten days before the hearing date. The notice
must set forth the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, and any
penalties and interest that is due. Notice must be delivered first-class
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to each responsible person's address as it
appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the
County of Ventura, whichever is more current. Service by mail is effective on
the date of mailing and failure of responsible person to actually receive
notice does not affect its validity.



   (E)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council will adopt
a resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the lien amount.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.18  RECORDING A LIEN.



   Within 30 days following the City Council's adoption of a resolution
imposing a lien, the City Clerk will file same as a judgment lien in the
Ventura County Recorder's Office.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.19  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.



   Each responsible person against whose property an assessment is levied
pursuant to this chapter will also be assessed an administrative fee in an
amount established by City Council resolution based on the costs incurred in
levying the assessment. The administrative fee will be included in the lien
amount approved by the City Council and recorded against the responsible
person's property.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.20  SATISFACTION OF LIEN.



   Once the city receives full payment for outstanding principal,
penalties, and costs, the City Clerk will either record a notice of
satisfaction or provide the responsible person with a notice of satisfaction
for recordation at the Ventura County Recorder's Office. This notice of
satisfaction will cancel the city's lien.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



§ 102.21  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violations of this chapter may be enforced as follows:



      (1)   Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the City
Attorney's discretion. For three or more violations at the same premises
occurring within any 12 consecutive month period, a violation of this chapter
is deemed to be a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Abated as a public nuisance. Because unruly gatherings
constitute an immediate threat to public health, safety, and welfare, the
procedures for emergency abatement may be used as provided by this Code and
can include, without limitation, an order requiring dispersal of the unruly
gathering.



   (B)   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to any other criminal or civil remedies including, without
limitation, those set forth elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. 1163, passed 8-7-06)



CHAPTER 103:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 104: [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 105:  ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS



Section



   105.01   Purpose



   105.02   Definitions



   105.03   Administration by administrator



   105.04   Registration required



   105.05   Alarm business prohibitions



   105.06   Prohibition against automatic dialing device



   105.07   Audible alarm prohibition



   105.08   Activation of alarms prohibited



   105.09   False alarms prohibited; false alarm fees



   105.10   Establishing fees



   105.11   Application fee



   105.12   Alarm system registry



   105.13   Change in application information



   105.14   Conditions



   105.15   Silent or audible alarm, presumption



   105.16   Alarm business duties



   105.17   Alarm agent duties



   105.18   Deactivation of audible alarm



   105.19   Emergency power supply



   105.20   Liability for fees



§ 105.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with the city's police powers, as
set forth in the California Constitution, in order to inform the city's Fire
and Police Departments regarding which commercial buildings use alarm systems
and, if required, to recover costs associated with responding to false alarms.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   211 ALARM or TAKEOVER ALARM means a silent alarm dispatch request
generated by the manual activation of an alarm system device intended to
signal that a robbery is in progress or that an alarm site has been entered
by intruders.



   ALARM means a sound, signal, or message generated by an alarm system.



   ALARM AGENT means a person employed by an alarm business, whose duties
include altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, or
servicing alarm systems.



   ALARM BUSINESS means a commercial enterprise that sells, leases,
installs, moves, maintains, alters, services, or monitors alarm systems.
Alarm business does not include a business that:



      (1)   Sells but does not service alarm systems; or



      (2)   Manufactures alarm systems and sells the same to
retailers, and not to the public.



   ADMINISTRATOR means the Police Chief, or designee.



   ALARM DISPATCH means a visit by a public safety officer to an alarm
site in response to an alarm dispatch request.



   ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST means a notification to the city that an alarm
has been activated at an alarm site.



   ALARM SITE means a building, structure, or portions thereof, at which
an alarm system operates, except that in multi-tenant structures, each alarm
system is considered to serve a separate alarm site.



   ALARM SYSTEM means any mechanical or electrical device or connected
devices, not including a smoke detector, designed or used for the detection
of unauthorized entry into a building or structure, or the commission of an
unlawful act within a building or structure, or the existence of a fire or
medical emergency within a building or structure, that when activated emits a
sound and/or transmits a signal or message.



   AUDIBLE ALARM. means an alarm system device that, when activated, emits
an audible sound at the alarm site.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE means a device that automatically sends, by
direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal
indicating the existence of an emergency to the Public Safety Department or
other city facility.



   FALSE ALARM DISPATCH means an alarm dispatch to which the responding
public safety officer, having completed a timely investigation of the alarm
site, finds no evidence of a situation requiring a response by a public
safety officer.



   MONITORING means the process by which an alarm business receives
signals from alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the city.



   ONE PLUS CODE means an alarm system code that adds one to the last
digit of the normal arm/disarm code.



   OWNER means any person owning or leasing real property upon which an
alarm system is operated or maintained.



   PERSONAL ALARM DEVICE means a personal reporting device carried on a
person to report a medical or other personal emergency.



   PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT means the Santa Paula Police Department or
Santa Paula Fire Department.



   SILENT ALARM means an alarm system device or connected devices, when
activated, automatically transmits a non-audible message or signal to an
alarm business, indicating the need for an emergency response to the alarm
site.



   UNSECURED, in reference to an alarm site, means that a building or
structure is not equipped with a lock, bar or other device that prevents a
door or window from being opened from the exterior of the alarm site without
breaking the door or window.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.03  ADMINISTRATION BY ADMINISTRATOR.



   The administrator is authorized to implement this chapter.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.04  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to
operate or maintain an alarm system unless the alarm system is registered as
required by this chapter.



   (B)   Registration is not required for the following:



      (1)   Alarm systems in residential dwelling units;



      (2)   Personal alarm devices;



      (3)   Alarm systems affixed to motor vehicles or boats; and



      (4)   Alarm systems designed to alert only the inhabitants of
the alarm site and that do not have audible alarms that can be heard at the
exterior of the alarm site.



   (C)   This chapter does not apply to alarms or alarm systems owned,
operated, or maintained by the city.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.05  ALARM BUSINESS PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for an alarm business to:



   (A)   Program an alarm system so that a one plus code activates the
alarm;



   (B)   Install a single-action, non-recessed button as a device to
activate a 211 Alarm or a takeover alarm; or



   (C)   Install an automatic dialing device in an alarm system.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.06  PROHIBITION AGAINST AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.



   It is unlawful for an alarm system to consist of or include an
automatic dialing device.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.07  AUDIBLE ALARM PROHIBITION.



   It is unlawful for an alarm system to include an audible alarm that:



   (A)   Emits sounds similar to that made by an emergency vehicle,
siren or civil defense warning system; or



   (B)   Activates for any purpose other than detection of an
unauthorized entry into the alarm site



or a hazard prompting a response by the Public Safety Department.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.08  ACTIVATION OF ALARMS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a 211 Alarm or a takeover alarm to be
activated by means of a single-action, non-recessed button.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any alarm be activated by a one plus code.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any alarm system to be directly connected
to the Public Safety Department.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.09  FALSE ALARMS PROHIBITED; FALSE ALARM FEES.



   (A)   Owners must take all practicable and reasonable actions to
prevent false alarms from being generated by their alarm system.



   (B)   Each alarm system is allowed three false alarms during any
calendar year. The city may impose a fee on a owner for each subsequent false
alarm generated by an alarm system that causes a response by the Public
Safety Department.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.10  ESTABLISHING FEES.



   All fees applicable to this chapter including, without limitation, the
application fee, are established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.11  APPLICATION FEE.



   Applications for a permit issued in accord with this chapter must be
accompanied by an application fee based on the estimated administrative costs
incurred by the city for processing applications and issuing permits.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.12  ALARM SYSTEM REGISTRY.



   Administrator will maintain an alarm system registry that contains the
following for each alarm system:



   (A)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone
numbers of two contact persons in the event of an alarm;



   (B)   The alarm system's address;



   (C)   Notification that nothing in this chapter imposes a duty upon
the city to respond to an alarm; and



   (D)   Such additional information as the administrator may
reasonably require to process the application.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.13  CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Whenever any change occurs in the information contained in the
permit, the owner must give the administrator written notice of the change
within 30 days of the date that the change becomes effective.



   (B)   If an owner fails to give the administrator timely written
notice of a change in the information contained in the application, the
administrator may charge the owner an administrative fee.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.14  CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Owners must respond, or have an authorized representative
respond, to the alarm site within 30 minutes after being notified by the
Public Safety Department that an alarm is malfunctioning.



   (B)   Owners must pay all fees required by this chapter including,
without limitation, fees for failing to respond to an alarm site and for
false alarms.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.15  SILENT OR AUDIBLE ALARM, PRESUMPTION.



   It is presumed that an alarm results in an alarm dispatch request.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.16  ALARM BUSINESS DUTIES.



   Every alarm business that monitors alarm systems must:



   (A)   Make every effort to verify the legitimacy of every alarm,
except a 211 Alarm or a takeover alarm, before making an alarm dispatch
request;



   (B)   Report alarm dispatch requests by using telephone numbers
designated by the administrator;



   (C)   Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests
in a form and to telephone numbers designated by the administrator;



   (D)   Maintain for at least one year, records relating to all
dispatches, including the name, address and telephone number of owners; the
time of request for dispatch; information concerning the alarm business'
attempt to contact the alarm site by telephone or other electronic means
before requesting the dispatch;



   (E)   Make such records available to the administrator on request;
and



   (F)   Disconnect an alarm system located in a business, when
directed to do so by the administrator.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.17  ALARM AGENT DUTIES.



   Alarm agents must, on request, display the registration issued by the
California Department of Consumer Affairs to any public safety officer or the
alarm administrator.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.18  DEACTIVATION OF AUDIBLE ALARM.



   Every audible alarm must have a timer that automatically deactivates
the alarm within ten minutes after it begins sounding, and will not sound
again until the system is reset.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.19  EMERGENCY POWER SUPPLY.



   Alarm systems must be equipped with a relay or an uninterruptible power
supply so that a power interruption or restored power following an
interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm
system. An emergency power supply must be capable of at least four hours of
operation.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



§ 105.20  LIABILITY FOR FEES.



   All fees and interest imposed pursuant to this chapter are civil debts
owed to the city by the person fined. In the event that judicial action is
necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the city, the person or
persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs of suit and
attorney's fees incurred by the city to collect the fine.



(Ord. 1136, passed 5-1-06)



CHAPTER 106:  WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY



Section



   106.01.010   Applicability



   106.01.020   Purpose



   106.01.030   Definitions



   106.01.040   Scope



   106.01.050   Administration



   106.01.060   General standards for wireless facilities in the public
right of way



   106.01.070   Applications



   106.01.080   Findings; decisions; consultants



   106.01.090   Conditions of approval



   106.01.100   Breach; termination of permit



   106.01.110   Infrastructure controlled by city



   106.01.120   Nondiscrimination



§ 106.01.010  APPLICABILITY.



   The siting and construction of wireless facilities in the ROW are
subject to the provisions of this Chapter 12.18. The siting and construction
of wireless facilities on all other property are subject to the provisions in
Title 17 of this code (the Zoning Ordinance).



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.020  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for managing, and
uniform standards for acting upon, requests for the placement of wireless
facilities within the ROW of the city adjacent to all zoning districts
consistent with the city’s obligation to promote the public health, safety,
and welfare, to manage the ROW, and to ensure that the use and enjoyment of
the ROW is not inconvenienced by the use of the ROW for the placement of
wireless facilities. The city recognizes the importance of wireless
facilities to provide high-quality communi-cations service to the residents
and businesses within the city, and the city also recognizes its obligation
to comply with applicable federal and state law regarding the placement of
personal wireless services facilities in its ROW. This ordinance shall be
interpreted consistent with those provisions.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.030  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings. In
the event of any conflict between these definitions and applicable
definitions in federal law, the applicable provisions of federal law shall
control over these definitions.



   APPLICATION: A formal request, including all required and requested
documentation and information, submitted by an applicant to the city for a
wireless encroachment permit.



   APPLICANT means a person filing an application for placement or
modification of a wireless facility in the ROW.



   BASE STATION shall have the meaning as set forth in Title 47 Code of
Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Section 1.40001(b)(1), or any successor
provision.



   DIRECTOR means the city’s Director of Public Works or designee.



   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST shall have the meaning as set forth in 47
C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(3), or any successor provision.



   FCC: means the Federal Communications Commission or its lawful
successor.



   HEARING OFFICER means a person designated by the City Council to
conduct hearings.



   MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE means city-owned or controlled property
structures, objects, and equipment in the ROW, including, but not limited to,
street lights, traffic control structures, banners, street furniture, bus
stops or other poles, lighting fixtures, or electroliers located within the
ROW.



   PERMITTEE means any person or entity granted a wireless encroachment
permit pursuant to this chapter.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES shall have the same meaning as set forth in
47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i).



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITY means a wireless facility used for
the provision of personal wireless services.



   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY (ROW) means any public street, alley, sidewalk,
street island, median or parkway that is owned or granted by easement,
operated, or controlled by the city.



   SMALL CELL FACILITY: means (and is intended to be consistent with and
declaratory of the definition of “small wireless facility” in 47 C.F.R.
§ 1.6002(l), or any successor provision), a personal wireless services
facility that meets any of the following conditions:



      (1)   The facility:



         (a)   Is mounted on an existing or proposed structure 50
feet or less in height, including antennas, as defined in 47 C.F.R. §
1.1320(d); or



         (b)   Is mounted on an existing or proposed structure no
more than 10 percent taller than other adjacent structures; or



         (c)   Does not extend an existing structure on which it
is located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10 percent,
whichever is greater;



      (2)   Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding
associated antenna equipment (as defined in the definition of antenna in 47
C.F.R. § 1.1320(d)), is no more than three cubic feet in volume;



      (3)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and
any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than 28
cubic feet in volume;



      (4)   The facility does not require antenna structure
registration under 47 C.F.R. Part 17;



      (5)   The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined
under 36 C.F.R. § 800.16(x); and



      (6)   The facility does not result in human exposure to
radiofrequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards
specified in 47 C.F.R. § 1.1307(b).



   STRUCTURE: means an apparatus located in the ROW which is in any way
attached to, constructed on, or built into the ground, either directly or
indirectly. This term includes, without limitation, street lights, traffic
signals, and utility poles, but it does not include towers.



   SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any structure capable of supporting a base station.



   TOWER: Any apparatus built for the sole or primary purpose of
supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated
facilities, including those that are constructed for personal wireless
services, including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public
safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless
services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. This definition
does not include utility poles.



   UNDERGROUND AREAS: Those areas where there are no electrical facilities
or facilities of the incumbent local exchange carrier in the ROW; or where
the wires associated with the same are or are required to be located
underground; or where the same are scheduled to be converted from overhead to
underground. Electrical facilities are distribution facilities owned by an
electric utility and do not include transmission facilities used or intended
to be used to transmit electricity at nominal voltages in excess of 35,000
volts.



   UTILITY POLE: A structure in the ROW designed to support electric,
telephone and similar utility lines. A tower is not a utility pole.



   WIRELESS ENCROACHMENT PERMIT: A permit issued pursuant to this chapter
authorizing the placement or modification of a wireless facility of a design
specified in the permit at a particular location within the ROW; and the
modification of any existing support structure to which the wireless facility
is proposed to be attached.



   WIRELESS FACILITY, or FACILITY: The transmitters, antenna structures
and other types of installations used for the provision of wireless services
at a fixed location, including, without limitation, any associated tower(s),
support structure(s), and base station(s).



   WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER: An entity that provides personal wireless
services to end users.



   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person that owns, controls,
operates or manages a wireless facility or portion thereof within the ROW.



   WIRELESS REGULATIONS: Those regulations adopted by the City Council or
Director implementing the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.040  SCOPE.



   (A)   In general. There shall be a type of en-croachment permit
entitled a “wireless encroachment permit,” which shall be subject to all
of the same requirements as an encroachment permit would under Chapter 12.16
in addition to all of the requirements of this chapter. Unless exempted,
every person who desires to place a wireless facility in the ROW or modify an
existing wireless facility in the ROW must obtain a wireless encroachment
permit authorizing the placement or modification in accordance with this
chapter. Except for small cell facilities, facilities qualifying as eligible
facilities requests, or any other type of facility expressly allowed in the
ROW by state or federal law, no other wireless facilities shall be permitted
pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Exemptions. This chapter does not apply to:



      (1)   The placement or modification of facilities by the city
or by any other agency of the state solely for public safety purposes.



      (2)   Installation of a “cell on wheels,” “cell on
truck” or a similar structure for a temporary period in connection with an
emergency or event, but no longer than required for the emergency or event,
provided that installation does not involve excavation, movement, or removal
of existing facilities.



   (C)   Other applicable requirements. In addition to the wireless
encroachment permit required herein, the placement of a wireless facility in
the ROW requires the persons who will own or control those facilities to
obtain all permits required by applicable law, and to comply with applicable
law, including, but not limited, applicable law governing radio frequency
(RF) emissions and all requirements for encroachments under HBMC Chapter
12.16.



   (D)   Pre-existing facilities in the ROW. Nothing in this chapter
shall validate any existing illegal or unpermitted wireless facilities. All
existing wireless facilities shall comply with and receive a wireless
encroachment permit, when applicable, to be considered legal and conforming.



   (E)   Public use. Except as otherwise provided by California law,
any use of the ROW authorized pursuant to this chapter will be subordinate to
the city’s use and use by the public.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.050  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Review authority. The Director is responsible for
administering this chapter. As part of the administration of this chapter,
the Director may:



      (1)   Interpret the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Develop and implement standards governing the placement
and modification of wireless facilities consistent with the requirements of
this chapter, including regulations governing collocation and resolution of
conflicting applications for placement of wireless facilities;



      (3)   Develop and implement acceptable design, location and
development standards for wireless facilities in the ROW, taking into account
the zoning districts bounding the ROW;



      (4)   Develop forms and procedures for submission of
applications for placement or modification of wireless facilities, and
proposed changes to any support structure consistent with this chapter;



      (5)   Collect, as a condition of the completeness of any
application, any fee established by this chapter;



      (6)   Establish deadlines for submission of information
related to an application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate
and consistent with federal laws and regulations;



      (7)   Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for
information, or conduct or commission such studies as may be required to
determine whether a permit should be issued;



      (8)   Require, as part of, and as a condition of completeness
of any application, that an applicant for a wireless encroachment permit send
notice to members of the public that may be affected by the placement or
modification of the wireless facility and proposed changes to any support
structure;



      (9)   Subject to appeal as provided herein, determine whether
to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny an application; and



      (10)   Take such other steps as may be required to timely act
upon applications for placement of wireless facilities, including issuing
written decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time
for action on an application.



   (B)   Appeal.



      (1)   Any person claiming to be adversely affected by the
decision of the Director pursuant to this chapter may appeal the Director’s
decision. The appeal will be considered by a Hearing Officer appointed by the
City Manager. The Hearing Officer may decide the issues de novo and whose
written decision will be the final decision of the city. An appeal by a
wireless infrastructure provider must be taken jointly with the wireless
service provider that intends to use the wireless facility. As Section
332(c)(7) of the Telecommunications Act preempts local decisions premised
directly or indirectly on the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF)
emissions, appeals of the Director’s decision premised on the environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions will not be considered.



      (2)   Where the Director grants an application based on a
finding that denial would result in a prohibition or effective prohibition
under applicable federal law, the decision shall be automatically appealed to
the Hearing Officer. All appeals must be filed within two (2) business days
of the written decision of the Director, unless the Director extends the time
therefore. An extension may not be granted where extension would result in
approval of the application by operation of law.



      (3)   Any appeal shall be conducted so that a timely written
decision may be issued in accordance with applicable law. The appeal shall be
conducted in accordance with any procedures adopted in the Wireless
Regulations.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.060  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT
OF WAY.



   (A)   Generally. Wireless facilities in the ROW shall meet the
minimum requirements set forth in this ordinance and the Wireless
Regulations, in addition to the requirements of any other applicable law.



   (B)   Regulations. The wireless regulations and decisions on
applications for placement of wireless facilities in the ROW shall, at a
minimum, ensure that the requirements of this section are satisfied, unless
it is determined that the applicant has established that denial of an
application would, within the meaning of federal law, prohibit or effectively
prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, or otherwise violate
applicable laws or regulations. If that determination is made, the
requirements of this chapter may be waived, but only to the minimum extent
required to avoid the prohibition or violation.



   (C)   Minimum standards. Wireless facilities shall be installed and
modified in a manner that minimizes risks to public safety, utilizes
installation of new support structures or equipment cabinets in the ROW only
after all existing and replacement structure options have been exhausted, and
where feasible, places equipment underground, and otherwise maintains the
integrity and character of the neighborhoods and corridors in which the
facilities are located; ensures that installations are subject to periodic
review to minimize the intrusion on the ROW; and ensures that the city bears
no risk or liability as a result of the installations, and that such use does
not inconvenience the public, interfere with the primary uses of the ROW, or
hinder the ability of the city or other government agencies to improve,
modify, relocate, abandon, or vacate the ROW or any portion thereof, or to
cause the improvement, modification, relocation, vacation, or abandonment of
facilities in the ROW.



   (D)   Location and design standards. All applicants shall locate the
facilities in accordance with the Design Standards and Wireless Regulations.
All applicants shall, to the extent feasible, incorporate specific
concealment elements to minimize visual impacts and incorporate design
requirements in accordance with the Design Standards adopted by resolution of
the City Council and Wireless Regulations and ensure compliance with all
standards for noise emissions, unless it is determined that another design is
less intrusive or placement is required under applicable law.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.070  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Submission. Unless the Wireless Regulations provide otherwise,
the applicant shall submit a paper copy and an electronic copy of any
application, amendments, or supplements to an application, or responses to
requests for information regarding an application to the Director.



   (B)   Content. An application must contain:



      (1)   Any information required pursuant to the Wireless
Regulations.



      (2)   The name of the applicant, its telephone number and
contact information, and if the applicant is a wireless infrastructure
provider, the name and contact information for the wireless service provider
that will be using the wireless facility.



      (3)   The name of the owner of the structure, if different
from the applicant, and proof of owner’s authorization for use of the
structure.



      (4)   A complete description of the proposed wireless facility
and any and all work that will be required to install or modify it,
including, but not limited to, detail regarding proposed excavations, if any;
detailed site plans showing the location of the wireless facility, and
dimensioned drawings with specifications for each element of the wireless
facility, clearly describing the site and all structures and facilities at
the site before and after installation or modification; and a dimensioned map
identifying and describing the distance to the nearest residential dwelling
unit and any historical structure within 500 feet of the facility. Before and
after 360 degree photo simulations must be provided.



      (5)   Documentation sufficient to show that the proposed
facility will comply with generally-applicable health and safety provisions
of the Municipal Code and the FCC’s radio frequency emissions standards.



      (6)   A copy of the lease or other agreement between the
applicant and the owner of the property to which the proposed facility will
be attached. Proprietary information may be redacted.



      (7)   If the application is for a small cell facility, the
application shall state as such and shall explain why the proposed facility
meets the definition of small cell facility in this chapter.



      (8)   If the application is for an eligible facilities
request, the application shall state as such and must contain information
sufficient to show that the application qualifies as an eligible facilities
request, which information must show that there is an existing wireless
facility that was approved by the city. Before and after 360 degree photo
simulations must be provided, as well as documentation sufficient to show
that the proposed facility will comply with generally-applicable health and
safety provisions of the Municipal Code and the FCC’s radio frequency
emissions standards.



      (9)   Proof that notice of the application has been mailed to
owners and occupants of real property, and the resident manager for any
multi-family dwelling unit that includes ten (10) or more units, within 300
feet of the proposed wireless facility.



      (10)   If the applicant contends that denial of the
application would prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of service
in violation of federal law, or otherwise violate applicable law, the
application must provide all information on which the applicant relies on in
support of that claim. Applicants are not permitted to supplement this
showing if doing so would prevent the city from complying with any deadline
for action on an application.



      (11)   The electronic version of an application must be in a
standard format that can be easily uploaded on a web page for review by the
public.



      (12)   Any required fees.



   (C)   Fees. Application fee(s) shall be required to be submitted
with any application for a wireless encroachment permit, as established by
City Council resolution. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no application fee
shall be refundable, in whole or in part, to an applicant for a wireless
encroachment permit unless paid as a refundable deposit.



   (D)   Waivers. Requests for waivers from any application requirement
of this section shall be made in writing to the Director or his or her
designee. The Director may grant or deny a request for a waiver pursuant to
this subsection. The Director may grant a request for waiver if it is
demonstrated that, notwith-standing the issuance of a waiver, the city will
be provided all information necessary to understand the nature of the
construction or other activity to be conducted pursuant to the permit sought.
All waivers approved pursuant to this subsection shall be (1) granted only on
a case-by-case basis, and (2) narrowly-tailored to minimize deviation from
the requirements of the Municipal Code.



   (E)   Incompleteness. Wireless facility applica-tions will be
processed, and notices of incompleteness provided, in conformity with state,
local, and federal law. If such an application is incomplete, the Director
may notify the applicant and specify the material omitted from the
application.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.080  FINDINGS; DECISIONS; CONSULTANTS.



   (A)   Findings required for approval.



      (1)   Except for eligible facilities requests, the Director or
Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall approve an application if, on the
basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review
thereof, all of the following findings can be made:



         (a)   The facility is not detrimental to the public
health, safety, and welfare; and



         (b)   The facility complies with this chapter and all
applicable design and development standards; and



         (c)   The facility qualifies as a small cell facility;
and



         (d)   The facility meets applicable requirements and
standards of state and federal law.



      (2)   For eligible facilities requests, the Director or
Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall approve an application if, on the
basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review
thereof, it finds the following:



         (a)   That the application qualifies as an eligible
facilities request; and



         (b)   That the proposed facility will comply with all
generally-applicable laws.



   (B)   Decisions. Decisions on an application by the Director or
Hearing Officer shall be in writing and include the reasons for the decision.



   (C)   Independent consultants. The Director or Hearing Officer, as
the case may be, is authorized, in its discretion, to select and retain
independent consultant(s) with expertise in telecommunications in connection
with the review of any application under this chapter, at the expense of the
applicant. Such independent consultant review may be retained on any issue
that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with an
application, including, but not limited to, application completeness or
accuracy, structural engineering analysis, or compliance with FCC radio
frequency emissions standards.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.090  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   Generally. In addition to any supplemental conditions imposed
by the Director or Hearing Officer, as the case may be, all permits granted
pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions, unless
modified by the approving authority:



      (1)   Code compliance. The permittee shall at all times
maintain compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
regulations and other rules, including, without limitation, those applying to
use of the ROW.



      (2)   Permit duration. A wireless en-croachment permit shall
be valid for a period of ten (10) years, unless pursuant to another provision
of the code or these conditions, it expires sooner or is terminated. At the
end often (10) years from the date of issuance, such permit shall
automatically expire, unless an extension or renewal has been granted. A
person holding a wireless encroachment permit must either (1) remove the
facility within thirty (30) days following the permit’s expiration
(provided that removal of support structure owned by city, a utility, or
another entity authorized to maintain a support structure in the ROW need not
be removed, but must be restored to its prior condition, except as
specifically permitted by the city); or (2) at least ninety (90) days prior
to expiration, submit an application to the Director to renew the permit,
which application must, among all other requirements, demonstrate that the
impact of the wireless facility cannot be reduced. The wireless facility must
remain in place until it is acted upon by the city and all appeals from the
city’s decision exhausted.



      (3)   Timing of installation. The installation and
construction authorized by a wireless encroach-ment permit shall begin within
one (1) year after its approval, or it will expire without further action by
the city. The installation and construction authorized by a wireless
encroachment permit shall conclude, including any necessary post-installation
repairs and/or restoration to the ROW, within ninety (90) days following the
day construction commenced.



      (4)   Commencement of operations. The operation of the
approved facility shall commence no later than one hundred and eighty (180)
days after the completion of installation, or the wireless encroach-ment
permit will expire without further action by the city. The permittee shall
provide Director notice that operations have commenced by the same date.



      (5)   As-built drawings. The permittee shall submit an
as-built drawing within ninety (90) days after installation of the facility.
As-builts shall be in an electronic format acceptable to the city.



      (6)   Inspections; emergencies. The city or its designee may
enter onto the facility area to inspect the facility upon 24 hours prior
notice to the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections
and may be present for any inspection of its facility by the city. The city
reserves the right to enter or direct its designee to enter the facility and



support, repair, disable, or remove any elements of the facility in
emergencies or when the facility threatens imminent harm to persons or
property. The city shall make an effort to contact the permittee prior to
disabling or removing any facility elements, but in any case shall notify
permittee within 24 hours of doing so.



      (7)   Inspections and reporting. The permittee, when directed
by the city, must perform an inspection of the facility and submit a report
to the Director on the condition of the system to include any identified
concerns and corrective action taken. Additionally, as the city performs
maintenance on municipal infrastructure additional maintenance concerns may
be identified. These will be reported to the owner of the facility. The city
shall give the permittee 30 days to correct the identified maintenance
concerns after which the city reserves the right to take any action it deems
necessary, which could include revocation of the permit. The burden is on the
permittee to demonstrate that it complies with the requirements herein. Prior
to issuance of a permit under this chapter, the owner of the facility shall
sign an affidavit attesting to understanding the city’s requirement for
performance of annual inspections and reporting.



      (8)   Contact. The permittee shall at all times maintain
accurate contact information for all parties responsible for the facility,
which shall include a phone number, street mailing address and email address
for at least one natural person.



      (9)   Insurance. The permittee shall obtain and maintain
throughout the term of the permit a type and amount of insurance as specific
in the Wireless Regulations. The relevant policy(ies) shall name the city,
its elected/appointed officials, commission members, officers,
representatives, agents, and employees as additional insured. The permittee
shall use its best efforts to provide thirty (30) days prior notice to the
Director of to the cancellation or material modification of any applicable
insurance policy.



      (10)   Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the
owner of the property upon which the wireless facility is installed shall
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers,
officials, and employees (i) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries,
losses, costs, and expenses, and from any and all claims, demands, law suits,
writs of mandamus, and other actions or proceedings brought against the city
or its agents, officers, officials, or employees to challenge, attack, seek
to modify, set aside, void or annul the city’s approval of the permit, and
(ii) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and
expenses, and any and all claims, demands, law suits, or causes of action and
other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal
injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the
activities or performance of the permittee or, if applicable, the private
property owner or any of each one’s agents, employees, licensees,
contractors, subcontractors, or independent contractors. In the event the
city becomes aware of any such actions or claims the city shall promptly
notify the permittee and, if applicable, the private property owner and shall
reasonably cooperate in the defense. The city shall have the right to
approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel
providing the city’s defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as
applicable) shall reimburse the city for any costs and expenses directly and
necessarily incurred by the city in the course of the defense.



      (11)   Performance bond. Prior to issuance of a wireless
encroachment permit, the permittee shall file with the city, and shall
maintain in good standing throughout the term of the approval, a performance
bond or other surety or another form of security for the removal of the
facility in the event that the use is abandoned or the permit expires, or is
revoked, or is otherwise terminated. The security shall be in the amount
equal to 100% of the cost of removal of the facility as specified in the
application for the permit or as that amount may be modified by the Director
in the permit based on the characteristics of the installation. The permittee
shall reimburse the city for staff time associated with the processing and
tracking of the bond, based on the hourly rate adopted by the City Council.
Reimbursement shall be paid when the security is posted and during each
administrative review.



      (12)   Adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Permittee shall
undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent
properties and/or uses that may arise from the construction, operation,
maintenance, modification, and removal of the facility.



      (13)   Interference.



         (a)   The permittee shall not move, alter, temporarily
relocate, change, or interfere with any existing structure, improvement, or
property without the prior consent of the owner of that structure,
improvement, or property. No structure, improvement, or property owned by the
city shall be moved to accommodate a permitted activity or encroachment,
unless the city determines that such movement will not adversely affect the
city or any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all
costs and expenses related to the relocation of the city’s structure,
improvement, or property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to a
wireless encroachment permit, the permittee shall provide the city with
documentation establishing to the city’s satisfaction that the permittee
has the legal right to use or interfere with any other structure,
improvement, or property within the ROW or city utility easement to be
affected by permittee’s facilities.



         (b)   The facility shall not damage or interfere in any
way with city property, the city’s operations or the operations of
prior-existing, third party installations. The city will reasonably cooperate
with the permittee and/or carrier to carry out such activities as are
necessary to correct the interference.



            1.   Signal Interference - The permittee shall
correct any such interference within 24 hours of written notification of the
interference. Upon the expiration of the 24-hour cure period and until the
cause of the interference is eliminated, the permittee shall cease operation
of any facility causing such interference until such interference is cured.



            2.   Physical Interference - The city shall give
the permittee 30 days to correct the interference after which the city
reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary, which could include
revocation of the permit.



         (c)   The city at all times reserves the right to take
any action it deems necessary, in its sole discretion, to repair, maintain,
alter, or improve the sites. Such actions may temporarily interfere with the
operation of the facility. The city will in all cases, other than
emergencies, give the applicant 30 days written notification of such planned,
non-emergency actions.



      (14)   No right, title, or interest. The permission granted by
a wireless encroachment permit shall not in any event constitute an easement
on or an encumbrance against the ROW. No right, title, or interest (including
franchise interest) in the ROW, or any part thereof, shall vest or accrue in
permittee by reason of a wireless encroachment permit or the issuance of any
other permit or exercise of any privilege given thereby.



      (15)   No possessory interest. No possessory interest is
created by a wireless encroachment permit. However, to the extent that a
possessory interest is deemed created by a governmental entity with taxation
authority, the permittee acknowledges that the city has given to the
permittee notice pursuant to Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 107.6 that the
use or occupancy of any public property pursuant to a wireless encroachment
permit may create a possessory interest which may be subject to the payment
of property taxes levied upon such interest. Permittee shall be solely liable
for, and shall pay and discharge prior to delinquency, any and all possessory
interact taxes or other taxes, fees, and assessments levied against
permittee’s right to possession, occupancy, or use of any public property
pursuant to any right of possession, occupancy, or use created by this permit.



      (16)   General maintenance.



         (a)   The site and the facility, including, but not
limited to, all landscaping, fencing, and related transmission equipment,
must be maintained in a neat, safe and clean manner and in accordance with
all approved plans. All graffiti on facilities must be removed at the sole
expense of the permittee within forty-eight (48) hours after notification
from the city. The permittee shall ensure that all equipment and other
improvements to be constructed and/or installed in connection with the
approved plans are maintained in a manner that is not detrimental or
injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare and that the
aesthetic appearance is continuously preserved, and substantially the same as
shown in the approved plans at all times relevant to the permit.



         (b)   The permittee shall repair, at its sole cost and
expense, any damage including, but not limited to subsidence, cracking,
erosion, collapse, weakening, or loss of lateral support to city streets,
sidewalks, walks, curbs, gutters, trees, parkways, street lights, traffic
signals, improvements of any kind or nature, or utility lines and systems,
underground utility line and systems (water, sewer, storm drains, gas, oil,
electrical, etc.) that result from any activities performed in connection
with the installation and/or maintenance of a wireless facility in the ROW.
The permittee shall restore such areas, structures and systems to the
condition in which they existed prior to the installation or maintenance that
necessitated the repairs. In the event the permittee fails to complete such
repair within the number of days stated on a written notice by the Director
the city will engage resources at the permittee’s sole cost and expense to
complete such repairs. Such time period for correction shall be based on the
facts and circumstances, danger to the community and severity of the
disrepair. Should the permittee not make said correction within the time
period allotted the Director shall cause such repair to be completed at
permittee’s sole cost and expense.



         (c)   The permittee shall keep the site area free from
all litter and debris at all times. Each year after the permittee installs
the wireless facility, the permittee, if requested by the Director, shall
submit a written report to the satisfaction of the Director, documenting the
then-current site condition.



      (17)   RF exposure compliance. All facilities must comply with
all standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal
government agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards. After
transmitter and antenna system optimization, but prior to unattended
operations of the facility, the permittee or its representative must conduct
on-site post-installation RF emissions testing to demonstrate actual
compliance with the FCC Office of Engineering and Technology Bulletin 65 RF
emissions safety rules for general population/uncontrolled RF exposure in all
sectors. For this testing, the transmitter shall be operating at maximum
operating power, and the testing shall occur outwards to a distance where the
RF emissions no longer exceed the uncontrolled/general population limit.



      (18)   Testing. Testing of any equipment shall take place on
weekdays only, and only between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., except
that testing is prohibited on holidays that fall on a weekday. In addition,
testing is prohibited on weekend days.



      (19)   Modifications. No changes shall be made to the approved
plans without review and approval in accordance with this chapter.



      (20)   Agreement with city. If not already completed, the
permittee shall enter into the appropriate agreement with the city, as
determined by the city, prior to constructing, attaching, or operating a
facility on municipal infrastructure. This permit is not a substitute for
such agreement.



      (21)   Conflicts with improvements. For all facilities located
within the ROW, the permittee shall remove or relocate, at its expense and
without expense to the city, any or all of its facilities when such removal
or relocation is deemed necessary by the city by reason of any change of
grade, alignment, or width of any ROW, for installation of services, water
pipes, drains, storm drains, power or signal lines, traffic control devices,
ROW improvements, or for any other construction, repair, or improvement to
the ROW.



      (22)   Abandonment. If a facility is not operated for a
continuous period of 6 months, the wireless encroachment permit and any other
permit or approval therefor shall be deemed abandoned and terminated
automatically, unless before the end of the 6 month period (i) the Director
has determined that the facility has resumed operations, or (ii) the city has
received an application to transfer the permit to another service provider.
No later than thirty (30) days from the date the facility is determined to
have ceased operation or the permittee has notified the Director of its
intent to vacate the site, the permittee shall remove all equipment and
improvements associated with the use and shall restore the site to its
original condition to the satisfaction of the Director. The permittee shall
provide written verification of the removal of the facilities within thirty
(30) days of the date the removal is completed. If the facility is not
removed within thirty (30) days after the permit has been discontinued
pursuant to this subsection, the site shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and
the city may cause the facility to be removed at permittee’s expense or by
calling any bond or other financial assurance to pay for removal. If there
are two (2) or more users of a single facility or support structure, then
this provision shall apply to the specific elements or parts thereof that
were abandoned, but will not be effective for the entirety thereof until all
users cease use thereof.



      (23)   Encourage co-location. Where the facility site is
capable of accommodating a co-located facility upon the same site in a manner
consistent with the permit conditions for the existing facility, the owner
and operator of the existing facility shall allow co-location of third party
facilities, provided the parties can mutually agree upon reasonable terms and
conditions.



      (24)   Records. The permittee must maintain complete and
accurate copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in
connection with the facility, which includes without limitation this
approval, the approved plans and photo simulations incorporated into this
approval, all conditions associated with this approval and any ministerial
permits or approvals issued in connection with this approval. In the event
that the permittee does not maintain such records as required in this
condition or fails to produce true and complete copies of such records within
a reasonable time after a written request from the city, any ambiguities or
uncertainties that would be resolved through an inspection of the missing
records will be construed against the permittee.



      (25)   Attorney’s fees. In the event the city determines
that it is necessary to take legal action to enforce any of these conditions,
or to revoke a permit, and such legal action is taken, the permittee shall be
required to pay any and all costs of such legal action, including reasonable
attorney’s fees, incurred by the city, even if the matter is not prosecuted
to a final judgment or is amicably resolved, unless the city should otherwise
agree with permittee to waive said fees or any part thereof. The foregoing
shall not apply if the permittee prevails in the enforcement proceeding.



      (26)   The permittee is responsible for obtaining power to the
facility and for the cost of electrical usage.



      (27)   Failure to comply with the city’s adopted noise
standard after written notice and opportunity to cure have been given shall
be grounds for the city to revoke the permit.



      (28)   The permittee shall remove all non-operational
equipment from any structure on which it installs new equipment under the
permit.



   (B)   Eligible facilities requests. In addition to the conditions
provided in Section 12.18.090 of this chapter and any supplemental conditions
imposed by the Director or Hearing Officer as the case may be, all permits
for an eligible facility requests granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
subject to the following additional conditions, unless modified by the
approving authority:



      (1)   Permit subject to conditions of underlying permit. Any
permit granted in response to an application qualifying as an eligible
facilities request shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the
underlying permit.



      (2)   No permit term extension. The city’s grant or grant by
operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit constitutes a
federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit or approval for the
subject tower or base station. Notwithstanding any permit duration
established in another permit condition, the city’s grant or grant by
operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit will not extend the
permit term for the underlying permit or any other underlying regulatory
approval, and its term shall have the same term as the underlying permit or
other regulatory approval for the subject tower or base station.



      (3)   No waiver of standing. The city’s grant or grant by
operation of law of an eligible facilities request does not waive, and shall
not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge Section
6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) of
the Spectrum Act, or any modification to Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act.



   (C)   Small cell facilities requests. In addition to the conditions
provided in 12.18.090 of this chapter and any supplemental conditions imposed
by the Director or Hearing Officer, as the case may be, all permits for a
small cell facility granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
following condition, unless modified by the approving authority:



      (1)   No waiver of standing. The city’s grant of a permit
for a small cell facility request does not waive, and shall not be construed
to waive, any standing by the city to challenge any FCC orders or rules
related to small cell facilities, or any modification to those FCC orders or
rules.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.100  BREACH; TERMINATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   For breach. A wireless encroachment permit may be revoked for
failure to comply with the conditions of the permit or applicable law. Upon
revocation, the wireless facility must be removed within thirty (30) days;
provided that removal of a support structure owned by city, a utility, or
another entity authorized to maintain a support structure in the ROW need not
be removed, but must be restored to its prior condition, except as
specifically permitted by the city. All costs incurred by the city in
connection with the revocation and removal shall be paid by entities who own
or control any part of the wireless facility.



   (B)   For installation without a permit. A wireless facility
installed without a wireless encroachment permit (except for those exempted
by this chapter) must be removed within thirty (30) days of notification by
the city; provided that removal of support structure owned by city, a
utility, or another entity authorized to maintain a support structure in the
ROW need not be removed, but must be restored to its prior condition, except
as specifically permitted by the city. All costs incurred by the city in
connection with the revocation and removal shall be paid by entities who own
or control any part of the wireless facility.



   (C)   Violation. Any violation of this chapter will be subject to
the same penalties as a violation of Chapter 12.16.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.110  INFRASTRUCTURE CONTROLLED BY CITY.



   The city, as a matter of policy, will negotiate agreements for use of
municipal infrastructure. The placement of wireless facilities on those
structures shall be subject to the agreement. The agreement shall specify the
compensation to the city for use of the structures. The person seeking the
agreement shall additionally reimburse the city for all costs the city incurs
in connection with its review of, and action upon the person’s request for,
an agreement.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



§ 106.01.120  NONDISCRIMINATION.



   In establishing the rights, obligations and conditions set forth in
this chapter, it is the intent of the city to treat each applicant or ROW
user in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner, to the extent
required by law, and with considerations that may be unique to the
technologies, situation and legal status of each particular applicant or
request for use of the ROW.



(Ord. 1282, passed 5-1-19)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter




      110.   BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES





      111.   ADVERTISING





      112.   AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND VENDING MACHINES





      113.   BINGO





      114.   CABLE TELEVISION





      115.   SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS





      116.   [RESERVED]





      117.   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT





      118.   MOTION PICTURE, RADIO, TELEVISION PRODUCTION, AND STILL
PHOTOGRAPHY REGULATIONS





      119.   MASSAGE PERMITS





      120.   OIL WELLS





      121.   PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS





      122.   RESTAURANTS





      123.   SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY





      124.   DINING ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT




CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES



Section




General Provisions




   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Purpose



   110.03   Exemptions



   110.04   When taxes payable



   110.05   Appeals



   110.06   Enforcement by License Collector



   110.07   License a debt



   110.08   Suit to recover delinquent taxes



   110.09   Examination of places of business



   110.10   Examination of licenses; refusal to exhibit



   110.11   Compromise of claims



   110.12   Remedies cumulative; conviction not to bar civil collection



   110.13   Failure to pay




License Requirements




   110.25   Application and issuance of license; contents



   110.26   Council permission prerequisite to licensing of certain
businesses



   110.27   Licensing of new businesses



   110.28   Information required for renewal of licenses



   110.29   Statements of applicants not conclusive; inspection



   110.30   Information confidential



   110.31   Determination of tax if statement not filed



   110.32   Extension of time for filing



   110.33   Duplicate for lost license



   110.34   Posting or carrying



   110.35   Transferability



   110.36   Refund of taxes paid




Exemptions




   110.45   Required by law



   110.46   Charitable organizations; disabled veterans



   110.47   Farmers or horticulturists



   110.48   Claim for exemption



   110.49   Issuance of license without payment of tax



   110.50   Revocation of license




Rates




   110.60   Requirement of license



   110.61   Separate license required for each branch establishment;
exceptions



   110.62   Tax based on gross receipts



   110.63   Apportionment of tax



   110.64   Flat tax on certain businesses



   110.65   Tax based on income housing units



   110.66   Tax based on seating capacity



   110.67   Suspension or revocation of license; reinstatement



   110.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Adult entertainment establishments, see §§ 156.780 et seq.Taxation,
see Ch. 37



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license businesses, see Cal. Gov't Code § 37101 and Cal.
Bus. & Prof.  Code §§ 16000 et seq.



   State exemptions from business licensing, including certain non-profit
organizations and certain professions, see Cal. Gov't Code § 37101 and Cal.
Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 16000 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  Professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind
of calling carried on for profit or livelihood.  This includes all those
persons who are self-employed even though receiving their remuneration on an
hourly basis or who do not advertise.



   FORTUNETELLER.  Any person who carries on, professes to practice or
practices the business of or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life
reading, fortunetelling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal
gazing, hypnotism, medium-ship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic or
necromancy and who demands or receives a fee for the exercise or exhibition
of his art therein or who gives an exhibition thereof at any place when an
admission fee is charged other than at a regularly licensed theater.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  The total amount of the sale price of all sales and
the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service
or employment of whatever nature it may be for which a charge is made or
credit allowed, whether or not such service, act or employment is done as a
part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or
merchandise for the preceding calendar year.  Included in GROSS RECEIPTS
shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature and
any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without
any deduction therefrom on account of the costs, interest paid or payable or
losses or other expenses whatsoever.  Excluded from GROSS RECEIPTS shall be
cash discounts allowed and taken on sales, any tax required by law to be
included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or
purchaser and such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers
upon recision of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by
credit.



   ITINERANT VENDOR.  Every person, whether acting as principal or as
agent, who engages in the business in the city of selling, contracting to
sell, taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares
or merchandise with the intention at the time of engaging in such business of
continuing the same for a period of not more than 90 days and who, in
conducting or carrying on such business, hires, leases, subleases or occupies
any room, building or structure or a part of any room, building or structure
for the purpose of storing, exhibiting or displaying such goods, wares or
merchandise, or samples thereof; provided, that any person who so engages in
such business shall not be excluded from the operation of this section by
reason of associating with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer
or by reason of conducting such business in connection with, as part of or in
the name of the business of any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer.  This definition shall not apply to commercial agents selling
goods, wares or merchandise to, or soliciting orders therefor from retail
dealers; nor to hawkers, peddlers or persons selling fresh fruit or
vegetables, butter, eggs, poultry or other farm or ranch products.



   WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DELIVERY.  Delivering, selling or furnishing
articles of merchandise from a truck or other vehicle, either at  wholesale
or at retail.  Any person engaged in phone solicitation or advertising which
results in their own delivery of the product will be required to license
under each provision of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.010)  (Ord. 709, passed  - -78; Ord. 830, passed  - -85)



§ 110.02  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes
and is not intended for regulation.



('81 Code, § 5.04.020)



§ 110.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   One business license tax payment. Persons required to pay a
tax under this chapter are not required to pay additional, substantially
similar, business license taxes for the same business transactions under any
other provisions of this code.  Nothing in this section relieves the persons
from complying with any other regulatory provisions of this code.  This
section does not apply to taxes, including without limitation, sales tax,
fees, or other charges imposed for the privilege of selling tangible personal
property at retail.  The taxes, fees, and charges are in addition to the
taxes imposed by this chapter.



   (B)   City contracts.  Persons who are a party to a written
contract with the city for goods or services need not pay a business license
tax under this chapter if all the following provisions apply:



      (1)   The person is party to a written contract with the city
approved in accordance with all applicable laws including, without
limitation, this code;



      (2)   The only business transaction conducted by the person
within the city's jurisdiction is with the city; and



      (3)   The only parties to the written contract is the person
and city.



('81 Code, § 5.04.030)  (Am. Ord. 1086, passed 2-17-04)



§ 110.04  WHEN TAXES PAYABLE.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes under
the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on January
1 of each year; provided, that license taxes covering new operations
commenced after January 1 may be prorated quarterly for the balance of the
license period:



   (A)   Semiannual license taxes on January 1 and July 1 each year;



   (B)   Quarterly license taxes on January 1, April 1, July 1 and
October 1 of each year;



   (C)   Daily license taxes each day in advance.



('81 Code, § 5.04.040)



§ 110.05  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative
officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license
may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the
Council.



   (B)   The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing
such appeal.



   (C)   The clerk of the Council shall give notice to such person of
the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in
the United States Posts Office at Santa Paula, California, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person at his last known address.



('81 Code, § 5.04.050)



§ 110.06  ENFORCEMENT BY LICENSE COLLECTOR.



   (A)   The License Collector, and such other person or persons as may
be authorized by resolution of the City Council, shall enforce each and all
of the provisions of this chapter, and the Chief of Police shall render such
assistance in the enforcement thereof as may from time to time be required by
the License Collector.



   (B)   The Building Department shall be required to ascertain, prior
to giving final clearance on all remodeling and new construction, that all
general contractors and subcontractors performing such work are licensed.



('81 Code, § 5.04.060)  (Ord. 674, passed  - -77)



§ 110.07  LICENSE A DEBT.



   The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person carrying on
any business without first having procured a license from the city to do so
shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license tax and penalties
imposed on such business as specified elsewhere in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.070)



§ 110.08  SUIT TO RECOVER DELINQUENT TAXES.



   (A)   Against any person who engages in, conducts or carries on any
business or game, or exhibits any show or exhibition for which a license is
required by the provisions of this title without procuring such license and
paying the prescribed license tax, the Council may at any time direct the
City Attorney to bring suit in the name of the city for the recovery of such
license tax.



   (B)   In such action for collection of a license tax imposed, a
penalty , to be set by resolution, shall be added to the amount of any
judgment recovered by the city, in addition to any other penalty or penalties
then due and owing imposed by the provisions of this title.



('81 Code, § 5.04.080)  (Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 110.09  EXAMINATION OF PLACES OF BUSINESS.



   The License Collector, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him
under this chapter, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized
assistants, may examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the
city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied
with.



('81 Code, § 5.04.090)



§ 110.10  EXAMINATION OF LICENSES; REFUSAL TO EXHIBIT.



   (A)   The License Collector, each of his assistants and any police
officer may enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of
business required to be licensed under this chapter and demand an exhibition
of its license certificate.



   (B)   Any person having such license certificate theretofore issued
in his possession or under his control who wilfully fails to exhibit the same
on demand shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to the penalties
provided in this chapter.



   (C)   The License Collector and each of his assistants shall cause a
complaint to be filed against any person found to be violating any of such
provisions.



('81 Code, § 5.04.100)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.11  COMPROMISE OF CLAIMS.



   The License Collector, with the consent of the Council, may compromise
any claim as to the amount of license tax due.



('81 Code, § 5.04.110)



§ 110.12  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE; CONVICTION NOT TO BAR CIVIL COLLECTION.



   (A)   The conviction and imprisonment of any person for engaging in
any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall
not relieve such person from paying the license tax to conduct such business,
nor shall the payment of any license tax be a bar to criminal prosecution for
the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be
cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the
use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.120)



§ 110.13  FAILURE TO PAY.



   (A)   For failure to pay a license tax within 31 days of the due
date, the license tax shall become delinquent.  The License Collector shall
add a penalty of 10% of the license tax or $10, whichever is greater, for
late payment of the license tax.  An additional 10% or $10, whichever is
greater, shall be added on the first day of each month thereafter until the
license tax fees and all penalties are paid in full.



   (B)   Penalty charges shall not exceed 50% of the license tax due. 
This provision does not limit other penalties imposed by this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.130)  (Ord. 794, passed  - -83; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



LICENSE REQUIREMENTS



§ 110.25  APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CONTENTS.



   (A)   Every person required to have a license under the provisions
of this chapter shall make application for such to the License Collector of
the city.



   (B)   Upon the payment of the prescribed tax, the License Collector
shall issue to such person a license which shall contain:



      (1)   The name of the person to whom the license is issued;



      (2)   The name of the business licensed;



      (3)   The place where such business is to be transacted and
carried on;



      (4)   The date of the expiration of such license;



      (5)   The home address of the applicant; and



      (6)   Such other information as may be necessary for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.140)



§ 110.26  COUNCIL PERMISSION PREREQUISITE TO LICENSING OF CERTAIN
BUSINESSES.



   The License Collector shall not license any fortuneteller, taxicab
company, carnival or circus, or issue a dance permit/license for any
applicant who does not first receive the written permission of the Council.



('81 Code, § 5.04.150)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)



§ 110.27  LICENSING OF NEW BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Information required.  Upon a person making application for a
license to be issued for a newly established business, when the amount of
license tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts, rentals or seating
capacity of the place of business, such person shall furnish to the License
Collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be
paid by the applicant a written statement upon a form provided by the License
Collector setting forth such information as may be therein required and as
may be necessary to properly determine the amount of license tax to be paid
by the applicant.



('81 Code, § 5.04.160)



   (B)   Estimate of gross receipts; collection at end of period.



      (1)   If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the
applicant for a license for a newly established business is based upon the
gross receipts of the place of business, he shall estimate the gross receipts
for the period to be covered by the license to be issued.  Such estimate, if
accepted by the License Collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining
the amount of license tax to be paid by such applicant, but the amount of
license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall,
within 30 days after the expiration of the period for which such license was
issued, furnish the License Collector with a statement upon a form furnished
by the License Collector, showing the actual gross receipts of the place of
business during the period of such licensed and the license tax for such
period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this
chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes, after
deducting from the payment found to be due the amount paid at the time such
first license was issued.



      (2)   The License Collector shall not issue any such person
another license for the same or any other business until such person shall
have furnished to him the written statement and paid the license tax as
required in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.170)



§ 110.28  INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR RENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   In all cases the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to
the License Collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the
license tax to be paid by the applicant a written statement, upon a form to
be provided by the License Collector, setting forth such information
concerning the applicant's business during the preceding year as may be
required by the License Collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of
the license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.180)



§ 110.29  STATEMENTS OF APPLICANTS NOT CONCLUSIVE; INSPECTION.



   (A)   No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth
therein, nor shall the filing of such preclude the city from collecting by
appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this
chapter.  Such statement and each of the several items therein contained
shall be subject to audit and verification by the License Collector, his
deputies or authorized employees of the city, who are authorized to examine,
audit, or inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for a
license as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the
amount of license fee due.



   (B)   All licensees, applicants for licenses and persons engaged in
business in the city shall permit an examination of such books and records
for the purposes mentioned in division (A) of this section.



('81 Code, § 5.04.190)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.30  INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.



   (A)   The information furnished or secured pursuant to §§ 110.27
and 110.28 shall be confidential.



   (B)   Any unwarranted disclosure or use of such information by any
officer or employee of the city shall constitute an infraction, and such
officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this
chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.200)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.31  DETERMINATION OF TAX IF STATEMENT NOT FILED.



   (A)   Authority.  If any person fails to file any required
statement within the time prescribed or if, after demand therefor made by the
License Collector, he fails to file a corrected statement, the License
Collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by
means of such information as he may be able to obtain.



('81 Code, § 5.04.210)



   (B)   Hearing on determination.



      (1)   In case such a determination is made as provided in
division (A) of this section, the License Collector shall give notice of the
amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United
States Post Office at Santa Paula, California, postage prepaid, addressed to
the person so assessed at his last known address.



      (2)   Such person may, within 10 days after the mailing or
serving of such notice, make application in writing to the License Collector
for a hearing on the amount of the license tax.



      (3)   If such application is made or if no application is made
within the time prescribed, the License Collector shall cause the matter to
be set for a hearing within 15 days thereafter before the Council.



      (4)   The License Collector shall give at least 10 days notice
to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed
above in this division for the service of notice of assessment.



      (5)   The Council shall consider all evidence produced, and
written notice of its findings thereon, which findings shall be final, shall
be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above in this division
for service of notice of assessment.



('81 Code, § 5.04.220)



§ 110.32  EXTENSION OF TIME FOR FILING.



   In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the License
Collector may, for good cause shown, extend the time for filing any required
statement for a period not exceeding 30 days and, in such case, may waive any
penalty that would otherwise have accrued.



('81 Code, § 5.04.230)



§ 110.33  DUPLICATE FOR LOST LICENSE.



   A duplicate license may be issued by the License Collector to replace
any license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or
destroyed upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact and,
at the time of filing of such affidavit, paying to the License Collector a
duplicate license fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the
City Council.



('81 Code, § 5.04.240)  (Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 110.34  POSTING OR CARRYING.



   All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:



   (A)   Any licensee transacting and carrying on a business at a fixed
place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous
place upon the premises where such business is carried on; and



   (B)   Any licensee transacting and carrying on a business, but not
operating at a fixed place of business within the city, shall keep the
license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such
business.



('81 Code, § 5.04.250)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.35  TRANSFERABILITY.



   (A)   A license may be transferred from one owner to another, upon
the necessary application, for a fee in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   Such applicant assumes the rights and responsibilities of the
former owner as to the amounts of license fees due which have not been paid
or any overpayments.



   (C)   Any owner may transfer his location of business by completing
a transfer request and paying a fee in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council.



('81 Code, § 5.04.260)



§ 110.36  REFUND OF TAXES PAID.



   (A)   There shall be no license fees refunded upon a business
closing except a business that is under gross receipts.



   (B)   Such request to be supported by a sworn statement from a
certified public accountant as to the actual amount of business done which
would qualify the owner for a refund of over $5.



   (C)   No refunds are to be made on a sale or transfer of ownership,
gross or otherwise.



('81 Code, § 5.04.270)



EXEMPTIONS



§ 110.45  REQUIRED BY LAW.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any
person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the
applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to
municipal corporations of such taxes as are prescribed in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.280)



§ 110.46  CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS; DISABLED VETERANS.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or
construed to require the payment of the license tax to conduct, manage or
carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or
organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit
of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly
or indirectly by any person, nor shall any license tax be required for
conducting any entertain-ment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific,
historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the city whenever
all the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture
are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or
benevolent purpose; nor shall any license tax be required for conducting any
entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious,
charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal
organization or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment,
dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated 100% for the
purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed and
from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person;
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any
such organization or association from complying with the provisions of any
ordinance of the city requiring a permit from the Council or any commission
or officer as to conduct, manage or carry on any profession, trade, calling
or occupation.  Such gatherings must have Council permission to have an
exempt license.



   (B)   Disabled veterans may also have a fee exempt license for the
purpose of peddling or soliciting upon the presentation of a document or
documents establishing an honorable discharge or release from the Armed
Forces, a medical statement certifying that such veteran is physically unable
to obtain a livelihood by manual labor and is a qualified elector of the
state.



('81 Code, § 5.04.290)



§ 110.47  FARMERS OR HORTICULTURISTS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to
farmers, poultry raisers or horticulturists whose place of producing is
within the city, who sell exclusively products produced or grown by them;
provided, however, that this exemption shall not be deemed or construed to
apply in favor of any person, including cooperative associations, who packs,
processes or sells products produced by more than one farmer, poultry raiser
or horticulturist or who otherwise serves or represents more than one farmer,
poultry raiser or horticulturist.



('81 Code, § 5.04.300)  (Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 110.48  CLAIM FOR EXEMPTION.



   Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this subchapter shall file
a sworn or notarized statement with the License Collector stating the facts
upon which exemption is claimed.



('81 Code, § 5.04.310)



§ 110.49  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE WITHOUT PAYMENT OF TAX.



   The License Collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the
notarized statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under
this subchapter without payment to the city of the license tax required by
this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.320)



§ 110.50  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The License Collector may revoke any license granted pursuant
to the provisions of this subchapter upon information that the licensee is
not entitled to the exemption as provided in this subchapter.



   (B)   Any other business license may be revoked for cause after due
notification and hearing and action of the Council.



('81 Code, § 5.04.330)



RATES



§ 110.60  REQUIREMENT OF LICENSE.



   There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings
and occupations specified in this chapter license taxes in the amounts
prescribed, and it is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any
such business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without
first having procured a license from the city to do so or without complying
with all applicable provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.04.340)  (Ord. 871, passed  - -86)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.61  SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED  FOR EACH BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT;
EXCEPTIONS.



   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type
of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the
licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the
location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that
warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to
a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed
to be separate places of business or branch establishments; and provided
further, that the business of selling or dealing in used automobiles in
connection with and as an incident to the business of selling and dealing in
new automobiles, whether conducted at the same location or at a different
location, shall not be deemed to be a branch establishment.



('81 Code, § 5.04.350)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.62  TAX BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS.



   (A)   Every person who engages in any retail, wholesale,
manufacturing, processing, professional, semiprofessional or other business
activity, including hotels, motels and mobile home parks, and whether or not
located at a fixed place of business within the city and who is not otherwise
classified in this chapter, shall be termed as being in Classification A for
the purpose of this chapter and shall pay an annual license fee based upon
annual gross receipts, which in all cases shall be a minimum of $25.



   Schedule of Gross Annual Receipts



At Least   But Less Than              Fee Schedule




      $  0     $ 40,000                            $ 25





  40,000         60,000   35





  60,000       100,000   45





  100,000       200,000   65





  200,000       300,000   85





  300,000       400,000   100





  400,000       500,000   125





  500,000       600,000   150





  600,000       800,000   175





  800,000     1,000,000   200





1,000,000   an additional $25 per $1,000,000




    and up    of gross business or fraction thereof



   (B)   Provided, however, that any public utility operating within
the city under franchise or franchises from the city and which makes
franchise payments thereunder is subject to the provisions of this chapter
only to the extent that it engages in retail merchandising within the city
not covered by franchise.



('81 Code, § 5.04.360)  (Ord. 794, passed  - -83)



§ 110.63  APPORTIONMENT OF TAX.



   Every person who engages in any retail, wholesale, manufacturing,
processing, professional, semiprofessional or other business activity having
a fixed place of business within the city deriving gross receipts
attributable to business or sales activities occurring outside the city, he
shall be entitled to an apportionment of the tax due under § 110.62 as
follows:



   (A)   The following factors and percentages shall be considered in
apportioning the license tax:



      (1)   Is the business office serving as a base of business or
sales activities located in the city?—20%;



      (2)   Are sales or other business negotiated or solicited by
the business through the physical presence of a person, his employees or
agents in the city?—30%;



      (3)   Are orders or contracts accepted or approved at the city
location?  Such acceptance or approval shall be deemed to take place at the
sales office serving as a base for all sales activities, unless there is
clear and conclusive evidence that a binding acceptance or approval occurs
elsewhere—10%;



      (4)   Is merchandise stored in the city immediately prior to
shipment or delivery?—20%;



      (5)   Do orders for or arrangements for the shipment or
delivery of merchandise sold emanate from a location in the city?—5%;



      (6)   Are billing procedures performed in the city?—5%;



      (7)   Are accounts receivable collected in the city
location?—5%;



      (8)   Is merchandise delivered to city addresses by vehicles
operated by the taxpayer?—5%.



   (B)   The amount of the tax due shall be determined by the License
Collector who shall make such determination by ascertaining what factors and
percentages apply to the business seeking apportion-ment and multiplying the
total percentage by the business's total gross receipts, assuming all
business and sales activities of the business to be taxed have occurred in
the city.  The tax fee is then computed on the apportioned gross receipts
figure.



   (C)   The procedures set forth in §§ 110.25 et seq. concerning
issuance, transfer and gathering of information for licensing of new
businesses and renewal of licenses shall apply to apportionment of the
license tax.



('81 Code, § 5.04.370)  (Ord. 709, passed  - -78; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 110.64  FLAT TAX ON CERTAIN BUSINESSES.



   Any person who engages in any of the following businesses or callings
within the city shall be termed as being in Classification B and shall pay a
license fee, to be set by resolution:



   (A)   (1)   Auction sales or fire sales.



      (2)   Exceptions:



         (a)   Whenever such sales are conducted in conjunction
with a business otherwise licensed under § 110.62, the fee shall not exceed
a specific amount per year set by resolution (not to exceed one sale weekly
and not to be prorated);



         (b)   Business closeouts, including closeout sales of
certain stock to be discontinued, a specific amount per day set by resolution
(unless such sales are conducted by professional auctioneers or auction
companies, in which event the greater fee shall apply);



         (c)   Sales promotion (includes all types of attraction
for public), a specific amount set by resolution.



   (B)   Boxing and wrestling.



   (C)   Carnival.



   (D)   Circus.



   (E)   Commercial filming.



   (F)   Dance permits:



      (1)   Dance hall, dancing club and public dances without
on-sale liquor permits.



      (2)   With on-sale liquor permits (liquor defined to include
wine or beer or any type of beverage which has an alcoholic content).



   (G)   Delivery, wholesale and retail (per truck or vehicle);
includes established delivery, service and sales routes.



   (H)   Exhibition (travel).



   (I)   Fortuneteller.



   (J)   Parade vendors:



      (1)   Local vendors.



      (2)   Out-of-town vendors.



      (3)    LOCAL shall be described as an organization, business
or person that is a resident of and/or has a business office within the city
limits;



   (K)   Taxicab in service.



   (L)   Vendors and peddlers.



('81 Code, § 5.04.380)  (Ord. 707, passed  - -78; Ord. 794, passed  -
-83; Ord. 830, passed  - -85; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 110.65  TAX BASED ON INCOME HOUSING UNITS.



   Tax based on income housing units shall be as follows:



   (A)   Under four units, no charge;



   (B)   Four units, $25 per year;



   (C)   Each additional unit in excess of four, $2 per unit per year.



('81 Code, § 5.04.390)  (Ord. 794, passed  - -83)



§ 110.66  TAX BASED ON SEATING CAPACITY.



   Every person regularly engaged in the business of operating a motion
picture house, theater, other than in a tent, shall pay an annual tax of $75
where the seating capacity does not exceed 350 seats or 140 speakers, plus
$12.50 for each additional 100 seats or 40 speakers or major fraction thereof.



('81 Code, § 5.04.400)



§ 110.67  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; REINSTATEMENT.



   (A)   The City Council has the authority to revoke or suspend any
business license when such licensee is in violation of the city ordinances
regarding the health, safety and well-being of the community or is in
violation of laws of the United States or state.



   (B)   Such license cannot be reinstated unless approved by the City
Council.



   (C)   Such action of suspension or revocation are to be taken after
due notice and a hearing held by the Council.



('81 Code, § 5.04.430)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter by knowingly
or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer, employee or representative
of the city any material fact in procuring a license or permit as provided in
this chapter, or failing to obtain a business license prior to engaging in
any act of business, or failing to renew a business license as provided in
this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction and punished according to
Chapter 13 of this code.



('81 Code, § 5.04.440)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



CHAPTER 111:  ADVERTISING



Section



   111.01   Distributing handbills in public place



   111.02   Throwing handbills in yard or building



   111.03   Posting placards without permission



   111.04   Depositing samples on yard or porch



§ 111.01  DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACE.



   It is unlawful for any person to distribute or throw or cause to be
distributed or thrown to or among pedestrians along or upon any public
street, park, or other public place of the city, or to throw into or upon any
motor vehicle, any handbill, dodger or other notice of advertisement, unless
such is personally delivered.



('81 Code, § 5.24.010)  (Ord. 871, passed  - -86)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 111.02  THROWING HANDBILLS IN YARD OR BUILDING.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw any handbill, dodger or printed
advertising matter in any vacant lot, in any yard or in any building or
store, unless such is delivered personally to some person in such yard,
building or store.



('81 Code, § 5.24.020)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 111.03  POSTING PLACARDS WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   It is unlawful for any person to post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise
affix, or cause to be done by another, any notice, placard, bill, poster or
advertisement to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curbing, hydrant, tree,
fence, enclosure or building, or upon any telegraph, telephone or electrical
light pole, without first obtaining the permission of the owner, agent or
occupant thereof.



('81 Code, § 5.24.040)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



Statutory reference:



   Regulations authorized, see Cal. Gov't Code § 38774



§ 111.04  DEPOSITING SAMPLES ON YARD OR PORCH.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place or leave upon
any yard, doorstep or porch, or in any store or motor vehicle, any patent
medicine or drug or medicine of any description or any sample of goods,
produce or household commodity.



('81 Code, § 5.24.050)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND VENDING MACHINES



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License required



   112.03   License procedure



   112.04   Fee



   112.05   Display of license



   112.06   Transferability



   112.07   Term of license



   112.08   Distributor or owner identification



   112.09   Confiscation conditions



   112.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Amusement arcades, see Ch. 16.56



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMUSEMENT CENTER OR ARCADE.  Any business, store or location, with the
exception of bowling alleys or pool halls, in which more than three amusement
devices are placed, whether or not the operation of the devices is primary or
accessory to the business, store or location.  A bowling alley or pool hall
shall be considered an amusement center or arcade if more than 10 amusement
devices are in the location, or more than three amusement devices if more
than 50% of the public floor area is devoted to amusement devices.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Any electrically or mechanically operated
instrument, machine, device or equipment which is activated, operated or used
by means of any payment, or by means of inserting a coin, token, slug or
other device into a slot or receptacle and may be operated by the public for
use as a game, entertainment or amusement whether or not skill is involved. 
The common intent of such devices is to register the best possible point
score.  It shall include, but not be limited to, such devices as electronic
or mechanical game machines, video games, pinball machines, skill ball,
bowling machines, electronic sports machines, or other similar type machines,
regardless of their name.



   OTHER AMUSEMENT DEVICES.  A coin or token operated machine or device,
not including amusement games, which provide a ride, electronic reading or
weight, lamination, music, or devices designed exclusively for use by
children under 10 years of age such as riding machines.  Also included in
this category are coin-operated pool tables.



   PERSON or OWNER.  Any person, licensee, firm, partnership, corporation
or association which owns any amusement device or is responsible for the
placement or distribution of such devices within the city.



   VENDING MACHINES.  Any machines that dispense goods, wares or
merchandise such as cigarettes, sodas, food, and the like.



('81 Code, § 5.08.010)  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall keep, operate or maintain for public use or operation
within the city any machine or device, as described in § 112.01 of this
chapter, without first obtaining from the city a license therefor and paying
the license fee provided in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.08.020)  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  LICENSE PROCEDURE.



   Every person desiring a license pursuant to § 112.02 shall file a
written application with the License Collector on a form prepared by the
License Collector.  The application shall include, but not be limited to,
the name and address of the applicant, who will be responsible for complying
with the provisions of this code, the number of machines and the location,
name and address where the machines are to be located, and a brief
description of the type of machine.



('81 Code, § 5.08.030)  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)



§ 112.04  FEE.



   (A)   Amusement device.  The licensee shall pay a license fee in
the amount equal to one percent of gross revenues derived from all amusement
devices the licensee maintains within the city.  The license fee shall be in
an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   Amusement arcade.  An operator of an arcade, of which more
than 50% of the public floor is devoted to amusement devices, shall pay a
license fee equal to 1% of the gross revenues derived from the total business
operation.  The license fee shall be in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   Other amusement devices and vending machines.  The license
fee shall be based upon the gross-receipts schedule listed in § 110.62 of
this title except for vending machines, where the limitation imposed by Cal.
Bus. & Prof. Code § 16002.5 shall apply when calculating gross receipts.



('81 Code, § 5.08.040)  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 112.05  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Each licensee shall post or keep in a visible position at all times, on
each machine or device so licensed, the license permit provided by the city.



('81 Code, § 5.08.050)  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  TRANSFERABILITY.



   (A)   An amusement device, other amusement device or vending machine
may be substituted by a licensee for another similar-type machine or device
under his license within the same location. Notification must be given to the
License Collector for any transfer of location of machine.



   (B)   No license or permit shall be transferred or assigned to
another owner, person or operator.



('81 Code, § 5.08.060)  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.07  TERM OF LICENSE.



   All licenses shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year and
shall expire on December 31 of each year.



('81 Code, § 5.08.070)  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)



§ 112.08  DISTRIBUTOR OR OWNER IDENTIFICATION.



   Every distributor or owner of an amusement device, other amusement
device or vending machine shall post on the machine or device his name and
address in a place where it may be seen by anyone using the machine or device.



('81 Code, § 5.08.080)  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.09  CONFISCATION CONDITIONS.



   Any machine or device subject to a business license under this chapter
and maintained in the city without a license is subject to confiscation by
the city.  Confiscation of the machine or device will occur only after
reasonable notification of violation to the owner or operator.  If the owner
or operator reclaims the confiscated machine or device, he shall pay the city
the actual cost incurred in confiscation.



('81 Code, § 5.08.090(B))  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person in violation of any section of this chapter shall be subject
to the general penalties as listed in Chapter 13 of this code.



('81 Code, § 5.08.090(A))  (Ord. 778, passed  - -82)



CHAPTER 113:  BINGO



Section



   113.01   Definition



   113.02   Who may conduct



   113.03   Wages



   113.04   Injunction



   113.05   No minors



   113.06   Place



   113.07   Public



   113.08   Operation



   113.09   Financial interest



   113.10   Special fund



   113.11   Proceeds



   113.12   License fees



   113.13   Participants



   113.14   Prizes



   113.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Bingo, see Cal. Penal Code § 326.5



§ 113.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BINGO.  A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
designated numbers or symbols on a card that conform to numbers or symbols
selected at random.  Notwithstanding Cal. Penal Code § 330c, as used in
this section, the game of bingo includes cards having numbers or symbols that
are concealed or preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of
prizes.  The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any
person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game.  All
preprinted cards shall bear the legend "for sale or use only in a bingo game
authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance."  It is the
intention of the Legislature that bingo as defined in this section   
applies exclusively to this chapter and shall not be applied in the
construction or enforcement of any other provision of law.



('81 Code, § 5.12.010)  (Ord. 676, passed  - -77; Am. Ord. 1019, passed
1-20-98)



§ 113.02  WHO MAY CONDUCT.



   Only organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and
corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g
and 23701l of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, mobilehome park associations and
senior citizens organizations may conduct bingo games; and only if the
receipts of those games are used for charitable purposes.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.03  WAGES.



   It is a misdemeanor for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage, or
salary from any bingo game authorized by Section 19 of Article IV of the
State Constitution.  Security personnel employed by the organization
conducting the bingo game may be paid from the revenues of bingo games, as
provided in Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 (j) and (k).



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.04  INJUNCTION.



   The city may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.05  NO MINORS.



   No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.06  PLACE.



   An organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to § 113.02
shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or
property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used
by that organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for
which the organization is organized.  Nothing in this section shall be
construed to require that the property owned or leased by, or whose use is
donated to, the organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated
exclusively to, that organization.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.07  PUBLIC.



   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the
authorized organization.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.08  OPERATION.



   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the
authorized organization that organized it.  Those members shall not receive
a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game.  Only the organization
authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such a game, or participate
in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of a bingo game.  This
subdivision does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are
not members of the authorized organization at a bingo game by the
organization conducting the game.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.09  FINANCIAL INTEREST.



   No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except
the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game, shall hold a financial
interest in the conduct of a bingo game.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.10  SPECIAL FUND.



   With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and
corporation tax by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701d, all profits derived from
a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be
commingled with any other fund or account.  Those profits shall be used only
for charitable purposes.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.11  PROCEEDS.



   With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games
pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be
kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other
fund or account.  Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games conducted by
organizations described in § 113.10.  These proceeds shall be used only for
charitable purposes, except as follows:



   (A)   The proceeds may be used for prizes.



   (B)   A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed 20% of the proceeds
before the deduction for prizes or $2,000 per month, whichever is less, may
be used for the rental of property and for overhead, including the purchase
of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security
personnel.



   (C)   The proceeds may be used to pay license fees.



   (D)   If the monthly gross receipts from bingo games of an
organization within this chapter exceed $5,000, a minimum percentage of the
proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes not relating to the
conducting of bingo games and that the balance shall be used for prizes,
rental of property, overhead, administrative expenses, and payment of license
fees.  The amount of proceeds used for rental of property, overhead and
administrative expenses is subject to the limitations specified in subsection
(B) above.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.12  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   A fee not exceeding $50 annually, except as provided in
subsection (B) below, shall be charged to those organization conducting bingo
games.  If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license
fee shall be refunded to the organization.



   (B)   In lieu of the license fee permitted under subsection (A)
above, the city may impose a license fee of $50 upon application.  If an
application for a license is denied, one-half of the application fee shall be
refunded to the organization.  An additional fee for law enforcement and
public safety costs incurred by the city that are directly related to bingo
activities may be imposed and shall be collected monthly by the city;
however, the fee shall not exceed the actual costs incurred in providing the
service.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.13  PARTICIPANTS.



   No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the
person is physically present at the time and place where the bingo game is
being conducted.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.14  PRIZES.



   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games
shall not exceed $250 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which
is held.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of § 113.02 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$10,000, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.  A
violation of any provision of this chapter, other than § 113.02 is a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1019, passed 1-20-98)



CHAPTER 114:  CABLE TELEVISION



Section




General Provisions




   114.001   Authority



   114.002   Findings



   114.003   Short title



   114.004   Definitions




Franchise Terms and Conditions




   114.010   Franchise purposes



   114.011   Franchise required



   114.012   Term of the franchise



   114.013   Franchise territory



   114.014   Federal or state jurisdiction



   114.015   Franchise non-transferable



   114.016   Geographical coverage



   114.017   Nonexclusive franchise



   114.018   Multiple franchises



   114.019   Franchise modification




Franchise Applications and Renewal




   114.030   Filing of applications



   114.031   Applications - contents



   114.032   Consideration of initial applications



   114.033   Franchise renewal




Minimum Consumer Protection and Service Standards




   114.040   Operational standards



   114.041   Service standards



   114.042   Billing and information standards



   114.043   Verification of compliance with standards



   114.044   Subscriber complaints and disputes



   114.045   Other requirements




Franchise Fee and Financial Requirements




   114.050   Franchise fee



   114.051   Security



   114.052   State video franchisees




Construction Requirements




   114.060   System construction



   114.061   Multiple franchises




Standards




   114.070   Applicable standards



   114.071   Non-compliance with standards



   114.072   Costs of technical assistance




Indemnification and Insurance Requirements




   114.080   Hold harmless



   114.081   Insurance




Records and Reports




   114.090   Records required



   114.091   Reports



   114.092   Opinion survey




Review of System Performance




   114.100   Biannual review




Franchise Violations




   114.110   Remedies for violations



   114.111   Procedure for remedying franchise violations 



   114.112   Grantor's power to revoke



   114.113   Appeal of finding of revocation




Force Majeure; Grantee's Inability to Perform




   114.120   Force majeure; grantee's inability to perform




Abandonment or Removal of Franchise Property




   114.130   Abandonment or removal



   114.131   Restoration by grantor: reimbursement of costs



   114.132   Extended operation and continuity of services



   114.133   Receivership and foreclosure




Grantor and Subscriber Rights




   114.140   Reservation of grantor rights



   114.141   Waiver



   114.142   Rights of individuals



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 114.001  AUTHORITY.



   The city of Santa Paula pursuant to applicable federal and state law,
is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises to construct,
operate, maintain and reconstruct cable systems within the city limits.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.002  FINDINGS.



   The City Council finds that the development of cable systems has the
potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of the city.
Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable
systems, the City Council further finds that the public convenience, safety
and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers
which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city may designate.
It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and
specify the means to attain the best possible cable service to the public and
any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include
this as an integral finding thereof. It is the further intent of this chapter
to establish regulatory provisions that permit the city to regulate cable
system franchises to the extent permitted by federal and state law, including
but not limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the
Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the
Federal Tele-communications Act of 1996 as amended or hereafter amended,
applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations and applicable
California law.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.003  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall constitute the "Cable System Regulatory Ordinance"
of the city of Santa Paula and may be referred to as such.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.



   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission
of local television broadcast signals.




   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who:





      (1)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly
or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system; or





      (2)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such cable system.





   CABLE SERVICE.





      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:





         (a)   Video programming;





         (b)   Other programming service.





      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.





   CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM. A facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community,
but such term does not include:





      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;





      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any
public rights-of-way;





      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of
1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system (other than for the purposes of 47 U.S.C. 541) to the extent such
facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive
on-demand services;





      (4)   An open video system that complies with Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 573) as amended; or





      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility system.





   CHANNEL or CABLE CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency
spectrum which is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a
television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.





   COUNCIL. The City Council of the city of Santa Paula.





   FRANCHISE. An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the
Council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit,
license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which
authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement
to obtain any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting
business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the
city.





   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. A franchise grant ordinance or a contractual
agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted,
including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.





   FRANCHISE FEE. Any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on
a grantee as compensation for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way.
The term FRANCHISE FEE does not include:





      (1)   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability
(including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and
cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment
which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);





      (2)   Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be
incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access
facilities;





      (3)   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or
enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds,
letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated
damages; or





      (4)   Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.





   GRANTEE. Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and
under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful
successor, transferee or assignee.





   GRANTOR or CITY. The city of Santa Paula as represented by the Council
or any delegate, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.





   GROSS ANNUAL CABLE SERVICE REVENUES. The annual gross revenues received
directly or indirectly by a grantee from the provision of cable service
within the city utilizing the public rights-of-way for which a franchise is
required. GROSS ANNUAL CABLE SERVICE REVENUES shall include, but not be
limited to, subscriber revenue, equipment charges, late fees, advertising
revenue, home shopping revenue and franchise fee revenue. GROSS ANNUAL CABLE
SERVICE REVENUES shall not include refundable deposits, rebates or credits,
or any sales, excise or other taxes or charges imposed externally to the
franchise, and collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal
government.





   INSTALLATION. The connection of the system to subscribers' terminals,
and the provision of service.





   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Those service conditions which are within
the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control
of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions,
pay-per-view events rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods,
and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.





   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, corporation or governmental entity.





   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES or PEG ACCESS
FACILI-TIES. The total of the following:





      (1)   Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public,
educational, or government use; and





      (2)   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel
capacity.





   SECTION. Any section, subsection or provision of this chapter.





   SERVICE AREA or FRANCHISE AREA. The entire geographic area within the
municipal boundaries of the city as it is now constituted or may in the
future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise.





   SERVICE TIER. A category of cable service or other services provided by
a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged.





   STATE. The state of California.





   STREET or PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Each of the following
which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the
public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within
the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys,
sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property.




   SUBSCRIBER or CUSTOMER or CONSUMER means any person who or which elects
to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the grantee by
means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges
therefor.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



FRANCHISE TERMS AND CONDITIONS



§ 114.010  FRANCHISE PURPOSES.




   A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter
shall encompass the following purposes:





   (A)   To permit the grantee to engage in the business of providing
cable service, and such other services as may be permitted by law which
grantee provides to subscribers within the designated service area;





   (B)   To permit the grantee to erect, install, construct, repair,
rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related
electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other
property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over,
under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the
designated service area;





   (C)   To permit the grantee to maintain and operate said franchise
properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and
distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable
services, and such other services as may be permitted by law;




   (D)   To set forth the obligations of the grantee under the
franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.011  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to construct, install or operate a cable system in the city within any
public way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.012  TERM OF THE FRANCHISE.



   (A)   A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established
in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor's adoption of an
ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise.



   (B)   Franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by
the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.013  FRANCHISE TERRITORY.



   Any franchise shall be valid within all the municipal limits of the
city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise,
unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.014  FEDERAL OR STATE JURISDICTION.



   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted
or renewed after the effective date of this chapter to the extent permitted
by applicable law.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.015  FRANCHISE NON- TRANSFERABLE.



   (A)   Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign or dispose of,
in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary
sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise (collectively "transfer"), the
franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the
prior consent of the Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied,
withheld or delayed; provided, however, that the prior written consent of the
Council shall not be required for an intra-corporate or intra-company
transfer from one subsidiary of grantee's ultimate parent company to another
subsidiary in which grantee°s ultimate parent company retains at least a 75%
interest. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any
mortgage or other hypothecation or by assignment of any right, title or
interest in the cable system, or use of the cable system as collateral in
order to secure indebtedness, shall not be considered a transfer for the
purposes of this section.



   (B)   The requirements of division (A) shall apply to any change in
control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein includes majority
ownership, and actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the
event that grantee is a corporation, prior consent of the Council shall be
required where ownership or control of more than 25% of the voting stock of
the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert,
none of whom own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the
effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively.



   (C)   Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or
any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise
property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest
covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such
notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in
control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions
under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control
or ownership shall apply.



   (D)   For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to
such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into
the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, in
accordance with the guidelines set forth herein, and grantee shall assist
grantor in such inquiry. In seeking grantor's consent to any change of
ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that
the grantee and/or the proposed transferee complete an application in
accordance with Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or equivalent. An
application shall be submitted to grantor not less than 120 days prior to the
proposed date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that
it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and
maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the
remainder of the term of the franchise. If the grantee is then in compliance
with the requirements of the franchise, and the legal, financial and
technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall
consent to the transfer of the franchise in accordance with federal
regulations. The grantor may impose such reasonable conditions upon the
transfer as are within the grantor's legal authority. If the grantor has not
taken action on the grantee's request for transfer within 120 days after
receiving such request, grantor's consent to such transfer shall be deemed
given. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably
denied or delayed.



   (E)   Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or
its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation
of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its
designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the
cable system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations.
Further, said financial institution shall also agree in writing to continue
cable service and comply with all franchise requirements during the term the
financial institution exercises control over the ystem.



   (F)   Any submission of an application for transfer of a franchise
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable franchise processing fee in the
amount specified in grantee's franchise agreement. Upon transfer, grantee
shall reimburse grantor for grantor's reasonable processing and review
expenses in connection with the transfer of the franchise, to the extent such
expenses exceed the nonrefundable franchise processing fee, up to the dollar
amount specified in grantee's franchise agreement. Any such reimbursement
shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor during the term
of the franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.016  GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE.



   (A)   Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system
to have the capability to pass every residential dwelling unit in the service
area, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the
franchise agreement.



   (B)   Business and commercial facilities shall be passed and/or
served in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement.



   (C)   After service has been established by activating trunk and/or
distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to
any requesting subscriber within that service area within 30 days from the
date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all
rights-of-way, permits and landlord agreements necessary to extend service to
such subscriber within such 30 day period on reasonable terms and conditions.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.017  NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.



   Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive.
The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to
applicable state and federal law.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.018  MULTIPLE FRANCHISES.




   (A)   Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to
applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises
granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of
applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:





      (1)   The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate
multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility
systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage.





      (2)   The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result
of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.





      (3)   The disadvantages that may result from cable system
competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents'
property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public
rights-of-way.





   (B)   Where electric and telephone utilities are to be placed
underground in any new residential housing developments, grantor and the
developer of such new residential housing shall give each grantee serving the
franchise area within which the new residential housing development is
located at least 72 hours prior written notice of the date on which open
trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit,
pedestals and vaults. On request of the grantor or developer, the grantee
shall provide specifications needed for trenching. Developers of new
residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to
accommodate cables for at least two new entrant cable systems and dedicate
the use of such conduit to the city.




   (C)   Grantor may require that any new entrant, non-incumbent
grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs
associated therewith, if, in grantor's opinion, the public rights-of-way in
any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional
cables.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.019  FRANCHISE MODIFICATION.



   The grantee may be required to pay any reasonable costs incurred by the
grantor in processing a grantee request for franchise modification. Such
costs may include the reasonable costs incurred for hiring consultants to
assist in evaluating the request. Upon written request from the grantee, the
grantor shall provide grantee with an estimate of the total processing costs
prior to entering into the review of the request. Such costs shall be paid by
the grantee prior to final consideration of the request by the grantor.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS AND RENEWAL



§ 114.030  FILING OF APPLICATIONS.



   Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file
an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable initial application
fee established by the city shall accompany the initial franchise application
to cover all validly documented reasonable costs associated with processing
and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of
administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the
applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs
incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect
to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In
the event such validly documented reasonable costs exceed the application
fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within 30
days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.031  APPLICATIONS - CONTENTS.



   An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall
contain, where applicable:



   (A)   A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area;



   (B)   A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the
expertise of applicant in the cable system field;



   (C)   A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant,
if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each
stockholder having a 5% or greater interest, if a corporation;



   (D)   A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the
applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person;



   (E)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the
applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;



   (F)   A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a
certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete
and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city;



   (G)   A proposed construction and service schedule;



   (H)   Any reasonable relevant additional information that the city
deems applicable.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.032  CONSIDERATION OF INITIAL APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the
City Manager or a delegate shall prepare a report and make recommendations
respecting such application to the Council.



   (B)   A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise
grant, at a time and date approved by the Council. Within 60 days after the
close of the hearing, the Council shall make a decision based upon the
evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the initial
franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions.
The Council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any
franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.033  FRANCHISE RENEWAL.



   Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law and
regulation. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal
negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



MINIMUM CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS



§ 114.040  OPERATIONAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement,
grantee shall meet or exceed the following consumer protection and service
standards under normal operating conditions:



      (1)   Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during
normal business hours to assure that telephone answer time by a customer
service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds; and
callers needing to be transferred shall not be required to wait more than 30
seconds before being connected to a service representative. Under normal
operating conditions, a caller shall receive a busy signal less than 3% of
the time.



      (2)   Emergency toll free telephone line capacity on a 24 hour
basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the
telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system,
including an answering machine and calls received after normal business hours
by such service or automated response system must be responded to by a
trained company representative by the next business day. During periods when
an answering device, including, but not limited to voice-mail, is used,
grantee shall provide personnel who shall contact the answering device or
machine, at a minimum, every five hours to check on requests for service or
complaints.



      (3)   A business and service and/or payment office located
within the city open during normal business hours where grantee provides
adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and the return or exchange of
subscriber equipment. Normal business hours shall include some evening hours,
at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours. The grantee may
petition the grantor to reduce its business hours if the extended hours are
not justified by subscriber demand, and grantor may not unreasonably deny the
petition.



      (4)   An emergency system maintenance and repair staff,
capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a 24 hour
basis.



      (5)   An installation staff, capable of installing service to
any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days after
receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been
activated. "Standard installations" shall be those that are located up to 125
feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in any
franchise agreement.



      (6)   Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four hour
time period during normal business hours, all appointments with subscribers
for installation of service, service calls and other activities at the
subscriber location. Grantee may schedule installation and service calls
outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.
Grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of
business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee
representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will
not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer shall be
contacted and the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is
mutually agreeable to the grantee and the customer.



   (B)   Under normal operating conditions, the standards of
subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall be met not less than 90% of the
time measured on a quarterly basis. The standards of subsections (A)(4)
through (A)(6) above shall be met not less than 95% of the time measured on a
quarterly basis.



   (C)   Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above
unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.041  SERVICE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly,
and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and
shall occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably
between midnight and 6:00 a.m. local time.



   (B)   The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians
normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the
following time frames:



      (1)   For a system outage: within two hours, including
weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service which by
number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels,
affecting at least 10% of the subscribers of the system;



      (2)   For an isolated outage: Within 24 hours, including
weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of
sound or picture for one or more channels that affects five or more
subscribers. On weekends, an outage affecting fewer than five subscribers
shall result in a service call no later than the next business day.



      (3)   For inferior signal quality: within two business days of
receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or
sound quality.



   (C)   Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for
service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the
service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber
not being home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave
written notification of arrival.



   (D)   Grantee shall not charge for the repair or replacement of
defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by grantee to subscribers,
unless the defect was caused by the subscriber, or the equipment owned by the
subscriber requires repair or replacement.



   (E)    Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the
problem resulting in a request for service within two business days of
beginning work and resolve all cable system related problems within five
business days unless technically infeasible.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.042  BILLING AND INFORMATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Subscriber bills shall be clear, concise and understandable.
Bills shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited
to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall also
clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional
charges, rebates and credits.



   (B)   In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.



   (C)   Grantee shall provide pro rata credits or refunds to
subscribers whose service has been interrupted for two or more hours if the
interruption was not caused by the subscriber, and grantee knows or should
have known of such interruption.



      (1)   Credits or refunds shall automatically be provided by
grantee on a pro rata basis to any subscriber(s) affected by interruption(s)
of service for more than three hours due to actions or outages under the
control of the grantee, exclusive of scheduled repairs, maintenance or
franchise-required construction that grantee has provided advance written
notice of to subscribers. In cases where advance written notice is provided
to subscribers, the time period detailed in said notice shall not exceed six
hours in any 24 hour period. In cases where said notice has been given to
subscribers and the service interruption exceeds the period detailed in said
notice, the provisions of this section shall apply.



      (2)   In the event grantee has improperly or inadvertently
disconnected cable services to a subscriber, grantee shall provide for
restoration without charge to subscriber as soon as possible, but no later
than within two days of discovery of disconnection. Grantee shall credit or
provide refunds to any subscriber improperly or inadvertently disconnected
from receiving cable services for the period of time without cable service.



      (3)   All credits or refunds for service shall be issued no
later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that
a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be
issued promptly, but no later than 30 days after the return of any grantee
supplied equipment.



   (D)   Grantee shall provide written information on each of the
following areas: at the time of the installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:



      (1)   Products and services offered;



      (2)   Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other services;



      (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;



      (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;



      (5)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
and



      (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address
and telephone number of the grantor office designated for dealing with
cable-related issues.



   (E)   Subscribers shall be notified of any changes in rates,
programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing and
in accordance with state and federal law. Notice must be given to subscribers
a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the
control of the grantee. In addition, grantee shall notify subscribers 30 days
in advance of any significant changes in the information required in §
114.012(D).



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.043  VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS.



   (A)   Upon ten days prior written notice, grantee shall respond to a
request for information made by grantor regarding grantee's compliance with
any or all of the standards required in §§ 114.040 - 114.042. Grantee shall
provide sufficient documentation to permit grantor to verify grantee's
compliance.



   (B)   A repeated and verifiable pattern of non-compliance with the
consumer protection standards of §§ 114.040 - 114.042, after grantee's
receipt of due notice and not less than a 30 day opportunity to cure, may be
deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.



   (C)   The grantor, pursuant to § 114.040(C), may require grantee to
acquire equipment to determine compliance with the telephone answering
standards of this subchapter. Should grantee have its own telephone equipment
which can report on telephone line(s) usage, the grantee, upon written
request from the grantor, shall submit such report from its own system in
order to verify compliance with the telephone answering standards of this
subchapter.



   (D)   Grantee shall take necessary steps to ensure that adequate
telephone lines and/or staffing are available to permit grantee to satisfy
its obligations under this chapter and the franchise. Consideration shall be
given for periods of promotional activities or outages. The monthly billing
period shall be considered as a normal, daily activity for purposes of
determining the availability of adequate telephone lines and/or staffing.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.044  SUBSCRIBER COMPLAINTS AND DISPUTES.



   (A)   Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving,
acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the
grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a
subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the
subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these
procedures with grantor. The written procedures shall include a requirement
that grantee respond to any written complaint from a subscriber within 30
days of receipt.



   (B)   Upon prior written request, grantor shall have the right to
review grantee's response to any subscriber complaints in order to determine
grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the
subscriber's right to privacy.



   (C)   Subject to applicable law, it shall be the right of all
subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial
and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the
grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives
notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee
shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive cable service so long
as the franchise remains in force.



   (D)   In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the
event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall
cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity
of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled
to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system.



   (E)   Grantee response to subscriber complaints, as well as
complaints made by subscribers to grantor and provided by grantor to grantee,
shall be initiated within one business day of receipt by grantor. The
resolution of subscriber complaints shall be effected by grantee not later
than three business days after receipt of the complaint, or a longer period
if such complaint cannot reasonably be resolved within three business days.
Should a grantee supervisor not be available when requested by a subscriber,
a supervisor shall respond to the subscriber's complaint at the earliest
possible time, and in no event later than the end of the next business day.
For complaints received by grantor and provided by grantor to grantee,
grantee shall notify grantor of grantee's progress in responding to, and
resolving, said complaints.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.045  OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven
consecutive days other than for reasons beyond the control of grantee,
without prior approval or subsequent excuse of the grantor, the grantor may,
at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until such
time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor
or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this
obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills
such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from
the system, and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all reasonable
costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by grantor that are the
result of grantee's failure to perform.



   (B)   All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its
contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into
contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers'
premises shall carry a photo identification card in a form approved by
grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times.
Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly
identified as working for grantee.



   (C)   Additional service standards and standards governing consumer
protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise
provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement or
by separate ordinance as permitted by federal law. If grantor establishes
such additional service standards which exceed any standards established by
the Federal Communications Commission, grantee may be permitted by federal
law or regulation to recover the incremental cost associated with meeting the
more stringent standard (such as the incremental cost differential between
meeting the existing standard and that of the newly established standard). A
verified and continuing pattern of repeated and substantial noncompliance may
be deemed a material breach of the franchise, provided that grantee shall
receive due process, including prior written notification and a reasonable
opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being imposed.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



FRANCHISE FEE AND FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 114.050  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the
grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee on gross annual cable
service revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise
agreement.



   (B)   The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a
statement within 120 days of the close of the calendar year, either audited
and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by
an officer or authorized financial representative of the grantee, reflecting
the total amounts of gross revenues and all payments, deductions and
computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon 30 days prior
written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent
financial audit of grantee's gross annual cable service revenue and franchise
fee records, in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Procedures
(GAAP), and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of 2% or
more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable documented costs of such audit.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any
payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and
satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums
payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any
other obligation of the grantee.



   (D)   In the event that any franchise fee payment or payment of any
adjustment to any franchise fee is not made on or before the dates specified
in the franchise agreement, unless otherwise excused, grantee shall pay:



      (1)   An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an
annual rate of 8%; and



      (2)   If the payment is late by 30 days or more, a sum of
money equal to 5% of the amount due in order to defray those additional
expenses and costs incurred by the grantor due to grantee's delinquent
payment.



   (E)   Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the
schedule indicated in the franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.051  SECURITY.



   (A)   Grantor may require grantee to provide security, in an amount
and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security
shall be established based on the extent of the grantee's obligations under
the terms of the franchise.



   (B)   The security shall be available to grantor to satisfy all
claims, liens and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of
construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any
actual or liquidated damages arising out of a material breach of the
franchise agreement, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the
franchise agreement.



   (C)   If the security is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with
the procedures established in this chapter and the franchise agreement,
grantee shall cause the security to be replenished to the original amount no
later than 30 days after receiving written confirmation from the issuer where
such security is maintained that grantor has made a draw against the
security. Failure to replenish the security shall be deemed a material breach
of the franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.052  STATE VIDEO FRANCHISEES.



   (A)   PEG fee established. In accord with Cal. Public Utilities Code
§ 5870(n), any grantee of a franchise, or state franchisee, must pay to the
city a fee for the support of public, educational, and governmental access
("PEG") channel facilities. The amount of the PEG fee established by this
section is 1% of gross revenues, as defined in this code, the applicable
city-issued franchise, or Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5860(d).



   (B)   Franchise fee established. For any state franchisee, the
amount of the franchise fee imposed by Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5840(q)
shall be 5% of gross revenues, as defined in Cal. Public Utilities Code §
5860(d).



   (C)   Notices from state franchisees. Any notice a state franchisee
is required to deliver to the city by Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5840(m)
must be delivered to the City Manager or a delegate.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or restrict in
any way the imposition of any existing or future generally applicable,
nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral tax, fee, or charge to a state
franchisee, city franchisee, or the services the franchisees provide.



   (E)   Customer service provisions for state franchisees.



      (1)   All state franchisees must comply with all applicable
state and federal laws and local regulations regarding customer service and
customer protection.



      (2)   The City Manager or a delegate may review the
performance of state franchisees for compliance with the customer service
requirements specified in Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5900 ("Customer
Service Standards").



      (3)   If the city believes a material breach of the customer
service standards has occurred, the City Manager or a delegate shall give the
state franchisee written notice of any alleged material breach(es). The state
franchise shall remedy the specified material breach(es) no later than 30
days from receipt of the notice.



      (4)   If the state franchisee fails to remedy the specified
material breach(es) within 30 days, the Cable Franchise Administrator may
impose monetary penalties on the following schedule:



         (a)   Up to $500 for each day of each material breach,
not to exceed $1,500 for each occurrence of a material breach.



         (b)   For a second material breach of the same nature
within 12 months, up to $1,000 for each day of each material breach, not to
exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach.



         (c)   For a third or further material breach of the same
nature within 12 months, up to $2,500 for each day of each material breach,
not to exceed $7,500 for each occurrence of the material breach.



      (5)   Any monetary penalty imposed under this section may be
appealed by the state franchisee to the City Council. Appeals must be
received in writing by the City Clerk within 60 days of imposition of the
penalty. The state franchisee may present any relevant written or oral
evidence of its choice. The City Council may uphold or reverse, in whole or
in part, the imposition of the monetary penalties.



   (F)   For the duration of any city-issued franchise, if that
franchisee has existing unsatisfied obligations under the franchise to pay to
the city any cash payments for the ongoing costs of public, educational, and
governmental access channel facilities or institutional networks, the fee
payable by each city and state franchisee shall be the franchisee's pro rata
per subscriber share of the cash payment required to be paid by the city
franchisee to the city for the costs of PEG channel facilities.



      (1)   Within 45 days of receipt of the notice required by Cal.
Public Utilities Code § 5840(n), each city and state franchisee must provide
to the City Manager or a delegate a written statement of the number of its
subscribers within the franchisee's service area in the city.



      (2)   Within 45 days of receipt of all franchisee subscriber
number statements, the City Manager or delegate must calculate the division
of the cash payments among all city and state franchisees, and provide
written notice to each franchisee of the franchisee's share of the cash
payment. This amount may be expressed as a percentage of gross revenue or as
an amount per subscriber, per month, or otherwise.



   (G)   Interconnection. To properly serve the city's interest in PEG
programming, each state franchisee and city franchisee must comply with the
PEG system interconnection requirements of Cal. Public Utility Code § 5870.
The City Manager or delegate may make any interconnection determinations of
the city under Cal. Public Utility Code § 5870, including requiring
interconnection where the city franchisee and state franchisee fail to reach
a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement.



   (H)   Notwithstanding Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5870(n), upon
the expiration of any state franchise, without any action of the City
Council, Section 7.2 titled “State Video Service Fees for Public,
Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access” shall be deemed to have been
automatically reauthorized, unless the state franchise holder has given the
City Manager and the City Council written notice 60 days prior to the
expiration of its state franchise that the section will expire pursuant to
the terms of Cal. Public Utilities code § 5870(n).



(Ord. 1268, passed 1-3-17; Am. Ord. 1276, passed 3-19-18)



CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS



§ 114.060  SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until
grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other responsible
public agencies. The grantee shall be subject to all permit and bonding
requirements applicable to contractors working within the public
rights-of-way. No provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement shall
be deemed a waiver of the obligation of a grantee to pay grantor for the
issuance of a permit.



   (B)   In those areas of the city where transmission lines or
distribution facilities of all public utilities providing telephone and
electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct,
operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground.



   (C)   In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are
located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the
public and/or municipal utility providing telephone or electric power
service, and in the event that the facilities of both the telephone and
electric power utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the
grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and
distribution facilities underground, at grantee's cost. Certain of grantee's
equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally
are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures,
unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.



   (D)   Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires,
cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein
referred to as "Structures"), or the construction of any additional
structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and
public ways shall be made under the direction of City Engineer or a designee,
who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the
provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public
thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the
California regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof.



      (1)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with
the proper use. of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the said public rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere
with existing public and municipal utility installations.



      (2)   In the event that any property or improvement of the
grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or
any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking
any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to the grantee pursuant to
this chapter and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the
grantee's sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor's satisfaction said
property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged. If such property
or improvement shall within two years (or in the case of street improvement,
until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the
two years) of the date the restoration was completed, become uneven,
unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or
replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by
the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall,
promptly upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and at the grantee's
sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor's satisfaction said property or
improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the
grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as
may, from time to time, be established by the grantor.



      (3)   Prior to commencing any work on the system in the public
rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain any and all permits, licenses and
authorizations lawfully required for such work. If emergency work on the
system in the public right-of-way is required, the grantee shall with all due
diligence, seek to obtain any and all such required permits, licenses and
authorizations within three working days after commencing such emergency
work. Prior to performing any work in the public right-of-way, grantee shall
give appropriate notice to the "Underground Service Alert" ("USA"), or any
similar type service provider as designated by the grantor.



      (4)   There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary
obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any
of the work provided for herein. The grantee shall maintain any barriers,
signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public
rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid
injury or damage to life and property.



      (5)   If the grantor lawfully elects to alter or change the
grade or location of any public right-of-way, the grantee shall, upon
reasonable notice by the grantor, and in a timely manner, remove, relay and
relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
fixtures at its own expense provided that grantee shall be entitled to share
in any grantor-provided funds or reimbursements provided to utilities or
other users of the public rights-of-way for such location.



      (6)   The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other
fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas,
electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility and all such
poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as
to comply with all ordinances of the grantor.



      (7)   In accordance with applicable law, the grantee or any
utility user of the public rights-of-way may be required by the grantor to
permit joint use of its poles and/or conduit located in the public
rights-of-way, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and
upon payment of a reasonable rental fee for such usage. In the absence of
agreement regarding such joint use, each party shall be entitled to exercise
any rights and defenses provided by applicable law.



      (8)   The grantee, on request of any person holding a moving
permit issued by the grantor, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or
fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than five business
days prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment
changes.



      (9)   Subject to provisions of City Code, the grantee shall
have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the
public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other
natural growth from coming in contact with the grantee's wires, cables and
other equipment. The grantor may require all trimming of trees and natural
growth to be done under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the
grantee.



      (10)   Grantee shall be subject to any and all requirements
established by the grantor with regard to the placement and screening of
grantee's facilities and equipment located in the public rights-of-way. Such
requirements may include, but not be limited to, use of landscaping to screen
pedestals and cabinets and requiring that construction be flush with the
natural grade of the surrounding area.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.061  MULTIPLE FRANCHISES.



   If the grantor authorizes or permits another cable system to operate
within the municipal limits of the city, it shall do so on conditions that
such new cable system entrant indemnify and hold harmless and reimburse the
grantee from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening
poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground
facilities and all other costs including those of grantee, the city and
utilities, incident to inspections, make ready and construction of an
additional cable system in the franchise area; and grantee shall be
designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated
into the authorizations) granted to such new entrant cable system.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



STANDARDS



§ 114.070  APPLICABLE STANDARDS.



   (A)   The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its
cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, regulations,
construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards,
and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition,
the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon written request, a written
report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests
conducted pursuant to FCC standards and guidelines.



   (B)   Should the FCC no longer require proof of performance tests,
the grantee shall make and submit such proof of performance tests and reports
in response to a written request from the grantor. Such report shall be
submitted to the grantor within 30 days of issuance of the grantor request.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.071  NON-COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS.



   Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards
shall constitute a material breach of the franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.072  COSTS OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.



   If the grantor determines through the use of an independent third party
that grantee's cable system does not comply with any material franchise
imposed technical requirements, the grantee shall pay the reasonable costs
incurred by the grantor for obtaining any technical assistance deemed
necessary by the grantor to determine said compliance. Any such payment by
grantee shall not be credited against any franchise fees due to the grantor.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS



§ 114.080  HOLD HARMLESS.



   Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents
and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or
expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.081  INSURANCE.



   (A)   On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee
shall furnish to grantor certificates of insurance for liability, workers'
compensation and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance
companies, which shall be "admitted" in the state of California. The
certificates of insurance shall provide that the insurance is in force and
will not be cancelled or modified without 30 days prior written notice to
grantor. The certificates of insurance shall be in a form reasonably
satisfactory to grantor. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout
the term of the franchise, the insurance required herein and in any franchise
agreement.



   (B)   The policy of liability insurance shall:



      (1)   Name grantor, its officers, agents and employees as
additional insured;



      (2)   Indemnify all liability for personal and bodily injury,
death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises
used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but
not limited to:



         (a)   Negligent acts or omissions of grantee, and its
agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise
operations, and/or



         (b)   Use of motor vehicles;



      (3)   Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive
general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the
amount provided for in the franchise agreement.



   (C)   The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall comply
with the laws of the state of California.



   (D)   The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance
with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the
conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to
resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by
this insurance. The certificates of insurance shall indicate the following
information:



      (1)   The policy number;



      (2)   The date upon which the policy will become effective and
the date upon which it will expire;



      (3)   The names of the primary insureds and any additional
insured required by the franchise agreement;



      (4)   The subject of the insurance;



      (5)   The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and



      (6)   The amount or limit of coverage provided by the
insurance.



   (E)   If the certificates of insurance do not provide all of the
above information, grantor reserves the right to inspect the relevant
insurance policies.



   (F)   The commencement of franchise operations shall not begin until
grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section.



   (G)   In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the
above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon 48
hours notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and
recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to
suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said
policies in full force and effect.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



RECORDS AND REPORTS



§ 114.090  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Grantee shall at all times maintain:



      (1)   A written or computer- stored record of all service
calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the
preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a
service call, subject to the subscriber's right of privacy.



      (2)   A full and complete set of plans and record drawings
showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city,
exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's
homes.



      (3)   If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls,
identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a
monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the
grantor within 30 days following any written request by grantor, in a form
reasonably acceptable to the grantor.



      (4)   If requested by grantor, a complaint record which shall
contain a semi-annual (through June 30 and December 31) breakdown indicating
the total number of complaints received for the preceding reporting period,
and shall indicate the classifications of complaints as follows:
construction, billing, customer relations/service and miscellaneous.



      (5)   A full and complete record of rates for programming
services, equipment, installations and other subscriber charges. This
information shall include, but not be limited to, rates for the basic service
tier, tiers of service beyond the basic tier, premium service, pay-per-view
services, late fees, additional outlets, converters, remote controls and any
charges for installation or service at the subscriber premises.



   (B)   The grantor may impose requests for additional information,
records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the
scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise
agreement.



   (C)   Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours,
grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the
grantor of all:



      (1)   Franchise property and facilities, together with any
appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the service
area; and



      (2)   All records relating to the franchise, provided they are
necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities
under this chapter or the franchise agreement. Grantee shall have the right
to be present at any such examination.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.091  REPORTS.



   (A)   Within 90 days after the end of the calendar year, grantee
shall submit a written report to grantor with respect to the preceding
calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to,
the following information:



      (1)   A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the
initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the
cable system, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued
during the reporting year;



      (2)   A list of grantee's officers and members of its board of
directors;



      (3)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding
10% or more of the voting interest in grantee;



      (4)   An indication of any residences in grantee's service
area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service;



      (5)   Information as to



         (a)   The number of homes passed;



         (b)   Total subscribers; and



         (c)   The number of basic and pay subscribers;



      (6)   A full and complete set of maps showing the underground
locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of
subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers homes. It is
the intent of this section that the grantor have a complete set of "as-built"
maps for the underground construction areas, and access to reviewing said
maps for above ground construction. After the initial submission of drawings
for underground areas, the grantee may satisfy the provisions of this section
by providing updated portions of those sections of the drawings which have
changed;



      (7)   Any other information relevant to franchise regulation
which the grantor shall reasonably request, and which is relevant to its
regulatory responsibilities.



   (B)   The grantor may impose requests for additional reports,
information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably
relate to the scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the grantee's
franchise agreement.



   (C)   Upon request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all
pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal,
state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well
as copies of all decisions issued in response to such pleadings, applications
and reports, which are non-routine in nature and which will materially affect
its cable system within the franchise area.



   (D)   Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by
grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by
grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public
inspection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation
to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of
grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to
grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor, as expressed
in a written confidentiality agreement, that such information can and will be
held in strictest confidence and protected by the grantor. To the extent
possible, grantee may provide grantor with summaries of any required
documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters
deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on grantee to establish the
confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable
satisfaction of the grantor.



   (E)   If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee's annual
and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to
grantor within 45 days of the publication of such reports.



   (F)   Upon grantors request, but no more than annually, grantee
shall submit to grantor a privacy report indicating the degree of compliance
with the provisions contained in § 114.092(C), (D) and (F) herein and all
steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been
protected.



   (G)   All reports required under this chapter, except those required
by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public inspection in
the grantors offices during normal business hours.



   (H)   All reports and records required to be delivered to grantor
under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except
as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.



   (I)   The willful refusal, failure, or willful negligence of grantee
to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may
be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are
not provided to grantor within 30 days after written request therefor, and
may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are
available to grantor under this chapter or the franchise agreement.



   (J)   Any materially false or misleading statement or representation
made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under this
chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of
the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable,
which are available to grantor.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.092  OPINION SURVEY.



   Upon written request of the grantor, but not more than once every two
years, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining
to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in grantee's
invoice for cable services. The survey shall be designed to be returned to
the grantor and shall be subject to grantor's prior review and approval, said
approval to be in writing. The cost of such survey shall be borne by the
grantor, said costs to be agreed to by grantor and grantee prior to
transmittal to subscribers.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



REVIEW OF SYSTEM PERFORMANCE



§ 114.100  BIANNUAL REVIEW.



   (A)   Every two years throughout the term of the franchise, if
reasonably requested by prior written notice from the grantor, grantor and
grantee shall meet to review system performance and quality of service. The
various reports required pursuant to this chapter, results of technical
performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee's response
to those complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys,
shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may
submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in
writing, and these shall be considered. Within 30 days after the conclusion
of such a review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the
cable system's franchise compliance. Within 30 days of the issuance of such
findings, the grantee shall provide the grantor with grantee's written
response to the findings.



   (B)   If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement,
grantor shall provide grantee, in the form of written findings, the specific
details of each alleged noncompliance. Grantor may then direct grantee to
correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time.
Failure of the grantee, after due notice, to:



      (1)   Correct the area(s) of noncompliance within the period
specified therefor;



      (2)   Commence compliance within such period and diligently
achieve compliance thereafter; or



      (3)   Demonstrate that the allegations of noncompliance are
incorrect.



   (C)   The above shall be considered a material breach of the
franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this
chapter and the franchise agreement considered appropriate under the
circumstances.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS



§ 114.110  REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation
required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following
reasonable written notice from the grantor and a not less than 30 day
opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter and the franchise, grantor may at its option and in its sole
discretion:



   (A)   Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from
the security fund established in the franchise agreement if such violation is
not cured within 30 days after written notice to the grantee of grantor's
intention to cure and draw upon the security unless grantor has provided
grantee with additional time to effectuate a cure, the granting of additional
time not to be unreasonably withheld;



   (B)   Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set
forth in the franchise agreement for any such violations(s) if such violation
is not cured, or if grantee has not commenced a cure, on a schedule
reasonably acceptable to grantor, within 30 days after written notice to the
grantee of grantor's intention to assess liquidated damages. Such assessment
may be withdrawn from the security fund, and shall not constitute a waiver by
grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or
applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from
grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual
attorney's fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason
of or arising out of such material breach of the franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.111  PROCEDURE FOR REMEDYING FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS.



   Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee
specified in this chapter, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity
to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures.



   (A)   Grantor shall first notify grantee of the alleged violation in
writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand
correction, or evidence of non-violation, within a reasonable time, which
shall not be less than 30 calendar days. If grantee fails to:



      (1)   Correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed;



      (2)   Commence correction of the alleged violation within the
time prescribed and diligently remedy such alleged violation thereafter; or



      (3)   Provide evidence that there is no violation.



   (B)   The grantor shall then give, by personal delivery or
registered or certified mail written notice of not less than 30 days of a
public hearing to be held before the Council. The notice shall set forth in
detail each of the violations alleged to have occurred.



   (C)   Subsequent to the public hearing, the Council shall hear and
consider all other relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its
decision.



   (D)   If the Council finds that



      (1)   The grantee has corrected the alleged violation;



      (2)   The grantee has diligently commenced correction of such
alleged violation after notice thereof and is diligently proceeding to fully
remedy such alleged violation; or



      (3)   No material violation has occurred, the proceedings
shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.



   (E)   If the Council finds that material violations exist and that
grantee:



      (1)   Has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner; or



      (2)   Has not diligently commenced correction of such
violation after notice thereof and is not diligently proceeding to fully
remedy such violation; then the Council may impose one or more of the
remedies provided in this chapter and the franchise agreement as it, in its
discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.112  GRANTOR'S POWER TO REVOKE.



   (A)   Grantor may revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the
following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee
and a material breach under the franchise:



      (1)   If grantee fails to perform any of its material
obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and continues such
failure to perform after receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity
to cure;



      (2)   If grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force
and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required in the
franchise agreement;



      (3)   If grantee violates any order or ruling of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the
grantee's franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by
grantee in good faith in an appropriate proceeding;



      (4)   If grantee knowingly practices any material fraud or
deceit upon grantor; or



      (5)   If grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay
its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt.



   (B)   After completing the procedures set forth in § 114.111, the
grantor may make a formal request before the Council that the grantee's
franchise be revoked. The Council shall cause to be served on the grantee
written notice of its intent to consider revoking grantee's franchise. Such
notice shall be served on grantee at least 30 days prior to the date of the
hearing on the issue. The notice shall contain the time and place of the
hearing and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation within the franchise area ten days prior to the hearing date.



   (C)   The Council shall hear any person(s) interested in the
revocation and within 90 days after the date of the hearing shall make its
determination whether the grantee has committed a material breach of the
franchise.



   (D)   If the grantor determines that the grantee has committed a
material breach, then the grantor may:



      (1)   Declare the franchise revoked and any security fund and
bonds forfeited; or



      (2)   If the material breach is curable by the grantee, direct
the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and manner
and under the terms and conditions reasonably specified by the grantor.



   (E)   The termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise
shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the
franchise or any provision of law.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.113  APPEAL OF FINDING OF REVOCATION.



   The grantee may appeal a finding of revocation made pursuant to §
114.112 to an appropriate court of jurisdiction. Any such appeal must be
taken by the grantee within 90 days of the issuance of the grantor's decision
to revoke the franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



FORCE MAJEURE; GRANTEE'S INABILITY TO PERFORM



§ 114.120  FORCE MAJEURE; GRANTEE'S INABILITY TO PERFORM.



   In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or
obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is
prevented by a cause or event not within grantee's control, such inability to
perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to
perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by §
114.012(C) pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service.
For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of
grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, war, strikes, sabotage,
riots or civil disturbances, labor disputes, restraints imposed by order of a
governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies and natural
disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires, but shall not
include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the
grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental
agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such
failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of
the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the
installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system where the
grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies,
services or equipment.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



ABANDONMENT OR REMOVAL OF FRANCHISE PROPERTY



§ 114.130  ABANDONMENT OR REMOVAL.



   (A)   If the grantee discontinues the use of any of its property
within the public rights-of-way for a continuous period of 12 months, such
property shall be deemed to have been abandoned by grantee. Any part of the
cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system and
is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part
thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of
use.



   (B)   Grantor, upon such reasonable terms as grantor may lawfully
impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system
facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above-ground
facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and
shall restore to grantor's satisfaction any affected public right-of-way. In
removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its
own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all
public rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to ;such
removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable
or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right
to inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way, cables,
wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability,
indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as
provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of
this section.



   (C)   Upon the approved abandonment of any franchise property, the
grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an
instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor
the ownership of the abandoned franchise property.



   (D)   At the expiration, without renewal or extension, of the term
for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation, as provided
herein, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its
own expense, all above-ground portions of the cable system from all streets
and public ways within the service area within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be less than 130 days.



   (E)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place
so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the public
rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by
any public utility or other franchise holder.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.131  RESTORATION BY GRANTOR: REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS.



   Upon reasonable written notice and upon the failure of the grantee to
commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any public right-of-way
required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or the franchise
agreement, within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction of
the grantor, the grantor may cause the work to be commenced and/or completed.
The grantor shall provide to the grantee an itemized work order setting forth
in detail the exact nature of the work completed and the supplies used in
such work. The grantee shall pay to the grantor the reasonable costs for such
work no later than 30 days after receipt of the itemized work order.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.132  EXTENDED OPERATION AND CONTINUITY OF SERVICES.



   Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have
the discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable system for
an extended period of time. Grantee shall continue to operate the system
under the terms and conditions of this chapter as of the effective date of
the franchise and the franchise, as existed immediately prior to said
expiration or revocation, and to provide the regular subscriber service and
any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be
the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services
provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The
grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted
service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during
transition periods following franchise expiration or termination.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.133  RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE.



   (A)   At the option of the grantor and subject to applicable law, a
franchise granted hereunder may be revoked 120 days after appointment of a
receiver(s) or trustee(s) to take over and conduct the business of grantee,
whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or
proceeding, unless:



      (1)   The receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
within 120 days;



      (2)   Such receivers or trustees within 120 days shall have
remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the
remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to the grantor; or



      (3)   Such receivers or trustees shall, within 120 days, have
executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction whereby
such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every
term, provision and limitation of the franchise.



   (B)   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the
cable system, in whole or in part, the grantor may serve notice of revocation
upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, and all rights and
privileges of the grantee hereunder shall be revoked 30 days after service of
such notice, unless:



      (1)   Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the
franchise, in the manner provided by law; and



      (2)   The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed
with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the
franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



GRANTOR AND SUBSCRIBER RIGHTS



§ 114.140  RESERVATION OF GRANTOR RIGHTS.



   In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this
chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is
required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the
franchise.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.141  WAIVER.



   (A)   The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the
franchise imposing an obligation on grantee, except those required by federal
or state regulation, if the grantor determines (1) that it is in the public
interest to do so, or (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose
an undue hardship on the grantee or on the subscribers. To be effective, such
waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly
authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one
instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such
instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise
unless the statement so recites.



   (B)   The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of
the requirements of this chapter or the franchise agreement by any failure of
the grantor on any one or more occasions to require or seek compliance with
any such terms or conditions.



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



§ 114.142  RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex or marital status.
Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state
and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. However,
nothing in this chapter or the franchise shall limit the right of the grantee
to deny service to any household or individual who has a negative credit or
service history with the grantee, which may include non-payment of bills or
theft or damage to grantee's equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted
employees of the grantee in the course of their employment. In cases of bad
or negative credit, grantee may require the payment of a deposit.



   (B)   Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment
opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now
written or as amended from time to time.



   (C)   Without a lawful court order or applicable valid legal
authority, neither grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without
the subscriber's consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable,
line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose
except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service,
polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support
advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior
cannot be identified.



   (D)   In the conduct of providing its cable services or in pursuit
of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall
take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general
citizen's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the
system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. The
grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal
authority utilize the system's interactive two-way equipment or capability,
if such equipment or capability exists, for unauthorized personal
surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen.



   (E)   No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of
equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber's
premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any
required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install
upon subscriber's property shall be deemed granted.



   (F)   Grantee shall comply with all laws and regulations regarding
subscriber privacy including, but not limited to, Section 631 of the Cable
Act (47 U.S.C. 551).



(Ord. 1048, passed 1-22-02)



CHAPTER 115:  SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS



Section




General Provisions




   115.001   Purpose



   115.002   Definitions



   115.003   Administration by Director



   115.004   Notices



   115.005   Permit requirements



   115.006   Exceptions



   115.007   Fees




Administrative Appeals




   115.020   Right of administrative review



   115.021   Time for administrative review



   115.022   Commencement of administrative review



   115.023   Administrative review



   115.024   City Council appeal




Permit Applications




   115.035   Application for permit - Form and content - All events



   115.036   Additional information required for parades



   115.037   Additional information required for block parties



   115.038   Supplemental information required by the Director




Action on Permit Applications




   115.050   Action on permit application - review by city officers



   115.051   Time requirements - Events



   115.052   Time requirements - Block parties



   115.053   Time requirements - Free speech event



   115.054   Action on permit application - Permit issuance



   115.055   Action on permit application - Permit denial



   115.056   Alternative times, place, or manner




Permit Conditions




   115.065   General permit conditions - Indemnification agreement



   115.066   General permit conditions - Liability insurance



   115.067   General permit conditions - Notice to adjoining property
owners



   115.068   Special permit conditions



   115.069   Subsequent conditions




Permit Revocation/Suspension




   115.080   Permit revocation



   115.081   Emergency suspension of authorized event




Conduct of a Permitted Event




   115.090   Cordoning off the route or site of an event



   115.091   Public conduct during an authorized event



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 115.001  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and Cal.
Veh. Code § 21101(e), and any succeeding statute, for the purpose of
regulating parades, athletic events, block parties and public assemblies on
or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public
rights-of-way that obstruct, delay or otherwise interfere with the normal
flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic, or which do not comply with applicable
traffic laws or controls.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.002  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter.



   ATHLETIC EVENT means any event where a group of persons collectively
engage in a sport or form of physical exercise on or within a city street,
parking facility, sidewalk, or other public right-of- way, including, without
limitation, jogging, running, racing, bicycling, rollerblading, and roller
skating.



   BLOCK PARTY  means a noncommercial sociable gathering on a local, not
arterial or collector, street or area requiring partial or complete street
closure to vehicular traffic and use of the street for the festival.



   CITY MANAGER means the City Manager or designee.



   DIRECTOR means the City of Santa Paula's Director of Community
Services, or designee.



   EVENT  means any parade, athletic event, block party, or public
assembly that may require partial or complete street closure to vehicular
traffic and use of the street for the event.



   FREE SPEECH  means activity protected by the First Amendment of the
United States Constitution and/or Article 1, Section 2 of the California
Constitution provided that such activity is a significant part of the event.



   GROUP  means two or more individuals.



   IN WRITING  means telegram, facsimile or any other written document.



   PARADE means any organized march or organized procession of animals,
vehicles or persons on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or
other public right-of-way.



   PERMITTEE  means a person or entity to which the city issues a permit
pursuant to this chapter.



   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means any group of people participating in an organized
activity on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other
public right-of-way, other than a group of people participating in an
athletic event, block party or parade.



   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER has the same definition as set forth in Cal.
Gov’t Code § 3301, and any successor statute.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.003  ADMINISTRATION BY DIRECTOR.



   The Director will receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and
otherwise implement this chapter according to the procedures herein.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.004  NOTICES.



   (A)   Where the provisions of this chapter require that an
applicant/permittee be served with notice, such notice will be deemed served
when personally delivered to such applicant/permittee or when deposited in
the first class U.S. Mail, addressed to such applicant/permittee at the
applicant/permittee's last known address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a
permittee/applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the
basis for such decision.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.005  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to conduct, sponsor, or
knowingly participate in any event on or within any city street, sidewalk,
parking facility, or other public right-of-way that obstructs or interferes
with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or which does not
comply with applicable traffic laws or controls.



   (B)   Activity in subsection (A) of this section is permissible when
a permit for such an event is obtained pursuant to this chapter. A permit is
not deemed issued until the Director receives the applicant's written
acceptance in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.006  EXCEPTIONS.



   A special event permit is not required for a parade consisting of a
vehicular funeral procession or wedding procession.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.007  FEES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by federal, state, or local laws,
or other City Council authorized restrictions, all fees applicable to this
chapter including, without limitation, fees for using public property, will
be established by City Council resolution.



   (B)   Charges will be imposed for city services provided to a
permittee other than public safety and emergency services. Such charges will
be determined by the applicable servicing city department(s) and will be
based on the actual cost incurred by the city in providing such services.
Such service charges will include, without limitation, charges for labor,
supervision, overhead, administration and the use of any and all city
equipment, supplies, and the like. Additional charges may be imposed to cover
the cost of extraordinary permit investigation and staff costs, if the
Director determines this necessary.



   (C)   Traffic control fee. Permittee will pay the city a fee in an
amount equal to the city's total estimated costs for providing all of the
personnel and materials, including, without limitation, public safety
personnel, necessary to control and monitor pedestrian and vehicular traffic
for such event. Such fee will be paid by the permittee before the director
issues a permit. The Director for any permit authorizing an event involving
an exercise of free speech rights may waive the traffic control fee. Such
waiver may be granted only upon a showing of the applicant's inability to
pay, which will be supported by a financial declaration.



   (D)   Fee waivers. Upon an applicant's request, the Director may,
but is not required to, seek a fee waiver from the City Council for an event.
Fees may only be waived for the following applicants:



      (1)   Non-profit groups with current Internal Revenue Code
501(c)(3) status, government agencies, and public schools; or



      (2)   Community service groups or organizations without
current Internal Revenue Code 501(c)(3) or 501(c) status where the City
Council, by resolution, determines that the proposed event provides services
that meet community needs and it is in the public interest to waive such fees.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS



§ 115.020  RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative
review of the Director's decision pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.021  TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be
commenced within five days from the date on which written notice of the
Director's decision is served on the applicant/permittee.



   (B)   If request is untimely, the Director may, nevertheless, extend
the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.022  COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   A request for administrative review will be on a form provided by the
Director and contain the following information:



   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the person making
the request;



   (B)   A description of the decision, determination or order which is
the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order
was made or issued;



   (C)   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and



   (D)   Such other information as may be required by the Director.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.023  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the
Director will provide a copy of the notice to the City Manager within two
business days.



   (B)   Upon receiving a request for review from the Director, the
City Manager will review the request and, within ten days of receiving the
request notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:



      (1)   The Director's decision is affirmed;



      (2)   The Director's decision is modified;



      (3)   The Director's decision is reversed and a permit is
issued or issued without special conditions.



   (C)   The City Manager may, but is not required to, conduct a
hearing at a time and place determined at the City Manager's sole discretion.



   (D)   In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any
notification to the requestor must set forth any modifications of the
Director's decision.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.024  CITY COUNCIL APPEAL.



   Unless otherwise provided, an applicant may appeal the City Manager's
decision to the City Council within ten days of that decision as provided
elsewhere in this code or by city policy and procedure.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



PERMIT APPLICATIONS



§ 115.035  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT - FORM AND CONTENT - ALL EVENTS.



   (A)   Permit applications will be filed by a natural person.



   (B)   Permit applications will be in a form prescribed by the
Director and, for all events, will contain all of the following information:



      (1)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening
telephone numbers of the person filing the application;



      (2)   If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the
name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the organization; and
if requested by the Director, written documentation of the authority under
which the applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;



      (3)   The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number
of the person who will be present during, and responsible for, the event;



      (4)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening
telephone number of any workers to be employed during the event;



      (5)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening
telephone number of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and
the applicant is unavailable;



      (6)   The nature of the event;



      (7)   The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time
of the event;



      (8)   The proposed location of the event, including its
boundaries;



      (9)   The estimated number of participants in the event;



      (10)   The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and
structures that will be used in the event;



      (11)   A description of any sound amplification equipment to
be employed at the event;



      (12)   The number, size, and material of construction of any
signs or banners to be used in the event;



      (13)   The parking requirements for the event;



      (14)   The location of any water, first aid, or comfort
stations to be provided at the event;



      (15)   The type and number of any vendors who will sell food,
beverages or other goods or services at the event for which a business
license is required by this code; and



      (16)   The type of entertainment.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.036  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR PARADES.



   In addition to the information required in this chapter, every
application for a parade will include the following information:



   (A)   The time when units of the parade will begin to assemble;



   (B)   The proposed assembly point for the parade;



   (C)   The proposed parade route;



   (D)   The interval space to be maintained between units of the
parade; and



   (E)   The number, types and size of floats.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.037  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR BLOCK PARTIES.



   In addition to the information required by this chapter, every
applicant for a block party will include the following information:



   (A)   The number of occupied houses within the proposed block party
boundaries;



   (B)   A drawing of the street layout, block party boundaries and
proposed barricades; and



   (C)   The written consent for the block party of at least two thirds
of the property owners/residents on the street within the affected area. The
petition must clearly state the time, date, place and sponsor of the event.
The name, address, telephone and signature of the persons giving consent must
be included.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.038  SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIRECTOR.



   In addition to the information required by this chapter, applications
for all permits authorizing an event will include such supplemental
information which the director may find reasonably necessary, given the
nature of the event, in order to determine whether to approve or deny a
permit authorizing such event in the manner hereinafter provided by this
chapter.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS



§ 115.050  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION - REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS.



   (A)   After an event permit application is filed, the Director will
immediately forward the application to Directors, or designees (collectively
"reviewing officers"), whose departments are affected by the proposed event
for their recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without
limitation:



      (1)   The Fire Chief;



      (2)   The Police Chief; and



      (3)   The Public Works Director.



   (B)   Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers will
consider the application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide
the director with written recommendations regarding:



      (1)   Any special conditions for a permit;



      (2)   Whether, based on the scope of the proposed event, a
pre-event operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be
necessary, the Director will notify the applicant of the time and place of
the meeting within a reasonable time before the event; and



      (3)   Any additional recommendations.



   (C)   The reviewing officers must complete their review within the
time that the Director must make a decision on the application.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.051  TIME REQUIREMENTS -EVENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for
a permit authorizing an event must be filed in the Director's office at least:



      (1)   Seventy days before the date of such event to ensure
administrative and City Council appeals;



      (2)   Thirty business days before the date of such event, in
which case the opportunity for a City Council appeal is deemed waived; or



      (3)   A lesser time period approved by the Director provided
that there is sufficient time to process the application pursuant to this
chapter. Any applicant submitting an application pursuant to this section
less than 30 days before an event is deemed to have waived the administrative
review and City Council appeal.



   (B)   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for
a permit authorizing an event will be denied, approved, or conditionally
approved by the Director within 15 business days after receiving the
completed application. Following his/her decision, the Director will promptly
attempt to notify the applicant orally, and will provide written notification
to the applicant.



   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, the applicant's acceptance of the
approval or conditional approval must be received by the Director within five
business days after the applicant was served with notification of the
decision. Failure of affected persons to receive actual notice of an event
after permittee has provided reasonable notice will not invalidate a permit.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.052  TIME REQUIREMENTS -BLOCK PARTIES.



   (A)   Completed applications for a permit authorizing a block party:



      (1)   Will be filed in the Director's office at least 15
business days before the date of such event or ten business days if the
applicant wishes to waive his/her administrative review rights;



      (2)   Will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by
the Director within seven business days after receiving the application. The
Director will promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally and provide
written notification to the applicant and City Manager.



   (B)   Applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval
must be received by the Director within three business days after the
applicant is served with notice. Failure to accept the decision or to timely
file a request for administrative review will be deemed a withdrawal of the
application.



   (C)   If the applicant filed a completed application at least 15
business days before the event and the permit is denied or conditioned, the
applicant may request an administrative review to the Director in writing
within three business days of being served with notice of the decision.



   (D)   Applicant will be deemed to have waived his/her administrative
review rights should the applicant fail to:



      (1)   Submit a completed application at least 15 days before
the event;



      (2)   Fail to request review of the Director's decision; or



      (3)   Fail to attend the administrative hearing personally or
through an authorized representative.



   (E)   The Director's decision is a final determination. There will
be no right of City Council appeal.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.053  TIME REQUIREMENTS - FREE SPEECH EVENT.



   (A)   Completed applications for a permit authorizing a free speech
event:



      (1)   Will be filed in the Director's office at least two
business days before the date of such event to ensure an administrative
review. The Director may, but is not required to, accept a completed
application less than two business days before an event upon good cause
shown. Applications will not be accepted less than 24 hours before an event.



      (2)   Will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by
the Director within one business day after receiving the application. The
Director will promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally, and provide
written notification to the applicant and City Manager. Such notice will
provide detailed facts and reasons for any denial or conditional approval.



      (3)   The Director will consult with the City Attorney's
office before denying, or specially conditioning, a permit for a free speech
event.



   (B)   The Director must receive applicant's acceptance of the
approval or conditional approval at least 24 hours before the event. Failure
to accept the Director's decision or to timely file an administrative review
request will be deemed a withdrawal of the application.



   (C)   The applicant may appeal to the City Manager in writing within
one business day of either oral or written notification, whichever is first.



   (D)   An administrative hearing will be held at a time and place
mutually agreeable to the parties. If the parties cannot agree on the time or
place, then it will be held the next business day after the Director's
decision at 4:00 p.m. in the City Manager's office. The City Manager will
issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and will also notify
the applicant and the director in writing of the City Manager's decision. Any
notification will describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons
supporting the decision.



   (E)   The City Manager's decision is a final determination. There
will be no right of City Council appeal.



   (F)   Applicant will be deemed to have waived his/her administrative
review rights should the applicant fail to:



      (1)   File a completed application at least two days before an
event;



      (2)   Seek review of the Director’s decision; or



      (3)   Attend the administrative hearing personally or through
an authorized representative.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.054  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Director must issue a permit if:



      (1)   The application was complete in accordance with this
chapter;



      (2)   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and



      (3)   Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional
approval in writing.



   (B)   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter will conform
to the general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special
permit conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the Director to protect
public, safety or welfare. Such special conditions may include, without
limitation, conditions for controlling pedestrian or vehicle traffic and for
protecting public or private property.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.055 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT DENIAL.



   A permit may be denied for the following reasons:



   (A)   The application is incomplete;



   (B)   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental
application information requested by the Director;



   (C)   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;



   (D)   Applicant seeks approval for an event that is so close in time
and location to another event scheduled for the same date as to cause
unreasonable traffic congestion or to overextend public safety or emergency
services;



   (E)   The event's time, route, or method will unreasonably interrupt
the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site or route of
the event;



   (F)   The concentration of persons, animals, or vehicles at the
event, or at the site of an assembly or disbanding, prevents public safety or
emergency services from reaching areas at or contiguous to the event;



   (G)   The size of the event will overextend public safety or
emergency services to the extent that the safety of event participants,
attendees, or the remainder of the city will be seriously jeopardized. This
provision does not authorize denying a permit because of the need to protect
participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit conditions can
be imposed;



   (H)   The event consists of a parade that will not move from its
point of origin to its point of termination in three hours or less;



   (I)   The location of the event will substantially interfere with
construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or
along the city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right-
of-way to be occupied by the event;



   (J)   The event will occur along a route or location adjacent to a
hospital or extended care facility, and the noise created by the event would
substantially disrupt the operation of the hospital or extended care facility
or disturb the patients within;



   (K)   The event will occur at a time when a school is in session and
along a route or at a location adjacent to the school or a class thereof, and
the noise created by the activities of the event will substantially disrupt
the educational activity of such school or class;



   (L)   The decorative material on parade floats is not fire resistive
or flame retardant or motorized parade floats and towing apparatus are not
provided with portable fire extinguisher readily accessible to the operator,
as provided in the latest adopted edition of the Uniform Fire Code, or any
similar provision in subsequent revisions of such code;



   (M)   The application is not timely submitted and there is
insufficient time to investigate and process the application pursuant to the
timelines herein.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.056  ALTERNATIVE TIMES, PLACE, OR MANNER.



   If the Director denies a permit for an event that would be acceptable
by changing the event's time, place, or manner, then the Director will inform
the applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the
alternative time, place, or manner then the Director will issue a permit in
accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



PERMIT CONDITIONS



§ 115.065  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS - INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.



   Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city
which will, in part, indemnify the city, its officers, employees, and agents,
from any liability arising from permittee's event in a form approved by the
City Attorney's office. Such agreement will be filed with the Director before
issuance of the permit.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.066  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS - LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   (A)   Insurance requirements. Permittee will obtain liability
insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
California and having a financial rating in Best's Insurance Guide of not
less than "A VII." Such insurance will provide "occurrence" coverage against
liabilities for death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or
in any way connected with such event. Such insurance will be based upon the
size and nature of the event, the risks foreseeably involved, and will be in
the amount prescribed by City Council resolution or city policy. Insurance
will name the city and the city's elected and appointed officials, officers,
and employees as additional insureds under the coverage afforded. In
addition, such insurance will be primary and noncontributing with respect to
any other insurance available to the city and will include a severability of
interest (cross-liability) clause. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served
at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor
liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000.



   (B)   Certificates of insurance. A copy of the policy or a
certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form
approved by the city's risk manager, must be filed with the Director not less
than five business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before
the date of the event unless the Director for good cause waives the filing
deadline.



   (C)   Waiver of insurance requirements. The Director for any permit
authorizing an event involving an exercise of free speech rights must waive
the insurance required by this section.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.067  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS - NOTICE TO ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS.



   Permittees must attempt to notify all affected persons, by any
reasonable means, regarding the event's nature, date, and time as specified
by the Director. Failure of the permittee to give such notice will not
invalidate a permit.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.068  SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Grounds for special permit conditions. The Director may
condition a permit with reasonable requirements concerning the time, place,
or manner of holding such event as necessary to protect the safety of persons
and property or to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the
site of the event, provided that these requirements will not be imposed in a
manner that will unreasonably restrict the exercise of free speech rights.



   (B)   Conditions may include, without limitation, the following:



      (1)   Assembly or disbanding area for a parade;



      (2)   Accommodating an event's pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, including restricting events to city sidewalks, portions of a city
street, parking facility, or other public right-of-way;



      (3)   Avoiding substantial interference with public safety
and/or emergency service access;



      (4)   The number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures
to be displayed or used in the event;



      (5)   Inspection and approval by city personnel of stages,
booths, floats and other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the
event, in order to ensure that such structures or vehicles are safely
constructed and can be safely operated;



      (6)   A cleaning deposit if the event includes using
structures, displaying or using horses or other large animals, operation of
water stations, food sales, beverage sales, and/or sale of other goods or
services;



      (7)   Provision and use of traffic cones and barricades;



      (8)   Provision and operation of first aid stations or
sanitary facilities, including handicap- accessible sanitary facilities;



      (9)   Provision and use of garbage containers, and the cleanup
and restoration of the site of the event at the termination of the event;



      (10)   Use of sound amplification equipment, and restrictions
on the amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the
course of the event;



      (11)   The manner for providing notice of permit conditions to
event participants;



      (12)   Provision and use of emergency services;



      (13)   Alternate sites, times, dates or modes for exercising
free speech rights;



      (14)   Obtaining of any and all business licenses required by
this code for the sale of food, beverage or other goods or services at the
event; and



      (15)   Director may require an additional deposit to any event.



      (16)   Private security may be required at any event. The
amount of security will be determined by the amount of estimated guest and
event type.



      (17)   The manner of which alcohol sales and service, if any,
will be conducted.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.069  SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Grounds for special permit subsequent conditions. The Director
may condition previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts
not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   Notice of special permit subsequent conditions. Should
subsequent conditions be required, the Director will serve written notice on
the permittee of this decision. When acting upon information obtained 24
hours before an event, the Director may orally inform the permittee, and city
personnel overseeing the event, of the new conditions.



   (C)   Except where otherwise provided, a permittee may seek review
of imposition of subsequent conditions to the Director as provided in this
chapter. The Director's decision is a final determination. There will be no
right of City Council appeal.



   (D)   Except where otherwise provided, an applicant conducting a
free speech event may appeal the decision to impose subsequent conditions
through a hearing before the City Manager. The City Manager's decision is a
final determination. There will be no right of City Council appeal.



      (1)   An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing provided
the applicant appeals the Director's decision within 24 hours of receiving
notice of such conditions and the event's purpose is for free speech.



      (2)   The hearing will be at the City Manager's office at 4:00
p.m. the next business day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise
agreed upon. The City Manager will issue a decision orally at the conclusion
of the hearing and will also notify the applicant, the Director in writing of
the City Manager's decision. Any notification will describe, with
particularity, the facts and reasons supporting the decision.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



PERMIT REVOCATION/SUSPENSION



§ 115.080  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Director will revoke an event permit upon learning or
discovering facts requiring permit denial not previously disclosed or
reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   The Director may revoke an event permit when the permittee or
event violates the permit's terms and conditions, or when event participants
violate applicable laws or regulations; provided, however, that this
subsection will not authorize revoking a permit because of the need to
protect participants from the conduct of others; and, provided further, that
the Director will not revoke a permit without warning the permittee and
allowing him/her to correct the violation(s) within a reasonable time.



   (C)   If the Director revokes a permit before the date of the event,
the Director will immediately serve written notice of revocation on the
permittee and will provide copies of the notice to all city personnel charged
with carrying out any responsibility under this chapter. If the Director
revokes a permit on the day of the event after learning of facts justifying
revocation less than 24 hours before the event commenced, the Director will
announce such action to the event participants, to those city officers and
employees monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the
person in charge of the event, if such person can be located at the site of
the event. Written notice will be delivered after such action to the
permittee and City Manager.



   (D)   An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing before the City
Manager provided:



      (1)   The applicant appeals the Director's decision within 24
hours of receiving notice of such conditions; and



      (2)   The event is scheduled at least 48 hours after the
hearing time.



      (3)   The hearing will be at the City Manager's office at 4:00
p.m. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed upon.
The City Manager will issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the
hearing and will also notify the applicant, the Director in writing of the
City Manager's decision.



      (4)   Content of notices of revocation. Any notification of
action, whether oral or written, will describe with particularity the facts
and the reasons for the decision.



   (E)   The City Manager's decision is a final determination. There
will be no right of City Council appeal.



   (F)   The Director or City Manager can only revoke a permit for a
free speech event after consulting with the City Attorney's office.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.081  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF AUTHORIZED EVENT.



   The Director and any sworn public safety officer may temporarily
suspend an event whenever there is an emergency that requires such action to
protect public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and event
participants will immediately comply with the suspending officer's
instructions. The Director will immediately attempt to notify the applicant
orally and will notify the applicant and the City Manager in writing, within
24 hours after the suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the
reasons for the suspension.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



CONDUCT OF A PERMITTED EVENT



§ 115.090  CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR SITE OF AN EVENT.



   The Director of Public Works, or designee, is authorized and directed
to establish traffic and crowd control devices on or within the city's
streets, parking facilities, sidewalks, or other public rights-of-way, and to
undertake other actions necessary to cordon off the route or site of an
event. In addition, the Director of Public Works, or Director, will, when
appropriate, cause the route or site of such event to be posted as a
no-parking zone for the duration of the event and sufficiently in advance
thereof as may be necessary to prevent vehicles from parking along the route
or at the site of the event.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



§ 115.091  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING AN AUTHORIZED EVENT.



   (A)   Interference with event. It is unlawful to physically
obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise interfere with any event authorized by
a permit or with any person, animal or vehicle participating or used in such
event.



   (B)   Driving through the site of parade or athletic event. It is
unlawful to drive a vehicle between vehicles or persons traversing the route
of a parade or athletic event authorized by a permit when such vehicles or
persons are in motion.



   (C)   Prohibited parking. It is unlawful to park along or within any
portion of the route or site of an event authorized by a permit, when the
route or site had been posted as a no-parking zone by the Director in the
manner authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. 1129, passed 12-20-04)



CHAPTER 116:  [RESERVED]




[RESERVED]




CHAPTER 117:  LIVE ENTERTAINMENT



Section



   117.01   Definition



   117.02   Permit required



   117.03   Permit application; contents



   117.04   Application fee



   117.05   Conditions for granting



   117.06   Issuance requirements



   117.07   Notice of decision



   117.08   Action on application; appeal



   117.09   Conditions for suspension or revocation



   117.10   Suspension or revocation procedure; appeal



   117.11   Exclusions



   117.12   Conditions for transfer of permit



   117.13   Location and type of entertainment



   117.14   Administration



§ 117.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENTERTAINMENT.  Every form of live entertainment, music, band or
orchestra, act, play, burlesque show, fashion show, review, pantomime, scene,
song or dance, act, or song and dance act or any other act or performance
participated in by one or more persons for the purpose of holding or gaining
attention and interest of, diverting or amusing guests or patrons, and shall
include any of such forms of live entertainment when used in connection with,
or as a means to attract or hold the attention of such guests or patrons for
the purpose of advertise-ment, demonstration or display of goods, wares,
merchandise or service, and also includes recordings, tapes and records,
jukeboxes and other instruments and equipment used for the reproduction of
sound, where the same are used for the sole or primary attraction of guests
or patrons.



('81 Code, § 5.32.010)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79)



§ 117.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person conducting, operating, owning or in
control of any premises open to the public, or private club within the city
to allow any entertainment upon the premises, or in or upon any adjoining
room of the premises, unless the city issued a valid permit to such person
pursuant to the provisions of this code.  Persons complying with Chapter 124
of this code need not, in addition, obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.32.020)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79; Am. Ord. 1151, passed
1-3-06) Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 117.03  PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS.



   (A)   An applicant for a permit shall submit his application under
oath to the License Collector.



   (B)   The application shall include:



      (1)   The true names and addresses of the applicant and of all
persons financially interested in the business;



      (2)   Recent photographs together with a complete set of
fingerprints of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in
the business; fingerprints shall be taken by the Chief of Police or his agent;



      (3)   The name and address of the business;



      (4)   A description of the entertainment to be offered;



      (5)   Applicant's residence for the five years preceding the
date of application;



      (6)   A statement of the nature and character of the business,
if any, to be carried on in conjunc-tion with such entertainment;



      (7)   Any other information necessary for investigation of the
applicant as required by the Chief of Police.



('81 Code, § 5.32.030)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 117.04  APPLICATION FEE.



   (A)   An application fee, in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council and payable to the city, shall be paid,
one-half of which shall be refunded to the applicant in the event his
application is denied.



   (B)   The fee shall be payable annually on a calendar basis and
submitted with each subsequent permit renewal.



('81 Code, § 5.32.040)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79)



§ 117.05  CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING.



   (A)   All applications for permits required by this chapter shall be
referred to the Chief of Police for investigation.  The Chief of Police
shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the permit should be
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as set forth in this
chapter.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall consider any relevant factual
material relating to such application and shall approve an entertainment
permit only if he finds that:



      (1)   The operation as proposed by the applicant, if
permitted, would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited
to the city's building, zoning and health regulations;



      (2)   Adequate lighting inside the place of entertainment is
provided;



      (3)   Safe and adequate parking for motor vehicles is provided;



      (4)   The ingress and egress of motor vehicles in and from the
parking area does not create a traffic hazard;



      (5)   There are sufficient doorways, stairways or other means
of ingress or egress to accommodate the public;



      (6)   There is adequate access for police, firefighters and
other emergency personnel in the event of a fire, medical emergency or public
disturbance;



      (7)   The building is structurally safe for the number of
people to be accommodated;



      (8)   The applicant has not knowingly made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of facts in the permit application, or
other document required by the city in conjunction therewith;



      (9)   The proposed entertainment will not disturb the peace or
quiet enjoyment of the occupants of surrounding dwellings, apartments or
businesses.



   (C)   If the Chief of Police finds any of the facts as set forth in
division (A) or (B) of this section are not present, he shall decline to
approve the permit as requested.



('81 Code, § 5.32.050)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 117.06  ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The License Collector, upon approval by the Chief of Police,
shall issue an entertainment permit only if he finds that:



      (1)   A written application form therefor has been filed;



      (2)   The required filing fee therefor has been paid;



      (3)   As a result of the Chief of Police's investigation, all
applicable provisions of this chapter with regard to such permit application
have or will be met.



   (B)   Permits may be issued conditionally in order to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.32.060)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 117.07  NOTICE OF DECISION.



   After the Chief of Police has made a deter-mination with reference to a
permit application, the License Collector shall give written notice of his
decision to the applicant and to any other person requesting such notice.



('81 Code, § 5.32.070)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 117.08  ACTION ON APPLICATION; APPEAL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police
with reference to the approval, conditional approval or denial of a permit
application, shall have the right to appeal to the City Council in the same
manner as an appeal from a variance application.



   (B)   The appellant shall be required to pay an appeal fee as set by
resolution of the City Council.



('81 Code, § 5.32.080)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79; Ord. 871, passed  - -86)



§ 117.09  CONDITIONS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   After notice and hearing the Chief of Police may suspend or revoke any
permit issued under this chapter if he finds that:



   (A)   The operation, as conducted by the applicant, does not comply
with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the city's building,
zoning and health regulations, including any conditions imposed in the permit;



   (B)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application, or any other document
required in conjunction therewith; and



   (C)   The entertainment has disturbed the peace or quiet enjoyment
of the occupants of surrounding dwellings, apartments or businesses.



('81 Code, § 5.32.090)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79)



§ 117.10  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION PROCEDURE; APPEAL.



   (A)   Prior to the suspension or revocation of the permit provided
for in § 117.09, the Chief of Police shall hold a hearing to consider the
action to be taken.  Such hearing shall be held before the Chief of Police
not less than two days after service of the notice of suspension or
revocation upon the manager or owner of the place of entertainment, with a
copy thereof being mailed to the permittee.  The notice shall set forth the
time, date and place of hearing.  At such hearing the permittee or his
representative may present evidence.



   (B)   Within five days after the conclusion of the hearing the Chief
of Police shall issue his decision.  If such decision is to suspend or
revoke the permit, such decision shall be effective immediately when
personally served on the manager of the place of entertainment or to the
permittee thereof, or 48 hours after the same has been deposited in the
United States mail, postage prepaid.



   (C)   If the permittee, or any interested person, is dissatisfied
with the action taken by the Chief of Police, such permittee or interested
person may appeal to the City Council pursuant to § 117.08.



('81 Code, § 5.32.100)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79)



§ 117.11  EXCLUSIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to require a permit
for the following:



   (A)   Any entertainment provided for members and their guests at a
private club where admission is not open to the public;



   (B)   Entertainment conducted in a park or recreational facility
owned or operated by the city;



   (C)   Entertainment conducted by or sponsored by any bona fide
nonprofit club, society or association, organized or incorporated for
benevolent, charitable, religious, dramatic or literary purpose having an
established membership and which holds meetings other than such entertainment
at regular intervals, when proceeds, if any arising from such entertainment,
are used for the benefit of such club, society, or association;



   (D)   Entertainment conducted or sponsored by a public agency.



('81 Code, § 5.32.110)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79)



§ 117.12  CONDITIONS FOR TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   (A)   No permit shall be transferable except with the written
consent of the Chief of Police.



   (B)   An application for such a transfer shall be in writing and
shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee in an amount to be
established by resolution of the City Council, the same to be filed with the
License Collector.



   (C)   One-half of the fee shall be refundable in the event such
application for transfer is denied.  The written application for such
transfer shall contain the same information as required in this chapter for
an initial application for such a permit.



   (D)   If the transfer is denied by the Chief of Police, the
permittee or proposed transferee may appeal such action to the City Council
pursuant to § 117.08.



('81 Code, § 5.32.120)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79; Ord. 871, passed  -
-86)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 117.13  LOCATION AND TYPE OF ENTERTAINMENT.



   The permittee shall not conduct any entertain-ment activity at a
location other than the location specified, nor any other type of
entertainment than that specified on the permit.



('81 Code, § 5.32.130)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 117.14  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Members of the Police Department, when on duty, shall be
admitted free of charge to all locations, where entertainment is permitted
pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of insuring conformity with the
permit, including any rules, regulations or conditions applicable thereto.



   (B)   Such police officers may required an entertainer at the
location purporting to entertain under the authority of permittee's permit to
identify himself by his name, age and address.



('81 Code, § 5.32.140)  (Ord. 723, passed  - -79)



CHAPTER 118:  MOTION PICTURE, RADIO, TELEVISION PRODUCTION, AND STILL
PHOTOGRAPHY REGULATIONS



Section



   118.01   Purpose



   118.02   Definitions



   118.03   Permit required; exemptions



   118.04   Additional agreements



   118.05   Administration



   118.06   Application for permit; contents; issuance



   118.07   Application and permit fees



   118.08   Direct overhead expenses



   118.09   Cash deposit for fees and security deposit required



   118.10   Security deposit retention; appeal



   118.11   Review by city officers



   118.12   Time requirements



   118.13   Action on permit application; permit issuance



   118.14   Action on permit application;  permit denial



   118.15   Alternative time, place, or manner



   118.16   Administrative policies and procedures



   118.17   Indemnification agreement



   118.18   General permit conditions; liability insurance



   118.19   Notice to residences and businesses;  generally



   118.20   General permit conditions; special effects; fire permit



   118.21   General permit conditions; additional requirements



   118.22   Subsequent conditions



   118.23   Emergency suspension of filming



   118.24   Land use and parking regulations inapplicable



   118.25   Cordoning off the route or filming site



   118.26   Public conduct during filming



   118.27   Prohibitions



   118.28   Misrepresentation



   118.29   Permit modification



   118.30   Procedure for revocation or suspension of permit



   118.31   Appeals to the City Council



   118.32   Expedited review



§ 118.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers for the
purpose of establishing a permit system to regulate motion picture and
television production in the city. Application of this chapter is intended to
protect community health, safety, welfare, and property rights by ensuring
that motion picture and television production within the city has minimal
impact upon businesses and residents.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of words and phrases used in
this chapter:



   ADMINISTRATOR means the City Manager or designee.



   APPLICANT means a person seeking a filming permit pursuant to this
chapter.



   CURRENT NEWS means regularly scheduled news programs (excluding
documentary programs) and special news programs which are not preplanned and
are broadcast within 72 hours after filming.



   FILMING includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting
commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercially
prepared radio broadcasts. Filming also includes any noncommercial filming
that obstructs, delays, disrupts, or otherwise interferes with the ordinary
use of city streets, parking facilities, sidewalks or other public
rights-of-way, including, without limitation, on-street parking and vehicle
traffic within neighborhoods.



   FILMING SITE means the location designated by a valid permit issued
pursuant to this chapter for filming and all ancillary uses including,
without limitation, catering, storage, and parking.



   PERMITTEE means any natural person, entity, or combinations thereof
possessing a film permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.



   STILL PHOTOGRAPHY means and includes all activity attendant to staging
or shooting commercial still photographs.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.03  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to
engage in, conduct, or carry on filming or commercial still photography on
any public or private property, facility, or residence without a valid permit
issued pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   A permit is not deemed issued until the Administrator receives
the applicant's written acceptance in accordance with this chapter.



   (C)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Current news. This chapter does not apply to or affect
reporters, photographers, or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news
service, radio broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in
broadcasting current news concerning those persons, scenes, or occurrences
which are in the news and of general public interest.



      (2)   Studios. This chapter does not apply to or affect a
motion picture, television, or radio broadcasting studio operating within its
physical confines at an established or fixed place of business in the city.



      (3)   Charitable purposes. A permit fee is not required for
any permit issued for filming when the Administrator determines, based upon
reasonable evidence, that filming is conducted or carried on wholly for a
charitable or nonprofit purpose either directly or indirectly, by any
individual.



      (4)   Educational purposes. A permit fee is not required for
any permit issued for filming when the Administrator determines, based upon
reasonable evidence, that filming is conducted or carried on wholly for
student and class photographs, sports pictures, independent student media
film class activities, photography class activities and student cable filming.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.04  ADDITIONAL AGREEMENTS.



   In addition to, or in lieu of, a permit required by this chapter, use
of any public facility within the city may require a rental or use agreement.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.05  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Administrator is authorized to receive applications, issue and
revoke permits, and otherwise implement this chapter.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.06  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Information required. The following information must be
included in the application:



      (1)   The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number
of the person who will be present during, and responsible for, the filming;



      (2)   The address or place at which the activity is to be
conducted;



      (3)   The specific location(s) at such address or place;



      (4)   The inclusive times and dates such activity will
transpire;



      (5)   A general statement of the character or nature of the
proposed activity;



      (6)   The number of personnel to be involved;



      (7)   Anticipated use of any animals, pyrotechnics, fire, or
explosives;



      (8)   The food servicing arrangements;



      (9)   Requests for special assistance at the location,
including, without limitation, street closure, traffic control, and emergency
services;



      (10)   Whether the activity to be filmed includes vehicle
chases or other activities dangerous to the participants or to the public,
with a description of the activity to be filmed;



      (11)   The amount and type of equipment to be involved
including without limitation, the number and size of vehicles, location of
all vehicles and ancillary equipment and the name of the person responsible
for keeping the filming site clear and clean.



      (12)   A declaration regarding notification of residences and
businesses as required by this chapter; and



      (13)   Such other information as the Administrator deems
appropriate.



   (B)   In addition to the provisions of this chapter, any applicant
engaging in activity that requires compliance with federal, state, or local
regulations, including additional licenses or permits, must present evidence
of satisfactory compliance with those requirements.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.07  APPLICATION AND PERMIT FEES.



   Motion picture, radio, television productions, or still photography:



   (A)   A nonrefundable application fee for motion picture, radio,
television productions, or still photography as set by resolution of the City
Council must be paid.



   (B)   A permit fee set by City Council resolution must be paid
whenever the permittee uses any portion of any public street, road, right of
way or building, other than a building located in a public park, owned or
controlled by the city.



   (C)   The use of public parks and buildings located in public parks
to the exclusion of the general public is discouraged; however, when such
permit is granted, the permit fee will be fixed by City Council resolution.



   (D)   Still photography.



      (1)   A nonrefundable application fee for still photography
commercial advertising as set by resolution of the City Council must be paid.



      (2)   A permit fee set by city council resolution must be paid
whenever the permittee uses any portion of any public street, road, right of
way or building, other than a building located in a public park, owned or
controlled by the city.



      (3)   The use of public parks and buildings located in public
parks to the exclusion of the general public is discouraged; however, when
such permit is granted, the permit fee will be fixed by City Council
resolution.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.08  DIRECT OVERHEAD EXPENSES.



   In addition to the fees and charges established, the permittee must pay
all costs and direct overhead of the city for supervising, controlling, and
managing permittee's operation. This includes, without limitation, all
personnel costs, all material and supply costs, and all other direct costs
and expenses of the city. These costs and expenses will be computed at the
conclusion of the project and be deducted from the deposit required.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.09  CASH DEPOSIT FOR FEES AND SECURITY DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Cash deposit. After the application fee is paid and the
application approved and before any permit is issued, permittee must deposit
with the city a cash deposit computed as follows: Twice the amount determined
by the city to be the total cost to the city plus a sum equal to all permit
and license fees.



   (B)   Conditions for refund of security deposit. At the conclusion
of the project, the total of the deposit will be applied to the city's permit
and license fees and to the city's costs and direct overhead of administering
and supervising the permit; and the balance, if any, will be deemed a
security deposit. The security deposit must be refunded by the city to the
permittee if the permittee has fully complied with all of the conditions of
the permit and all requirements of law. If the permittee has not complied
with all conditions of the permit and all requirements of law, the security
deposit will be retained by the city.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.10  SECURITY DEPOSIT RETENTION; APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the Administrator's determination concerning
the amount of the deposit or the amount of any refund may file a written
appeal as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.11  REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS.



   (A)   After a film permit application is filed, the Administrator
must forward the application to directors, or designees (collectively
"reviewing officers"), whose departments are affected by the proposed event
for their recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without
limitation:



      (1)   The Fire Chief;



      (2)   The Police Chief;



      (3)   The Recreation and Parks Director; and/or



      (4)   The Public Works Director.



   (B)   Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers must
consider the application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide
the Administrator with written recommendations regarding:



      (1)   Any special conditions for a permit;



      (2)   Whether, based on the scope of the proposed filming, a
pre-filming operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be
necessary, the Administrator will notify the applicant of the time and place
of the meeting within a reasonable time before filming; and



      (3)   Any additional recommendations.



   (C)   The reviewing officers must complete their review before the
Administrator can make a decision on the application.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.12  TIME REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for
a film permit must be filed in the Administrator's office at least:



      (1)   Three business days before the filming date for a permit
that does not require city services; or



      (2)   Five business days before the filming date for filming
involving stunts or traffic control; or



      (3)   Ten business days before the filming date for filming
involving closure of public streets or rights-of-way, or use of pyrotechnics,
fire, or explosives for special effects, except that an application may be
filed pursuant to subsection (A)(1) if special effects are limited to the use
of "squibs" as defined in Cal. Code of Regs. Title 19, § 980, or any
successor regulation, and the fire department determined the pyrotechnic
operator's license to be in good standing within the previous 12 months.



   (B)   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for
a film permit must be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the
Administrator within the applicable time periods established by subsections
(A)(1) through (3). Following his or her decision, the Administrator will
promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally and in writing.



   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, the applicant's acceptance of the
approval or conditional approval must be received by the Administrator before
the filming date. Failure to accept the decision or failure to file a request
for appeal constitutes a withdrawal of the application.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.13  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Administrator must issue a permit if:



      (1)   The application was complete in accordance with this
chapter;



      (2)   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and



      (3)   Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional
approval in writing.



   (B)   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform
to the general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special
permit conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the Administrator to protect
public safety and/or welfare. Such special conditions may include, without
limitation, conditions for controlling pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic, for
protecting public and/or private property, and/or for protecting public
health and safety.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.14  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT DENIAL.



   (A)   A permit may be denied for the following reasons:



      (1)   The application is incomplete;



      (2)   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental
application information requested by the Administrator;



      (3)   Information submitted by the applicant is materially
false;



      (4)   Applicant seeks approval for filming that is so close in
time and location to another event scheduled for the same date as to cause
unreasonable traffic congestion and/or to overextend public safety and/or
emergency services;



      (5)   Filming time and/or methodology will unreasonably
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the filming
site;



      (6)   The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles
at the filming prevents public safety and/or emergency services from reaching
areas at or contiguous to the event;



      (7)   The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles
at the filming on or adjacent to public institutions or schools prevents
normal egress and ingress into the facility;



      (8)   The size of filming will overextend public safety and/or
emergency services to the extent that the safety of filming participants,
attendees, and/or the remainder of the city will be seriously jeopardized;
provided, however, that nothing authorizes denial of a permit because of the
need to protect participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit
conditions can be imposed;



      (9)   The filming location will substantially interfere with
construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or
along the city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public
right-of-way to be occupied by the event;



      (10)   The filming will occur along a route or location
adjacent to a hospital or extended care facility, and the noise created by
the filming would substantially disrupt the operation of the hospital or
extended care facility or disturb the patients within;



      (11)   The filming will occur at a location adjacent to a
library and the noise created by the filming will substantially disrupt the
library's operation or disturb a library's patrons;



      (12)   The application is not timely submitted and there is
insufficient time to investigate and process the application pursuant to the
timelines in this chapter;



      (13)   The application fails to include a declaration
regarding notification of residences and businesses within the impact zone as
required by this chapter.



   (B)   The Administrator must consult with the city attorney before
denying a filming permit.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.15  ALTERNATIVE TIME, PLACE, OR MANNER.



   If the administrator denies a film permit that would be acceptable by
changing filming time, place, or manner, then the administrator may inform
the applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the
alternative time, place, or manner then the Administrator will issue a permit
in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.16  ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.



   The City Manager is authorized and directed to promulgate
administrative policies and procedures governing the form, time, and location
within the city to implement this chapter. The rules and regulations can be
based upon the following criteria:



   (A)   Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city;



   (B)   The safety and convenience of all persons;



   (C)   The disruption of normal activities of all persons at
particular locations within the city;



   (D)   The safety of property within the city;



   (E)   Whether particular types of equipment are required for certain
film sites to reduce the impact on neighbors. Such equipment may include,
without limitation, tow plant generators; and



   (F)   Whether a film liaison is required to oversee filming at
certain filming sites. If a film liaison is required, permittees must also
abide with a filming code of conduct identified by the Administrator. The
cost of a monitor must be borne by permittees.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.17  INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.



   Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city
which, in part, indemnifies city, its officers, employees, and agents, from
any liability arising from permittees' filming in a form approved by the city
attorney.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.18  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   (A)   Insurance requirements. Permittee must obtain public liability
insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of
California and having a financial rating in Best's Insurance Guide of not
less than "A VII." Such insurance must provide "occurrence" coverage against
liabilities for death, personal injury, or property damage arising out of or
in any way connected with filming. Such insurance shall be based upon the
size and nature of filming, the risks foreseeably involved, and must be in
the amount of at least $1,000,000, combined single limit, and name the city
and the city's officers, employees, agents, and volunteers as additional
insureds under the coverage afforded. The city's risk manager may increase
this minimum limit depending on the risk involved with the proposed filming.
In addition, such insurance must be primary and noncontributing with respect
to any other insurance available to the city and include a severability of
interest (cross-liability) clause. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served
during filming, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor
liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000.



   (B)   Certificates of insurance. A copy of the policy or a
certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form
approved by the city's risk manager, must be filed with the Administrator not
less than five business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
before filming unless the Administrator for good cause waives the filing
deadline.



   (C)   Bonds. A bond/cash deposit may be required for purposes of
repairing any damage and restoring city facilities to original condition. The
amount will be determined by the Administrator. In the event of such damage,
city will provide written notice to the permittee specifying the damage to be
repaired and/or city facilities to be restored. If, after providing permittee
with such written notice, the requested repairs and/or restoration of city
facilities have not been commenced and/or completed within seven days, city
may draw upon the bond/cash deposit to effect said repairs and/or restoration
of city facilities. In the event of damage requiring emergency repairs and/or
restoration of city facilities by the city, the permittee is required to
reimburse the city in full for all costs incurred within 30 days receipt of
invoice from city.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.19  NOTICE TO RESIDENCES AND BUSINESSES; GENERALLY.



   Before the Administrator issues a filming permit, an applicant must
notify neighbors within 300 feet of a filming site as follows:



   (A)   The applicant must make every reasonable effort to notify
persons within 300 feet of a filming  site, by any reasonable means
specified by the Administrator, regarding the filming's nature, date, and
time.



   (B)   Notifications must include applicant's name, address,
telephone number, date(s), and time(s) of filming.



   (C)   The applicant must submit a declaration, signed under penalty
of perjury, with a permit application stating that reasonable notice was
provided to every persons within 300 feet of the filming site.



   (D)   The Administrator may, at the applicant's cost, prepare
documentation showing the neighbors within 300 feet of a filming site.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.20  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; SPECIAL EFFECTS; FIRE PERMIT.



   An applicant must obtain a permit from the city fire department for
filming that includes pyrotechnics, fires, or explosives. During filming the
permittee must, at its own expense, use city fire personnel deemed necessary
by the city fire department. All city fire permits must be obtained at least
72 hours before filming.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.21  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Filming cannot commence before 7:00 a.m.



   (B)   The permit, in its entirety, must be in the possession of the
permittee at all times while filming.



   (C)   A permittee must conduct operations in an orderly fashion. The
area used must be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion and before
leaving the filming site(s). A deposit to assure that a permittee removes all
trash and debris from the filming site(s) may be required. This requirement
and the amount may be determined by the Administrator.



   (D)   Vehicle parking for all filming related activities must be in
accordance with the Administrator's directions.



   (E)   All camera cars must have a police escort. The Administrator
may determine how many police officers will be required to escort camera cars.



   (F)   All filming and ancillary activities must cease not later than
10:00 p.m. Such ancillary activities include, without limitation, striking
sets, loading equipment, and vehicle traffic.



   (G)   Permittees must protect any neighbors within an impact zone
from glare caused by lighting used for filming after sunset.



   (H)   Production companies cannot place equipment or vehicles on
private property without the private property resident's written consent.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.22  SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Grounds for subsequent conditions. The Administrator may
condition previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts not
previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   Notice of subsequent conditions. Should subsequent conditions
be required, the Administrator will serve written notice on the permittee of
this decision. When acting upon information obtained 24 hours before filming,
the Administrator may orally inform the permittee, and city personnel
overseeing filming, of the new conditions.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.23  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF FILMING.



   The City Manager, Administrator, and/or any sworn public safety officer
may temporarily suspend filming whenever there is an emergency that requires
such action to protect public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and
filming participants must immediately comply with the suspending officer's
instructions. The Administrator will immediately attempt to notify the
applicant orally and notify the applicant in writing, within 24 hours after
the suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the
suspension.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.24  LAND USE AND PARKING REGULATIONS INAPPLICABLE.



   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or the terms and
conditions of a permit issued under this chapter, those provisions of this
code regulating land use and parking do not apply to a permittee. All other
provisions of this code are applicable to the permittee's conduct except as
specifically provided in the permit.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.25  CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR FILMING SITE.



   The Administrator, or designee, is authorized and directed to establish
traffic and/or crowd control devices on or within the city's streets, parking
facilities, sidewalks, or other public rights-of-way, and to undertake other
actions necessary to cordon off the filming site. In addition, the
Administrator, can, when appropriate, cause the filming site to be posted as
a no-parking zone for the duration of filming and sufficiently in advance
thereof as may be necessary to prevent vehicles from parking along the route
or at the filming location.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.26  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING FILMING.



   (A)   Interference with filming. It is unlawful for any person to
physically obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise interfere with any filming
authorized by a permit or with any person, animal or vehicle participating or
used in filming.



   (B)   Driving through the filming site. It is unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle between vehicles or persons authorized by a film
permit when such vehicles or persons are in motion.



   (C)   Prohibited parking. It is unlawful for any person to park
along or within any portion of the route or filming site, when the filming
site is designated as a no-parking zone by the Administrator in the manner
authorized by this chapter.



§ 118.27  PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in filming that would
constitute a hazard to public safety or interfere with or endanger the public
peace or rights of residents and other occupants of property to the quiet,
peaceful, unmolested enjoyment of their property.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.28  MISREPRESENTATION.



   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally
misrepresent to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in
procuring the permit provided for in this chapter.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.29  PERMIT MODIFICATION.



   (A)   If, due to inclement weather or other, similar, unforeseen
circumstances, it is necessary to change the filming date and/or time, the
Administrator may, upon permittee's request, issue a film permit addendum
authorizing filming at the same location for new times and dates. Permittee
must comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, including
notification, and pay any reasonable administrative fee that permit
reissuance may cost.



   (B)   If there is any substantial change in the filming from that
described in the permit application, an applicant must pay the permit
application fee and obtain an amended permit before the filming date.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.30  PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Administrator can revoke a film permit upon learning or
discovering facts requiring permit denial not previously disclosed or
reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   The Administrator may revoke a film permit when the permittee
and/or filming violates the permit's terms and conditions, or when filming
participants violate applicable laws or regulations; provided, however, that
this subsection does not authorize revoking a permit because of the need to
protect participants from the conduct of others; and, provided further, that
the Administrator cannot revoke a permit without warning the permittee and
allowing him/her to correct the violation(s) within a reasonable time.



   (C)   If the Administrator revokes a permit before the filming date,
the Administrator must immediately serve written notice of revocation on the
permittee and provide copies of the notice to all city personnel charged with
carrying out any responsibility under this chapter. If the Administrator
revokes a permit on the day of filming after learning of facts justifying
revocation less than 24 hours before the filming commenced, the Administrator
must announce such action to the filming participants, city officers and
employees monitoring or controlling traffic during the filming, and the
person in charge of the filming, if such person can be located at the filming
location. Written notice must be delivered after such action to the permittee.



   (D)   An applicant is entitled to an administrative hearing before a
hearing officer designated by the city manager provided.



      (1)   The applicant appeals the Administrator's decision
within 24 hours of receiving notice of such conditions;



      (2)   Filming is scheduled at least 48 hours after the hearing
time;



      (3)   The hearing will be at the Administrator's office at
4:00 P.M. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed
upon. The hearing officer will issue a decision orally at the conclusion of
the hearing and also notify the applicant, the Administrator in writing of
the hearing officer's decision;



      (4)   Any notification of action, whether oral or written,
must describe with particularity the facts and the reasons for the decision;



   (E)   The Administrator must consult with the city attorney before
revoking a filming permit.



   (F)   Appeals to Council. Any person aggrieved by the decision of
the Administrator may appeal to the council in the manner provided by this
chapter.



   (G)   Failure to appeal.  In the event no appeal is taken by the
permittee, the decision of the Administrator revoking or suspending such
permit becomes final and conclusive on the expiration of the time fixed for
the appeal as set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.31  APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Procedures. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Administrator or of any other officer of  the city made pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Council within 15 days after
notice thereof by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal,
briefly stating in such notice the grounds relied upon for appeal. If such
appeal is made within the time prescribed, the City Clerk will schedule a
hearing before the council within 30 days after the date of the receipt of
such notice of appeal, giving the appellant not less than ten days notice in
writing of the time and place of the hearing. The findings and determinations
of the Council at such hearing are final and conclusive and within three days
after such findings and determinations are made, the City Clerk will give
notice thereof to the appellant.



   (B)   Council determination. For appeals relating to the suspension
or revocation of permits issued pursuant to this chapter, the council's
determination become effective on the second day after the City Clerk gives
notice thereof to the appellant, unless otherwise provided by the council.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



§ 118.32  EXPEDITED REVIEW.



   Pursuant to Cal. Civ. Code § 1094.8(c), and any successor statute or
regulation, the permits under this chapter are designated for expedited
judicial review pursuant to the procedure set forth in Cal. Civ. Code  §
1094.8, or any successor statute or regulation.



(Ord. 1225, passed 1-19-10)



CHAPTER 119:  MASSAGE PERMITS



Section




General Provisions




   119.001   Purpose



   119.002   Definitions



   119.003   Administration



   119.004   Permits required



   119.005   Permits not interchangeable or transferable



   119.006   Permit exemptions



   119.007   Permit fee



   119.008   Additional permit requirements




Permit Applications




   119.020   Application for permits - Form and content



   119.021   Investigation by police



   119.022   Massage clinic permits - investigation Building and Safety
Division and Fire Department



   119.023   Supplemental information required by the Director




Action on Permit Applications




   119.035   Action on permit applications - Time for review



   119.036   Action on permit application - Permit issuance



   119.037   Action on permit application - Permit denial



   119.038   Permit denial



   119.039   Criteria for permit consideration




Permit Conditions




   119.050   General permit conditions - Indemnification agreement



   119.051   Duration and renewal



   119.052   Subsequent conditions



   119.053   Display of permit



   119.054   Massage clinic - Massage technicians employed by permittee



   119.055   Hours of operation



   119.056   Prohibited conduct



   119.057   Inspection and enforcement



   119.058   Facilities and operations



   119.059   Technician's dress code



   119.060   Revocation of permit




Appeals




   119.070   Right of appeal



   119.071   Time for appeal



   119.072   Commencement of appeal



   119.073   Administrative hearing



   119.074   Expedited review



Statutory reference:



   Massage parlors, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51030 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 119.001  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with California Constitution
Article XI, § 7 for the purpose of establishing uniform rules and procedures
to regulate massage clinics and massage technicians within the city's
jurisdiction. Adopting this chapter is intended to protect public health and
safety by ensuring that massage clinics are sanitary, that massage
technicians are properly regulated, and to reduce crime. In addition, this
chapter is intended to help reduce the secondary effects on land uses
surrounding establishments that engage in illegal activities.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.002  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.



   CONVICTED means having pled guilty or receiving a verdict of guilty,
including a verdict following a plea of nolo contendere, to a crime.



   CUSTOMER means and includes all clients, customers, patrons, guests,
and any other person who receives a massage from a massage technician.



   DIRECTOR means the Planning Director, or designee.



   HEALTH DEPARTMENT means the Public Health Department for Ventura County.



   HEARING OFFICER means the City Manager, or designee.



   MASSAGE  means any method of pressure on or friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, or stimulating the external
parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without
the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or
without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics,
oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar items commonly
used in this practice.



   MASSAGE CLINIC means a fixed place of business where a massage
technician engages in or carries on the practice of massage as the primary
service of the business establishment.



   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN means and includes any person who, for
consideration, gives, performs or administers, or offers to give or
administer, to another person a massage.



   NOTICE ADDRESS must be the address designated by the permittee for the
mailing of all notices, legal mail, and other written communications from the
city to the permittee.



   OFF-PREMISES MASSAGE  means a massage given or administered for any
form of consideration at a location other than a massage clinic.



   PERMITTEE means the owner, proprietor, manager, or operator of a
massage clinic, or off- premises massage service.



   PERSON  means and includes person(s), firms, corporations,
partnerships, associations or other forms of business organization or group.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT refers to the City of Santa Paula Police Department.



   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL  means any school or institution of learning which
teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession, and work of massage, which
school or institution has been approved pursuant to Cal. Educ. Code §§94300
et seq., and applicable regulations. A school offering a correspondence
course not requiring actual attendance is not a recognized school.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS  means and includes any of the following
human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses or female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES  means and includes all the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of specified
anatomical areas;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse,
oral copulation, or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation; or



      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in this definition.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.003  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Director is authorized to administer this chapter and to adopt
administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations
set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.004  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Massage clinic. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, it
is unlawful for any person to own, operate, or maintain a massage clinic
without a massage clinic permit issued in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Massage technician. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter,
it is unlawful for any person to practice, engage in, or carry on the
business or activities of a massage technician without a massage technician
permit issued in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.005  PERMITS NOT INTERCHANGEABLE OR TRANSFERABLE.



   (A)   Possessing a valid massage clinic permit does not allow a
person to practice, engage in, or carry on the business or activities of a
massage technician without a massage technician permit.



   (B)   Possessing a valid massage technician permit does not allow a
person to own, operate, or maintain a massage clinic without a massage clinic
permit.



   (C)   Permits cannot be transferred either as to location or as to
the person.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.006  PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to the following classes of individuals,
and no massage clinic or massage technician permit is required of such
persons, while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective
professions:



   (A)   Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their
profession in the State of California.



   (B)   Barbers, beauticians and cosmetologists, with respect to scalp
massage, who are duly permitted pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 7301
et seq., in accordance with the limitations of their permits;



   (C)   Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the State
of California;



   (D)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical
therapists who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in
the State of California.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.007  PERMIT FEE.



   (A)   Every person seeking a permit pursuant to this chapter must
pay an annual permit fee as set by City Council resolution.



   (B)   Charges will be imposed for city services provided to a
permittee. Such charges will be determined by the applicable servicing city
department(s) and will be based on the actual cost incurred by the city in
providing such services. Such service charges will include, without
limitation, charges for labor, supervision, overhead, administration,
attorneys fees, and fingerprinting. Additional charges may be imposed to
cover the cost of extraordinary permit investigation and staff costs, if the
Director determines this necessary.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.008  ADDITIONAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   If required by the uniform codes adopted by this code, for example, the
building, electrical or plumbing codes, persons seeking a massage clinic
permit must first obtain a building permit, or other similar permit, before
seeking a massage clinic permit.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



PERMIT APPLICATIONS



§ 119.020  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS - FORM AND CONTENT.



   Applications for massage clinic and massage technician permits, or
renewal of such permits, must be filed with the Director, in a form
prescribed by the Director, and contain all of the following information
under the penalty of perjury:



   (A)   For all permits:



      (1)   Name. The applicant's full name and any aliases
previously used or currently used and current business address and mailing
address and the names and residence addresses of all officers, directors, and
each stockholder holding more than 10% of the stock, if a corporation, or
partners, if a partnership;



      (2)   Addresses. All proposed, current and previous
businesses, and where applicable, the residential addresses of the applicant
or applicant's principal officers, directors, and stockholders holding more
than 10% of stock, if a corporation, or partners, if a partnership, for the
five years immediately preceding submission of the application;



      (3)   Physical description. Height, weight, color of eyes and
hair of applicant or each of the applicant's officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than 10% of stock, if a corporation, or partners, if
a partnership, together with at least two current color photographs at least
two inches by two inches in size for each individual;



      (4)   Proof of age. A certified birth certificate, immigration
papers, passport, or current California Driver's Permit evidence the fact the
applicant is no less than 18 years of age;



      (5)   Business information. The business, occupation, or
employment of the applicant or the applicant's officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than 10% of the stock, or partners, if a
partnership, for the three years immediately preceding the date of the
application. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation
must be set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of Incorporation and a
copy of the Articles of Incorporation attached to the application;



      (6)   Location for massage activities. Each location where the
permitted activities will be conducted and the names and addresses of all
massage technicians employed at those locations;



      (7)   Prior permits. A statement of any business permit
history relating to massage of the applicant and of applicant's partners, if
a partnership, or each of the officers, directors, or persons who hold more
than 10% of the stock, if a corporation, including a statement of whether
such person, in previous operations, has had such permit revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and a statement setting forth all massage
business history or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation;



      (8)   Criminal convictions. A statement of whether the
applicant, and any partners, if a partnership, or officers, directors, or
persons holding more than 10% of the stock, if a corporation, were convicted
of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under Cal. Penal
Code §290; conduct which violates Cal. Penal Code §§ 315, 316, 318,
647(b), or 2661; any felony involving the sale of a controlled substance
specified in Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 11054 through 11058; was
convicted in another state of an offense, which, if committed or attempted in
this state would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses
enumerated in this section; or was convicted of one or more other offenses as
may be described under Cal. Gov’t Code § 51032;



      (9)   Fingerprinting. A statement that the applicant consents
to being fingerprinted to determine whether the applicant has a criminal
record; and



      (10)   Notice address. The address to which all notices and
communications from the city to the applicant or permittee must be directed.
It must be the responsibility of the applicant or permittee to immediately
inform the Director, in writing, of any changes of the applicant or
permittee's notice address.



   (B)   For massage technician permits, an applicant must also submit
the following:



      (1)   Diploma. A diploma or certificate of graduation from a
recognized school, together with a certified transcript or record
establishing that the applicant attended a resident course of study of no
less than 300 hours in theory, ethics, practice and profession and work of
massage, and setting forth the beginning and ending date of applicant's
course of study. In lieu of the above, the applicant may submit a certificate
from a recognized school in the State of California stating the applicant has
completed a resident course of study in massage in another state and has
passed the examination required of a graduate from the recognized school in
the State of California; and



      (2)   A written and signed statement from a physician
permitted to practice medicine in the State of California and dated within 30
days of the date of the application, certifying that the applicant is free
from communicable diseases.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.021  INVESTIGATION BY POLICE.



   (A)   The Police Department will conduct a reasonable investigation
of the matters set forth in the application including, without limitation, a
criminal background investigation for each person listed on the permit
application to determine whether such persons have a criminal record.



   (B)   Report on investigation results. The Police Department must
promptly report to the Planning Director, or designee, the results of the
criminal background check.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.022  MASSAGE CLINIC PERMITS - INVESTIGATION BUILDING AND SAFETY
DIVISION AND FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   Before any massage clinic permit is issued under this chapter, and
after approval by the Police Department, the Director must submit the massage
clinic application for review by the Building and Safety Department and Fire
Department, to determine whether the premises proposed to be used for the
massage clinic comply with applicable laws, including, without limitation,
uniform Building and Fire Codes adopted by this code.



§ 119.023  SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIRECTOR.



   In addition to the information required by this chapter, applications
for all permits authorizing a sign will include such supplemental information
which the Director may find reasonably necessary, given the type of sign, in
order to determine whether to approve or deny a permit authorizing such sign
in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. Such additional
information may not include the sign copy or content, but must only be
related to non-communicative aspects of the proposed sign.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS



§ 119.035  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS - TIME FOR REVIEW.



   (A)   The Director must determine whether or not an application is
complete within 21 days after the application was first submitted. If deemed
incomplete, the Director must provide written notice of incompleteness to the
applicant and identify what is required to make the application complete. An
applicant must make corrections to the application within 21 days after
receiving notice to avoid paying a new application fee. If the Director fails
to provide a notice of incompleteness within 21 days, then the application is
deemed complete on the date of application.



   (B)   Within 21 days after an application is deemed complete, the
Director must either issue or deny a permit.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.036. ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   A permit must be issued if:



      (1)   The application was complete in accordance with this
chapter;



      (2)   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and



      (3)   Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional
approval in writing.



   (B)   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform
to the general conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special
conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the Director to protect public
safety or welfare.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.037  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT DENIAL.



   A permit may be denied for the following reasons:



   (A)   The application is incomplete;



   (B)   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental
application information requested by the Director;



   (C)   For massage clinic permits, the proposed massage clinic does
not conform with this code including, without limitation, provisions of the
uniform codes adopted by reference;



   (D)   The applicant failed to obtain such additional permits as may
be required by this code;



   (E)   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;



   (F)   The application is substantially the same as an application
previously denied, unless:



      (1)   Twelve months elapsed since the date of the last
application, or



      (2)   New evidence or proof of changed conditions is furnished
in the new application;



   (G)   The applicant, owners, operators, partners if a partnership,
or officers, directors, or persons holding more than 10% of the stock, if a
corporation, or any of them, has within 10 years immediately preceding the
date of the application been convicted of any of the offenses set forth in
this chapter, or have, within the same time frame been convicted of any
offense in another state which, if committed or attempted in this state,
would have been punishable as one or more offenses enumerated under this
section, or is required to register under Cal. Penal Code § 290.



   (H)   The applicant, owners, operators, partners if a partnership,
or officers, directors, or persons holding more than 10% of the stock, if a
corporation, or any of them, has had a massage clinic permit or massage
technician permit revoked or suspended for cause within the five year period
immediately preceding the date of the application.



   (I)   The applicant conducted a business requiring a massage clinic
or massage technician permit within the city without such a permit having
been issued by the city within the five years immediately preceding the
application.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.038  PERMIT DENIAL.



   Any person denied a permit pursuant to this chapter may not operate a
massage clinic. An applicant whose permit has been denied may appeal the
denial to the hearing officer as set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.039  CRITERIA FOR PERMIT CONSIDERATION.



   The Director's determination whether or not to issue a permit and, if
issued, what conditions are placed in a permit, must be guided solely by the
standards and criteria set forth in this code.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



PERMIT CONDITIONS



§ 119.050  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS - INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.



   In addition to all other conditions, permittees must enter into a hold
harmless agreement with the city which will, in part, indemnify the city, its
officers, employees, and agents, from any liability arising from the
permittee's activities in a form approved by the City Attorney's office.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.051  DURATION AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Term. Each permit issued under this chapter terminates one
year after first being issued unless revoked before such termination.



   (B)   Renewal. Any renewal of a permit before its expiration
requires payment of the annual permit fee as well as an inspection by the
Building and Safety Department to ensure continued compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and applicable laws and regulations. The Director
may draft permit renewal application forms that require less information than
required for the initial permit application. No application for renewal of
the permit will be accepted earlier than 90 days before expiration of the
permit.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.052  SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Grounds for special permit subsequent conditions. The Director
may condition previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts
not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   Notice of special permit subsequent conditions. Should
subsequent conditions be required, the Director will serve written notice on
the permittee of this decision.



   (C)   Except where otherwise provided, a permittee may seek review
of imposition of subsequent conditions to the hearing officer as provided in
this chapter.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.053  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   Any person to whom a massage clinic permit is granted must display such
permit prominently in a conspicuous place, capable of being viewed by
customers, at every location where the permitted activities are performed or
conducted.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.054  MASSAGE CLINIC - MASSAGE TECHNICIANS EMPLOYED BY PERMITTEE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for massage clinic permittees to allow massage
technicians to perform massage without a massage technician permit issued
under this chapter.



   (B)   Each massage clinic permittee under this chapter must notify
the Director in writing, within five days of the hiring and/or commencement
of services, whichever is first, of the name, permit number, date of hiring,
and location of each massage clinic where employed, of each massage
technician whose services are utilized by the permittee. Permittees must also
notify the Director in writing, within five days of the termination of
employment or services of the name, permit number, termination date, and
location of each massage clinic where employed, of each massage technician
whose services and/or employment terminated.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.055  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No massage clinic may be open or conduct business between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.056  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   Permits may be revoked for violations of the following provisions:



   (A)   If any massage technician or any other employee, working in a
massage clinic, or the clinic's customers, patrons, or guests engages in any
specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage clinic. No
massage technician or other employee of a massage clinic may expose specified
anatomical areas in the presence of any patron, customer, or guests. In the
course of administering a massage, no massage technician or other massage
clinic employee may make intentional physical contact with the specified
anatomical areas of any customer, patron, or guests.



   (B)   If a massage clinic allows massage technicians or any other
employee working in a massage clinic to administer any form of massage or
come into any form of physical contact with a customer who is either fully or
partially undressed, without first draping the customer's specified
anatomical areas, if such areas would otherwise be exposed, in accordance
with the accepted standards of the American Massage Therapy Association
and/or Associated Professional Massage Therapists and Allied Health
Practitioners.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.057  INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Employees of the Police Department, Planning Department , Building and
Safety Department, and the Fire Department may enter any massage clinic
during regular business hours and make reasonable inspection to determine
whether the provisions of this chapter are being met.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.058  FACILITIES AND OPERATIONS.



   No permit to operate a massage clinic may be issued nor may any massage
clinic operate unless the massage clinic premises and operation comply with
each of the following minimum requirements:



   (A)   Signage. A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance
identifying the establishment as a massage clinic, provided, however, that
all such signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of this code.



   (B)   Lighting. Minimum lighting must be provided in accordance with
the Building Code. In addition, at least one unobstructed artificial light,
white in color, of not less than 60 watts must be provided and used at all
times in each enclosed room or booth while massage services are being
rendered.



   (C)   Ventilation. Minimum ventilation must be provided in
accordance with the Building Code.



   (D)   Disinfection of instruments. Instruments used for massage must
be disinfected before each use. Where such instruments for massage are
employed, adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available
during all hours of operation.



   (E)   Water. Hot and cold running water must be provided.



   (F)   Linen storage. Closed cabinets must be utilized for the
storage of clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be
removed from the room or booth and stored in a clean container until
laundered.



   (G)   Dressing and toilet facilities. Dressing and toilet facilities
must be provided for patrons.



   (H)   Sanitary conditions. All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and
vapor rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage clinic must be
kept in good repair, maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (I)   Clean linen. Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be
provided for patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or
linens must be permitted.



   (J)   Compliance with laws. The premises to be used must at all
times comply with applicable laws.



   (K)   Any room in which a massage clinic provides massage services
may not be used for residential sleeping purposes; provided, however, that
the Director may allow such room to be used for residential or sleeping
purposes if the Director finds that the health and safety of the patrons of
the massage clinic will not be jeopardized.



   (L)   A register of all individuals employed as massage technicians,
and their permit numbers, must be maintained and available for inspection at
all times during regular business hours.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.059  TECHNICIAN'S DRESS CODE.



   Permittees under this chapter must ensure that all persons employed to
work on the massage clinic premises, and including all massage technicians
conducting permitted activities on the massage clinic premises, must be
dressed in clothing made of an opaque material, and at a minimum, not expose
any specified anatomical areas, and must comply with the following
requirements, as applicable:



   (A)   Upper garments. All garments covering the upper torso (e.g.,
shirts or dresses) must have sleeves not less than two inches in length,
measuring from the top of the shoulder, and necklines not lower than two
inches below the clavicle.



   (B)   Skirts. Hems of dresses, skirts, smocks, or other similar
garments must not be more than two inches above the top of the knee.



   (C)   Shorts. Cuffs or hems of shorts, culottes, pants or other
similar garments must not be more than six inches above the top of the knee.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§119.060  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Director may revoke a permit issued under this chapter on
one or more of the following grounds:



      (1)   Upon learning or discovering facts requiring permit
denial not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable;



      (2)   That the permittee practiced fraud or deceit in
obtaining a permit under this chapter;



      (3)   That the permittee violated a provision or provisions of
this chapter;



      (4)   That the permittee was convicted for any of the offenses
described in this chapter, above;



      (5)   That the facilities and operations of the massage clinic
do not comply with this chapter;



      (6)   That the permittee employed, allowed or permitted a
massage technician to perform massage in the holder's massage clinic without
a permit;



      (7)   That the permittee has knowingly been employed, allowed
or permitted to perform massage at a massage clinic that does not possess a
massage clinic permit;



   (B)   Upon identifying of grounds for revoking a permit, the
Director will cause notice to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail,
to the notice address designated by the permittee.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



APPEALS



§ 119.070  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   Applicants/permittees may appeal decisions made by the Director
regarding permit denials, conditions, or other matters under this chapter.
Such appeals must be filed with the City Clerk in the manner set forth below.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.071  TIME FOR APPEAL.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be
commenced within 30 days from the date on which written notice of the
Director's decision is served on the applicant/permittee.



   (B)   If request is untimely, the Director may, nevertheless, extend
the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.072  COMMENCEMENT OF APPEAL.



   A request for administrative review will be on a form provided by the
Director and contain the following information:



   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the person making
the request;



   (B)   A description of the decision, determination or order which is
the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order
was made or issued;



   (C)   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and



   (D)   Such other information as may be required by the Director.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.073  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   (A)   Within 30 days after receiving an appeal, the hearing officer
will conduct a hearing to consider the appeal. At least ten days before the
hearing, the hearing officer must notify the applicant of the time and place
of the hearing. The hearing officer will oversee the hearing and provide the
applicant an opportunity to speak at the hearing.



   (B)   Within 30 days after the hearing, the hearing officer must
provide the appellant with a written notification that:



      (1)   The Director's decision is affirmed;



      (2)   The Director's decision is modified;



      (3)   The Director's decision is reversed and a permit is
issued or issued without special conditions.



   (C)   The hearing officer's ruling is the city's final decision.
There is no right to a City Council appeal.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



§ 119.074  EXPEDITED REVIEW.



   Pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.8(c), and any successor
statute or regulation, the permits under this chapter are designated for
expedited judicial review pursuant to the procedure set forth in Cal. Civ.
Proc. Code § 1094.8, or any successor statute or regulation.



(Ord. 1123, passed 10-20-04)



CHAPTER 120:  OIL WELLS



Section




General Provisions




   120.001   Title



   120.002   Definitions



   120.003   Conformance to chapter and zoning provisions required




Drilling Permit




   120.015   Permit required



   120.016   Term of permit; renewal



   120.017   Assignability and transferability



   120.018   Application; bond, fees and issuance



   120.019   Termination of bond




Drilling and Operating Requirements




   120.030   General requirements



   120.031   Abandonment procedure



   120.032   Desertion of well site determined by inspection; procedure



   120.033   Transfer of operators; notice; information required



   120.034   Piping, valves and fittings



   120.035   Electrical equipment, internal combustion engines,
exhaust, waste control, and the like



   120.036   Enforcement; proceedings to revoke permit; right of appeal



   120.037   Appeal procedure




Storage Facilities




   120.050   Maximum tank capacity for each producing oil well



   120.051   Skim pond



   120.052   Location of tanks with respect to property lines



   120.053   Spacing between tanks



   120.054   Foundations and supports



   120.055   Stairs, platforms and walkways



   120.056   Dikes, diversion walls and catchment basins



   120.057   Design and construction of tanks



   120.058   Vents



   120.059   Tank valves



   120.060   Loading by truck from production tank sites




Oil Field Waste




   120.070   Storing or spreading declared nuisance; exceptions



   120.071   Permit required to store or spread



   120.072   Permit application



   120.073   Filing fee for petition



   120.074   Recommendation of Planning Commission to Council;
conditions



   120.075   Council hearing; notice



   120.076   Consideration and action by Council



   120.077   Permit fee



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate oil production activities,  see Cal. Pub. Res.
Code § 3690



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 120.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Santa Paula Oil
Code.”



('81 Code, § 5.40.010)



§ 120.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  Words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number
include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular.



   ABANDONMENT.  The restoration of the drill site as required by these
regulations.



   A.P.I.  The American Petroleum Institute.



   APPROVED BY THE BUILDING INSPECTOR, APPROVED TYPE or APPROVED DESIGN. 
Improvements, equipment or facilities of a type or design approved by the
Building Inspector.



   A.S.M.E.  The American Society of Mechanical Engineers.



   BLOWOUT.  The uncontrolled discharge of gas, liquid, or solids or a
mixture thereof from a well into the atmosphere.



   BLOWOUT PREVENTER.  A mechanical, hydraulic or pneumatic or other
device or a combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing,
including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith
designed and capable of preventing a blowout.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR.  The Building Inspector of the city.



   CELLAR.  An excavation around or above the top joint of the casing in
a well.



   COMPLETION OF DRILLING.  A well is completed, for the purpose of these
regulations, 30 days after the drilling crew has been released, unless
drilling or remedial operations are resumed before the end of the 30 days.



   DERRICK.  Any frame work, tower or mast which is used in connection
with the drilling, redrilling or well servicing of, or in, any oil or gas
well.



   DESERTION.  The cessation of operations on the property with the
intent to abandon such property without compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.



   DIVISION OF OIL AND GAS.  The Division of Oil and Gas of the
Department of Natural Resources of the state, or any other state agency that
may in the future be charged with its responsibilities.



   DRILLING.  Digging a hole in the earth formation for a well, as such
term is defined in this section.



   GAS.  The gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from
petroleum or natural gas.



   NATURAL GASOLINE PLANT or ABSORPTION PLANT.  A plant for the
processing of natural gas for the purpose of extracting gasoline or liquefied
petroleum gas from natural gas produced from wells.



   OIL.  A hydrocarbon which is liquid in its natural state and does not
include gasoline or liquefied petroleum gas.



   OPERATOR.  The person actually in charge and in control of the
drilling, maintenance, operation or pumping of a well or lease.



   OUTER BOUNDARY LINE.  Where several contiguous parcels of land in one
or different ownerships are operated as a single oil or gas lease or
operating unit, the exterior limits of the land included in the lease or
unit.  In determining the contiguity of any such parcels of land, no street,
road or alley lying within the lease or unit shall be deemed to interrupt
such contiguity.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, association, corporation, joint
venture, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.



   REDRILLING.  The drilling of an existing oil well beyond the limits of
the existing hole.  Except with reference to permit procedure, the
provisions of this chapter relating to drilling shall be equally applicable
to redrilling.



   SHALL.  This word is mandatory and not directory.



   SOURCE OF IGNITION.  Any flame, arc, spark, or heated object or
surface capable of igniting flammable liquids, gases, or vapors.



   STRUCTURE.  That which is built or constructed, including but not
limited to a tank, edifice, or building of any kind.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Building and Safety Inspector of the city.



   TANK.  A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the
drilling or production of an oil well, for holding or storing liquids at or
near atmospheric pressure.



   WELL or OIL WELL.  A well or hole drilled into the earth for the
purpose of exploring for or extracting from the earth oil, gas or other
hydrocarbon substances, or a well or hole in the earth by means of and
through which oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances are extracted,
produced, or capable of being produced from the earth, or a well or hole for
the purpose of secondary recovery or waste disposal.  A temporary core or
test hole drilled for the purpose of seismic or geophysical operations shall
not be considered as a well within the meaning of this code.



   WELL SERVICING.  Remedial or maintenance work performed within any
existing well which does not involve drilling or redrilling.



('81 Code, § 5.40.020)



§ 120.003  CONFORMANCE TO CHAPTER AND ZONING PROVISIONS REQUIRED.



   In the manner, and upon the terms and conditions set forth in this
code, it shall be lawful for any person to drill a well, or wells, for and to
produce oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances, or any thereof, and to
conduct any other lawful operations, including the installation and
maintenance of any derrick, drilling and producing equipment and appurtenant
structures or machinery proposed or intended to be used, or used for, or in
connection with the drilling for or production of oil and gas on or from any
land within any portion of the city which is zoned to permit such operations,
and on any other land where such operations may be authorized pursuant to the
provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city; provided, that all of such
operations shall conform with the provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.40.030)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



DRILLING PERMIT



§ 120.015  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   A permit shall be required to drill, own, operate or maintain
an oil well.  Each oil well permit shall be valid only for the calendar year
for which issued.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to construct, commence to
construct, or maintain or use within the city, any derrick or other
structure, equipment or machinery proposed or intended to be used, or used
for, or in connection with the drilling for or production of oil, gas and
other hydrocarbon substances, after the effective date of this code, without
first obtaining such written permit therefor to be issued by the Building
Inspector in accordance with the terms of this code.



('81 Code, § 5.40.040(A-B))  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.016  TERM OF PERMIT; RENEWAL.



   (A)   (1)   Each permit shall be renewed on December 31 of the
year following the year in which it was granted or renewed unless such well
has been abandoned prior thereto.



      (2)   On or before December 15 of each year subsequent to the
effective date of this code, the owner of any and all wells previously
drilled and not heretofore abandoned shall make application for a permit
covering the operation and maintenance thereof.



   (B)   No additional permit shall be required for well servicing,
redrilling or use of any well for injection purposes.



('81 Code, § 5.40.040(C-D))



§ 120.017  ASSIGNABILITY AND TRANSFERABILITY.



   In the event of any change of ownership of any oil or gas well after a
permit has been granted to cover the drilling thereof, or to cover the
operation and maintenance of an existing well, the permit and all rights and
obligations pertaining thereto may be assigned and transferred to such new
owner as provided in § 120.033.



('81 Code, § 5.40.040(E))



§ 120.018  APPLICATION; BOND, FEES AND ISSUANCE.



   Any person desiring any permit required by § 120.015 shall file a
written application therefor with the Building Inspector on forms furnished
for that purpose which shall contain and be accompanied by the following:



   (A)   Description.  The name or number and location of the proposed
or existing well as such well may be identified and described in notices
filed with the Division of Oil and Gas shall accompany each application.



   (B)   Bond.



      (1)   Except as provided in this division, every application
for a permit required by this code for which a bond is not on file shall be
accompanied by a faithful performance bond, on a form approved by the City
Attorney, in the sum of $2,000 for each well.  Such bond shall be
conditioned that the principal named in the bond shall faithfully comply with
all of the provisions of this code.  The bond shall secure the city against
all costs, charges and expense incurred by it by reason of the failure of the
permittee to fully comply with the provisions of this code.



      (2)   In lieu of filing such bond for each well a blanket bond
in the amount of $10,000 to cover all operations under this code of a single
permittee may be filed.  A rider to such blanket bond shall be filed with
the city identifying each well not then subject thereto and to be covered by
such blanket bond.



      (3)   Each such bond shall be kept and maintained in full
force and effect until terminated or superseded as provided in § 120.033.



   (C)   Permit fees.



      (1)   A fee in an amount to be established by resolution of
the City Council shall accompany each application for a permit to cover the
drilling of a new well.



      (2)   A fee in an amount to be established by resolution of
the City Council shall be paid annually for the operation and maintenance of
each well.



   (D)   Issuance of permit.



      (1)   The application shall be approved and permit granted by
the Building Inspector within five days after receipt of any application
which conforms with the provisions and requirements of this code.  No permit
shall be issued which would conflict with any provision of the zoning
ordinance or building code of the city.



      (2)   Each such permit covering the drilling of any well shall
include the installation and use of all temporary structures, steel derrick
or portable mast, tanks, equipment and facilities necessary or convenient for
such operations.



      (3)   Each such permit covering the operation and maintenance
of any oil well shall include the installation and use of all structures,
tanks, equipment and facilities necessary or convenient for the temporary
field storage, separating, gauging, handling and shipping of oil, gas and
other substances produced from or injected into any well customarily used in
connection with such operation.



('81 Code, § 5.40.050)



§ 120.019  TERMINATION OF BOND.



   (A)   The applicant, as principal, and the surety under any bond
filed under this chapter may have such bond terminated and cancelled if and
when the applicant, or the assignee of any permit granted under this chapter,
shall furnish a new bond therefor.



   (B)   Any bond or rider thereto shall be terminated and cancelled
upon the final and permanent cessation or abandonment of all operations in
connection with any well or wells for which such bond or rider thereto was
given, subject to compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.40.060)



DRILLING AND OPERATING REQUIREMENTS



§ 120.030  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Location of wells.  Well location shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the state.  No wells shall be drilled within 100 feet of
any building used for human occupancy, except any building owned by the
operator or his lessor, or any owner who consents in writing to such
location, or building incidental to the operation of the well, or any
building located on land the surface of which is under development for oil
and gas purposes.  Well location shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the state and the zoning ordinance of the city.



   (B)   Derricks.  All derricks and masts hereafter erected for
drilling or redrilling shall be at least equivalent to the American Petroleum
Institute Standards 4A, 15th Edition and 4D, 4th Edition.



   (C)   Signs.



      (1)   A sign having a surface area of not less than two square
feet and no more than six square feet bearing the current name and number of
the well and the name or insignia of the operator shall be located and
maintained at every well in a place where it will be fully visible at all
times, from the commencement of drilling operations until the well is
abandoned.



      (2)   In lieu of the sign mentioned in subdivision (1) of this
division and in the event there are more than two producing wells on one
leasehold or one operating unit, it shall be sufficient if the entrances to
such leasehold or operating unit are posted with a sign not less than 18
inches by 24 inches bearing the name of the operator together with the name
or designation of the lease together with an openly visible sign on each
producing well designating the particular number thereof.



   (D)   Blowout prevention.  Protection shall be provided to prevent
the blowout of a well, during drilling and redrilling operations, in
accordance with the requirements of the state, Petroleum Safety
Orders—Drilling and Production of Cal. Code of Regs. Title 17, §§ 1722 et
seq.



   (E)   Sump fencing.  All sumps or sump holes not attended 24 hours
per day shall be enclosed by a steel chain-link-type fence not less than five
feet in height, or a substitute approved by the Building Inspector.  There
shall be no aperture below such fence greater than four inches.  Fencing of
the outer boundaries of one leasehold or one operating unit shall be deemed
to be compliance with this provision.  Fence gates shall be kept locked at
all times when unattended by a watchman or serviceman.



   (F)   Well cellars.  Except during drilling and servicing
operations, well cellars shall be kept reasonably free from water, oil,
drilling fluids, or other substances and means shall be provided to keep such
cellars covered.



   (G)   Removal of equipment.  All drilling equipment shall be
removed from the premises within 60 days following the completion,
abandonment or desertion of any well.  With respect to all wells drilled
subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter all
derricks shall be removed from the premises within 60 days following the
completion, abandonment or desertion of any well.  Once any well drilled
subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter is a
producing well, it shall be serviced with a portable derrick and such derrick
shall be removed from the premises within 60 days following the completion of
such servicing operations.



   (H)   Surfacing of roads.  Private roads leading to well sites
shall be surfaced in such a manner as to prevent undue amounts of dust from
being carried onto adjacent property or the public streets.



   (I)   Sanitary facilities.  Suitable and adequate sanitary toilet
facilities shall be installed during all drilling operations and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.



('81 Code, § 5.40.070)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.031  ABANDONMENT PROCEDURE.



   A well shall be considered properly abandoned for the purposes of this
code when:



   (A)   A copy of the Division of Oil and Gas “Notice of Intention
to Abandon” furnished by the Division of Oil and Gas is mailed to the
Building Inspector; and



   (B)   The well has been abandoned in accordance with the
requirements of the Division of Oil and Gas; and



   (C)   The site has been cleared of all drilling or producing
equipment and left in a clean condition, which shall include draining and
backfilling of any sump used in connection with the well and removal of
concrete, pipe and other foreign materials from the surface of the ground,
and the surface of the land, insofar as practicable, left in a neat and
orderly condition; and



   (D)   The Building Inspector shall have inspected and certified in
writing that such well has been properly abandoned in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.40.080)



§ 120.032  DESERTION OF WELL SITE DETERMINED BY INSPECTION; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Whenever in the opinion of the Building Inspector desertion
has occurred, he shall so certify in writing to the City Council.  Within
two weeks after receipt of such certification, the City Council shall set the
time and place for a public hearing, which hearing shall be held not more
than 30 days, nor less than 15 days, from the date when the City Council
shall so set the hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not such
desertion has occurred.  Within two days after the setting of such hearing,
a certified copy of the resolution of the City Council calling such hearing
shall be served upon the operator by the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Such service shall be deemed complete when such resolution is
deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, and directed to
operator at his last known address.  Notice of such hearing shall also be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.



   (C)   At such hearing the City Council shall hear and review all
evidence concerning the alleged desertion and shall make a determination
thereon.



   (D)   If the City Council makes a determination that desertion has
occurred, the city may, in addition to any other proceeding provided for by
law, proceed against and collect from the bond filed by such operator and
with the proceeds thereof the city may perform or cause to be performed
whatever work or services as are necessary to abandon properly any such well
and restore the premises in accordance with the provisions of this code.



('81 Code, § 5.40.090)



§ 120.033  TRANSFER OF OPERATORS; NOTICE; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The permittee shall notify the Building Inspector in writing
of the sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, or exchange of any well within
30 days after such sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, or exchange, and
the new owner thereof shall succeed to all the rights and obligations of
permittee under the permit applicable to such well, upon the filing by the
new owner of a faithful performance bond as provided in § 120.018 to cover
its future operation and maintenance of such well.



   (B)   The notice shall contain the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the person to whom such well is
sold, assigned, transferred, conveyed, or exchanged;



      (2)   The name and location of the well;



      (3)   The date of sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, or
exchange;



      (4)   The date when possession was relinquished by the former
permittee.



('81 Code, § 5.40.100)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.034  PIPING, VALVES AND FITTINGS.



   (A)   Materials and design.  Piping, valves, and fittings for
flammable liquids shall be designed for the working pressures and structural
stresses to which they may be subjected.  They shall be of steel or other
material suitable for use with the liquid being handled.  Pipe wall
thicknesses shall be determined in accordance with nationally recognized good
practice; except that carbon steel pipe shall not be thinner than standard
wall thickness pipe.  Pipe wall thickness shall be determined according to
the provisions of ASA B31.1-1955 “American Standard Code for Pressure
Piping.”  All threaded joints and connec-tions shall be made up tight and
suitable lubricant or piping compound.  These provisions shall apply to all
piping for flammable liquids which falls within the scope of this chapter.



   (B)   Protection against corrosion.  All piping for flammable
liquids, both aboveground and under-ground, where subject to external
corrosion, shall be painted or otherwise protected.



   (C)   Supports.  Pipe systems shall be substantially supported and
protected against physical damage and excessive stresses arising from
settle-ment, vibration, expansion or contraction.



   (D)   Valves.  Pipe systems shall contain a sufficient number of
valves to operate the system properly and to protect the plant.  Pipe
systems in connection with pumps shall contain a sufficient number of valves
to control properly the flow of liquid in normal operation and in the event
of physical damage.  Connections to pipelines, by which equipment such as
tank cars or tank vehicles discharge flammable liquids by means of
centrifugal pumps into aboveground storage tanks, shall be provided with
check valves for automatic protection against backflow.



('81 Code, § 5.40.220)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.035  ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT, INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES, EXHAUST,
WASTE CONTROL, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Electrical equipment.  All electrical equipment used,
installed or maintained within 50 feet of a drilling well and within 25 feet
of a producing well, shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
Electrical Code of the city.



   (B)   Internal combustion engines, storage tanks, fired equipment
and open flames.  No internal combustion engine, storage tanks, boiler,
fired equipment or open flames except welding supervised by the production
foreman, drilling foreman, drilling engineer, drilling supervisors, or safety
supervisors shall be located closer than 25 feet to a producing well nor
closer than 100 feet to a drilling well.  Internal combustion engines (and
their fuel tanks) used in the drilling, production and servicing of oil wells
are exempt from the above provisions.  During drilling operations on a drill
site of two acres or less in area where two or more wells are drilled and
drilling and production equipment are located on such sites, the provisions
in this division relating to distance of storage tanks may be altered at the
discretion of the Building Inspector after consideration of the special
features such as topographical conditions; nature of occupancy and proximity
to buildings on adjoining property and height and character of construction
of such buildings; capacity and construction of proposed tanks and character
of liquids to be stored; degree of private fire protection to be provided,
and facilities of the Fire Department to cope with flammable liquid fires.



   (C)   Muffling exhaust.  The engines used in connection with the
drilling of any oil well or in any production equipment of any oil well shall
be equipped with an exhaust muffler to prevent excessive or unusual noise. 
Means shall be provided on all engines used during drilling operations to
prevent the escape of flames, sparks, ignited carbon and soot.



   (D)   Flammable waste gases and vapors.  Flammable waste gases or
vapors escaping from a production drill site shall be burned or controlled to
prevent hazardous concentrations reaching sources of ignition or otherwise
endangering the area.



      (1)   Flares.  Approved means of ignition shall be provided
whenever hydrocarbon gases are released to the air through flares.



      (2)   Venting.  Gases or vapors not burned may be discharged
to the atmosphere at not less than 20 feet vertically above grade and not
less than 25 feet horizontally from any source of ignition and at locations
that do not create a hazard to the general area.



   (E)   Waste control of drill site.



      (1)   No person shall permit or cause to be permitted the
discharge of any liquid containing crude petroleum or its products into or
upon any street, public highway, drainage canal, or ditch, storm drain or
flood-control channel.



      (2)   No person shall permit or cause to be permitted any oil,
waste oil, refuse or waste material to be on the surface of the ground,
under, around or near any oil well, pump, boiler, oil storage tank or
building except within an oil sump, tank, catchment basin or skimming pond.



      (3)   All land within 25 feet of any oil well, flammable
liquid tank or other appurtenance to any such well shall be at all times kept
free and clear of dry weeds, grass, rubbish or other combustible debris. 
When this distance is not sufficient to provide reasonable fire safety, a
greater distance may be required which shall not exceed the height of the
derrick or greatest dimension of the tank.



   (F)   Smoking.  No person shall smoke nor cause, permit or allow
another person to smoke within 50 feet of any well, tank location, or any
area contaminated by oil or waste gas.



   (G)   Fire control equipment.  A minimum of two fire extinguishers
shall be maintained at all oil well locations where drilling, servicing or
repair work is being conducted.  Each such extinguisher shall have a minimum
classification of 20B as set forth in N.B.F.U. No. 10, “First Aid Fire
Appliances,” in accordance with the Fire Code of the city.  Fire control
shall be as follows:



      (1)   Where flammable liquids are used or dispensed, first aid
fire appliances shall be provided.  The number and type of appliances shall
be as provided in N.B.F.U. No. 10, N.F.P.A. No. 10, “Portable Fire
Extinguishers.”



      (2)   Whenever flammable liquids are stored in containers,
provision shall be made and maintained for the detection of leakage. 
Leaking containers shall be immediately removed or made tight.



      (3)   Access shall be provided by unobstructed aisles whereby
first aid fire control apparatus may be brought to bear on any part of such
flammable liquids storage.



      (4)   In buildings, rooms or other confined spaces in which
flammable liquids are stored, no combustible waste materials shell be allowed
to accumulate.



      (5)   Crankcase drainings and flammable liquids shall not be
dumped into sewers, but shall be stored in tanks or tight drums outside of
any building until removed from the premises.



('81 Code, § 5.40.230)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.036  ENFORCEMENT; PROCEEDINGS TO REVOKE PERMIT; RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   (A)   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this code may
be revoked by the City Council upon its finding, after a public hearing as
provided in this chapter, that the permittee has failed, neglected or refused
to perform, comply with and abide by any of the conditions and provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and for that purpose the Building Inspector and
his deputies shall have the powers of a police officer.



   (C)   Proceedings before the City Council for the revocation of any
permit may be instituted by the Building Inspector causing to be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises covered by the permit, readable from the
ground level, a notice entitled “Notice of intention to revoke permit,”
and cause a copy thereof to be mailed, postage prepaid, to permittee, or his
designated agent, at his last known address, and a copy to be filed with the
City Council.  Such notice shall set forth the date of the posting hereof,
and the reasons and grounds upon which such revocation will be based, and
shall require permittee, within 15 days after the date of posting specified
therein, to cure and remedy any default under, noncompliance with, or
violation of any condition of the permit, or to show cause before such City
Council why such permit shall not be revoked.



   (D)   Upon application therefor by permittee, the City Council may,
at its discretion, extend the time for curing and remedying any claimed
default, noncompliance or violation by permittee, but no such extension of
time shall be for a longer period than a total of 60 days from and after the
service upon permittee of such notice of intention to revoke such permit.



   (E)   At any time prior to the expiration of such period of 15 days,
or any extension thereof, the permittee may file with the City Council a
written appeal from the order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Building Inspector as set forth in the notice mentioned in division (C) of
this section, and request a hearing thereon by the City Council.  Failure to
file a demand for such hearing within the period of time, mentioned in this
division, or any extension thereof, shall be deemed to be an admission on the
part of the permittee that valid grounds exist for the revocation of such
permit forthwith, unless the permittee has commenced with a diligent and bona
fide effort to cure and remedy the default, noncompliance or violation for
which such notice was issued.



('81 Code, § 5.40.240)



§ 120.037  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The City Council shall have and exercise the power to hear and
determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion
in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Building
Inspector in the administration or enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate
in the office of the City Clerk.  An appeal from any order, requirement,
decision or determination by the Building Inspector must set forth
specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion
by his action or where the decision is not supported by the evidence in the
matter.



   (C)   Within five days from and after the filing of the appeal, the
Building Inspector shall transmit to the City Council all papers involved in
the proceedings.  In addition, he may make and transmit to the City Council
such supplementary report as he may deem necessary to present clearly the
facts and circum-stances of the case.



   (D)   Upon receipt of the record, the City Council shall set the
matter for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose
thereof to appellant and to the Building Inspector and any other party at
interest who has requested in writing to be so notified and no other notice
need be given.



   (E)   Upon the date set for the hearing, the City Council shall hear
the appeal, unless for cause the City Council shall on that date continue the
matter.  No notice of continuance need be given if the order therefor is
announced at the time for which the hearing was set.



   (F)   Upon the hearing of such appeals, the City Council may affirm,
change or modify the ruling, decision or determination appealed from or in
lieu thereof may make such other or additional determina-tion as it shall
deem proper in the premise's subject to the same limitations as are placed
upon the Building Inspector by this code and by other provisions of law.



('81 Code, § 5.40.250)



STORAGE FACILITIES



§ 120.050  MAXIMUM TANK CAPACITY FOR EACH PRODUCING OIL WELL.



   If oil or other liquid storage facilities are established incidental to
a producing well on a drill site, such storage facilities shall not exceed a
total of 2,000 barrels per well.



('81 Code, § 5.40.110)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.051  SKIM POND.



   Any open, accessible, surface or subsurface installation used for the
disposal of permitted waste liquids shall be fenced in accordance with the
fencing provision in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.40.120)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.052  LOCATION OF TANKS WITH RESPECT TO PROPERTY LINES.



   (A)   (1)   Location of an aboveground tank for storage of
flammable liquids with respect to distance from the nearest line of adjoining
property which may be built upon, which shall be such that the distance
between any part of the tank and the line shall be not less than that set
forth in the following table:



   Minimum distance of outside aboveground tanks for flammable liquids
other than crude petroleum to line of adjoining property which may be built
upon.



 



Capacity of Tank (in gallons)
 
Class of Flammable Liquid
 
Minimum Distance (in feet)


0 to 275
 
III-B
 
0


276 to 750
 
III-B
 
5


0 to 750
 
I, II and III-A
 
10


751 to 12,000
 
III-B
 
10


751 to 12,000
 
I, II and III-A
 
15


12,001 to 24,000
 
I, II, III-A and III-B
 
15


24,001 to 30,000
 
I, II, III-A and III-B
 
20


30,001 to 50,000
 
I, II, III-A and III-B
 
25




 



      (2)   Tanks with capacities in excess of 50,000 gallons and
all tanks for the storage of crude petroleum shall be located in accordance
with the following provisions (applicable to gas-tight tanks including
conservation type tanks constricted in compliance with these or equivalent
standards):



 


Product Stored

 

Tank Protection

 

Distance From Line of Adjoining Property Which May Be Built Upon Shall Be Not
Less Than





 

(1) An approved permanently attached extinguishing system or

 

Greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank, except that such distance
need not exceed 120 feet




Refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boilover

 

(2) An approved floating roof not equipped with either of the above

 

One and one-half times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank
except that such distance need not exceed 175 feet





 

(1) An approved permanently attached extinguishing system or

 

Two times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank except that
such distance shall not be less than 20 feet and need not exceed 175 feet




Crude petroleum*

 

(2) An approved floating roof not equipped with either of the above

 

Three times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank except that
such distance shall not be less than 20 feet and need not exceed 350 feet




*  Or other non-petroleum product, handled in special process and chemical
plants, which have boilover characteristics somewhat like those of crude
petroleum.




 



   (B)   Location of any aboveground tank for the storage of flammable
liquids on the premises of any Division VI, commercial and industrial
establishment, or any Division VII, processing plant, with respect to the
distance to the nearest building or line of adjoining property which may be
built upon, shall be such that the distance between any part of the tank and
such building or property line is not less than that set forth in the
following table:



   Minimum distance between any outside aboveground tank for flammable
liquids on the premises of any Division VI or VII occupancy to the nearest
building of line of adjoining property which may be built upon.



   Diameter of Tank                                   
    Minimum Distance to



     (in feet)                                       
                  Building (in feet)



   Under 15                  15



   15 to 30                   tank diameter



   30 to 60                  30



   Over 60                 ½ tank diameter



   (C)   In particular installations these provisions may be altered at
the discretion of the Building and Safety Inspector after consideration of
the special features such as topographical conditions; nature of occupancy
and proximity to buildings on adjoining property and height and character of
construction of such buildings; capacity and construction of proposed tanks
and character of liquids to be stored; degree of private fire protection to
be provided, and facilities of the Fire Department to cope with flammable
liquid fires.



   (D)   Where two tank locations of diverse ownership have a common
boundary, the Building and Safety Inspector may, with the written consent of
the owners of the two properties substitute the distances provided in §
120.053 for the minimum distances set forth in the tables under this section.



('81 Code, § 5.40.130)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.053  SPACING BETWEEN TANKS.



   (A)   The location of a tank for the storage of any flammable liquid
with respect to any such other tank shall be such that the distance between
them shall be not less than three feet.



   (B)   For banks above 50,000 gallons individual capacity storing any
flammable liquid, except crude petroleum in producing areas, the distance
shall be not less than one-half the diameter of the smaller tank.



   (C)   In producing areas, for tanks storing crude petroleum and
having capacities not exceeding 126,000 gallons (3,000 bbls.), the distance
between tanks shall not be less than three feet; in excess of 126,000 gallons
(3,000 bbls.), the distance shall be not less than the diameter of the
smaller tank.



   (D)   The minimum separation between an LP gas container and a
flammable liquid tank shall be 20 feet.  Suitable means shall be taken to
prevent the accumulation of flammable liquids under adjacent LP gas
containers such as by diking, diversion curbs and grading.  When flammable
liquid tanks are diked, the LP gas containers shall be outside the diked area
and at least 10 feet away from the centerline of the dike.  The provisions
set forth in this section shall not apply when LP gas containers of 125
gallons or less capacity are installed adjacent to Class III-B flammable
liquid tanks of 275 gallons or less capacity.



('81 Code, § 5.40.140)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.054  FOUNDATIONS AND SUPPORTS.



   (A)   Tanks shall rest directly on the ground or on foundations or
supports of concrete, masonry, piling, or steel.



   (B)   Exposed piling or steel supports shall be protected by
fire-resistive materials to provide a fire resistance rating of not less than
two hours.



('81 Code, § 5.40.150)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.055  STAIRS, PLATFORMS AND WALKWAYS.



   Stairs, platforms and walkways hereafter installed, elevated more than
three feet above the surrounding ground level, shall be of noncombustible
construction.



('81 Code, § 5.40.160)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.056  DIKES, DIVERSION WALLS AND CATCHMENT BASINS.



   (A)   Required.  Tanks or groups of tanks shall be protected from
the effects of flammable liquid spills originating at or encroaching upon the
tank setting.



   (B)   Methods.  Diversion walls or drains safely directing the flow
to catchment basins, impounding basins formed by dikes around tanks or groups
of tanks, or combinations thereof shall be used.



   (C)   Capacity.  The net capacity of a catchment basin, diked
impounding basin, or any combination thereof shall be equal to the capacity
of the largest tank, plus six inches of freeboard.  In computing the
required capacity of a catchment basin, diked impounding basin or combination
thereof:



      (1)   The volume of the largest tank up to the height of the
dike shall be considered as part of the available capacity of a diked
impounding basin.



      (2)   No part of the volume of tanks other than the largest
tank shall be considered as part of the available capacity.



      (3)   The capacity of a separate catchment basin may be used
to reduce the required capacity of a diked impounding basin provided drainage
sufficient to prevent overflow of the dike and effective control of flow are
provided.



      (4)   The capacity of a single separate catchment basin may be
applied to reduce the required capacity of each of the diked impounding
basins draining to it.



   (D)   Dike construction, drainage and division.  Where dependence
is placed in whole or in part on diking for compliance with this subchapter,
dikes shall be constructed, drained, and divided as follows:



      (1)   Construction.  Dikes shall be of earth, concrete or
solid masonry designed to be liquid-tight to withstand a full hydraulic head,
and shall be maintained at full design capacity.  Where piping passes
through dikes, provision shall be made for movement without damage to the
dikes and to minimize leaks under emergency conditions.  Earthen dikes shall
be built and maintained at a minimum height of two feet.  The distance
between the inside toe of any dike and the shell of any tank not over 30 feet
in diameter shall be not less than five feet, and for tanks over 30 feet in
diameter shall be not less than 10 feet.



      (2)   Spill dikes.  Where tanks within a common diked
impounding basin may cause mutual exposure from spills, spill dikes shall be
provided between tanks of 10,000 barrels or greater individual capacity. 
Groups of tanks of less than 10,000 barrels individual capacity and not in
excess of 15,000 barrels aggregate capacity may be enclosed within a single
spill dike.  The height of such spill dikes shall not exceed 50% of the
height of the main or perimeter dikes.



      (3)   Drainage.  Drainage shall be provided at a consistent
slope of not less than one percent away from tanks and fittings toward a
sump, drain box or other safe means of disposal located within the diked
impounding area and at the greatest possible distance from the shell of the
tank.  Traps with not less than six inches of liquid seal shall be provided
between the sumps, drain boxes or drain openings within the diked area and
the sewers or drains intended for disposal of spills.  A valve, operable
from outside the dike, shall be provided in the dike drain system and shall
normally be kept closed.



      (4)   Disposal.  Approved provision shall be made for
disposing of water and oil retained by diked impounding basins or catchment
basins.



   (E)   Deviations.  In particular installations, deviations from the
provisions of this section may be granted by the Building and Safety
Inspector, after consideration of special features such as:



      (1)   Topographical conditions, nature of occupancy and
proximity to buildings on the same or adjacent property;



      (2)   Capacity and construction of proposed tanks and
character of liquids to be stored and nature and quantity of private and
public fire protection provided.



('81 Code, § 5.40.170)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.057  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF TANKS.



   (A)   Materials.  Tanks shall be built of steel or concrete unless
character of liquid stored requires other materials.  Steel commonly known
as “mill seconds” shall not be used.  Tanks built of materials other
than steel shall be designated to specifications embodying safety factors
equivalent to those specified in this section for steel tanks.  Concrete
tanks shall be built in accordance with sound engineering practice.  Unlined
concrete tanks shall only be used for storage of liquids having a gravity of
40° A.P.I. or heavier.  Concrete tanks with special linings may be used for
other services provided the design is approved by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.  Steel tanks shall be built in accordance with the requirements
of divisions (B) through (E) of this section.  All shop-built tanks shall be
tested at a pressure of not less than five and not more than 10 pounds per
square inch (measured at the top of the tank) for a period of at least 10
minutes without leakage or permanent deformation.



   (B)   Field erected vertical tanks.  Vertical tanks erected in the
field shall be built in accordance with the following specifications:



      (1)   A.P.I. Standard No. 12A, September, 1951, Specification
for Oil Storage Tanks with Riveted Shells;



      (2)   A.P.I. Standard No. 12C, September, 1955, Specification
for Welded Oil Storage Tanks;



      (3)   A.P.I. Standard No. 12B, September, 1955, Specification
for Bolted Production Tanks;



      (4)   A.P.I. Standard No. 12D, August, 1955, Specification for
Large Welded Production Tanks;



      (5)   A.P.I. Standard No. 12F, August, 1955, Specification for
Small Welded Production Tanks.



   (C)   Small, shop-built vertical tanks.  Vertical tanks not over
1,100 gallons capacity shall meet the following requirements.



  Capacity                                       
Minimum Thickness of Steel



(in gallons)                                           
    U.S. Standard



1 to 60                  18 gauge



61 to 350               16 gauge



351 to 560               14 gauge



561 to 1,100               12 gauge



   (D)   Large, shop-built vertical tanks.  Vertical tanks over 1,100
gallons capacity shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   For tanks up to 25 feet in height the shell shall be not
less than three-sixteenths of an inch thick.  For tanks from 25 to 30 feet
high the bottom ring shall be not less than one-quarter of an inch thick and
the remainder of the shell not less than three-sixteenths of an inch thick. 
For tanks between 30 and 35 feet high, the first two rings shall be not less
than one-quarter of an inch thick and the remainder of the shell not less
than three-sixteenths of an inch thick.  All one-quarter of an inch thick
rings shall be not less than five feet wide.



      (2)   The tops of tanks shall be either dished or cone-shaped
and of not less than No. 10 U.S. standard gauge steel.



      (3)   Tanks shall be welded, or riveted and caulked, or
otherwise made tight in a workmanlike manner.  The roof of the tank shall be
securely fastened to the top ring of the shell with a joint having the same
tightness as the joints between rings.  The joint between roof and shell
shall be weaker than any other joints in the shell of the tank.  Joints in
the roof shall be welded or riveted or made tight by other process
satisfactory to the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.  Roofs of tanks
shall have no unprotected openings.



   (E)   Shop-built horizontal tanks.  Horizontal tanks shall be
constructed in accordance with accepted engineering practice and shall meet
the following minimum requirements:  joints shall be riveted and caulked,
riveted and welded, or welded.  Tanks heads over six feet in diameter shall
be dished, stayed, braced, or reinforced.



      (1)   Small, shop-built horizontal tanks.  Horizontal tanks
not over 1,100 gallons capacity shall meet the following requirements:



  Capacity                                       
Minimum Thickness of Steel



(in gallons)                                           
    U.S. Standard     



  1 to 60               18 gauge



  61 to 275               14 gauge



276 to 550               12 gauge



551 to 1100               10 gauge



      (2)   Large, shop-built horizontal tanks.  Horizontal tanks
over 1,100 gallons capacity having a diameter of not over six feet, made of
steel, shall be three-sixteenths of an inch or greater nominal thickness. 
Tanks having a diameter of over six feet and not more than 12 feet, made of
steel, shall be one quarter of an inch or greater nominal thickness.



('81 Code, § 5.40.180)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.058  VENTS.



   (A)   Vents for normal breathing.  Tanks shall have normal venting
capacity sufficient to permit the filling and emptying of such tanks, plus
their breathing due to temperature changes, without distortion of tank shell
or roof.  Tanks storing Class I and Class II flammable liquids shall be
equipped where practical with either venting devices which shall be normally
closed when not under pressure or vacuum, or with approved flame arrestors,
except that tanks under 2,500 gallons capacity for Class I liquids and tanks
under 3,000 barrels capacity for crude petroleum in producing areas may have
open vents.



   (B)   Vents for emergency relief.  In addition to the provisions
for normal venting required in division (A) of this section, every
aboveground storage tank shall have some form of construction or device that
will relieve excessive internal pressure, caused by exposure fire, that might
cause the rupture of the tank shell or bottom.  In a vertical tank, this
construction may take the form of a weakened seam in the roof.  The joint
between the roof and the shell of a tank 36 feet or more in diameter, if
built in accordance with the provisions of division (B) of § 120.057, shall
be deemed to be a weakened seam for this purpose.  Where entire dependence
for such additional relief is placed upon some device other than a weak roof
seam or joint, the total venting capacity of both normal and emergency vents
shall be enough to prevent rupture of the shell or bottom of the tank if
vertical, or of the shell or heads if horizontal.  Such device may be a
self-closing manhole cover, or one using long bolts that permits the cover to
lift under internal pressure, or an additional or larger relief valve or
valves.  When emergency relief is provided by other than a weak roof seam or
joint, the total capacity of the normal breather and emergency relief shall
be sized according to the following table:



 



                                            Required
Total Pressure Relief Capacity of Vents



Capacity of Tank (in gallons)

 

Forty-Two Gallon Barrels

 

Total Pressure Relief Capacity (cu. ft. of free air per hour)

 

Approximate Diameter in Inches of Free Circular Opening for Various Pressures




3 in. of water

 

1 PSI

 

2½ PSI

 

5 PSI




1,000

 

23.8

 

25,300

 

4

 

2½

 

2

 

1½




4,000

 

95.2

 

69,500

 

6¾

 

3¾

 

3

 

2½




18,000

 

428

 

139,000

 

9½

 

5½

 

4¼

 

3¾




25,000

 

595

 

166,000

 

10¼

 

6

 

4¾

 

4




56,000

 

1,330

 

253,000

 

12¾

 

7¼

 

5¾

 

5




100,000

 

2,380

 

363,000

 

15¼

 

8¾

 

7

 

6




155,000

 

3,690

 

458,000

 

17¼

 

9¾

 

7¾

 

6½




222,000

 

5,290

 

522,000

 

18¼

 

10½

 

8¼

 

7




475,000

 

11,300

 

624,000

 

20

 

11¼

 

9

 

7¾




735,000

 

17,500

 

648,000

 

20

 

11½

 

9¼

 

7¾




Unlimited

 


 

648,000

 

20

 

11½

 

9¼

 

7¾




Note:  Venting equipment installed for normal operation may serve as
emergency relief; provided, that it has the requisite capacity under the
pressure limitation fixed by this table.  Responsibility for selecting the
limiting pressure is placed on the owner or operator.





 



('81 Code, § 5.40.190)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.059  TANK VALVES.



   (A)   Each connection to an aboveground tank storing flammable
liquids located below normal liquid level shall be provided with an internal
or external control valve located as close as practicable to the shell of the
tank.



   (B)   Except for flammable liquids whose chemical characteristics
are incompatible with steel, such valves, when external, and their
connections to the tank shall be of steel.



('81 Code, § 5.40.200)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.060  LOADING BY TRUCK FROM PRODUCTION TANK SITES.



   (A)   Location.  Tank vehicle loading racks, loading platforms or
movable loading spouts or arms dispensing flammable liquids shall be
separated from tanks, warehouses, other buildings, public streets and nearest
line of property that may be built upon by a clean distance of not less than
25 feet, measured from the nearest position of any fill stem.  Buildings for
pumps or for shelter of loading personnel may be part of the loading rack or
platform.  No person shall load or unload, or permit the loading or
unloading of a tank vehicle unless such vehicle is located outside of any
public street right-of-way.



   (B)   Loading and unloading operations.  During the loading or
unloading of a tank vehicle, a qualified person shall be at the loading
controls or unloading controls.  Provision shall be made for the safe
disposal of the oils released by overflow and from loading spouts or lines.



('81 Code, § 5.40.210)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



OIL FIELD WASTE



§ 120.070  STORING OR SPREADING DECLARED NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS.



   The storing or spreading of what is commonly known as oil field waste
in the city is a nuisance and unlawful, except under the conditions mentioned
in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 8.36.010)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.071  PERMIT REQUIRED TO STORE OR SPREAD.



   It is unlawful for any person acting as principal, agent or otherwise,
to spread or store within the city water, mud, acids, brine, oil or other
substances constituting what is known as oil field waste, without permission
therefor first had and obtained from the Council and the issuance of a permit
therefor as provided in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 8.36.020)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 120.072  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Before the Council may grant any permit required by §
120.071, an application shall be made to the Planning Commission of the city
on forms to be furnished by the city and a hearing shall be had at which time
property owners of the city or any person interested or who might be damaged
thereby be heard and present objections to the Planning Commission.



   (B)   Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least three days
before the date of the hearing.



('81 Code, § 8.36.030)



§ 120.073  FILING FEE FOR PETITION.



   At the time of the filing of the petition with the Planning Commission,
the petition shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount to be
established by resolution of the City Council.



('81 Code, § 8.36.040)



§ 120.074  RECOMMENDATION OF PLANNING COMMISSION TO COUNCIL; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   At the hearing referred to in this subchapter, the Planning
Commission shall consider the application and the objections thereto, if any,
and shall make their findings, recommending to the Council that the petition
for permit be denied or granted, with or without reasonable conditions
imposed, among which shall be that all operations under the permit shall
conform in all respects to the regulations and requirements of the State
Regional Water Pollution Control Board and any other valid applicable
governmental regulations.



   (B)   The decision of the Planning Commission shall be made and
transmitted to the Council within 30 days from the date of the hearing and
shall be advisory only.



('81 Code, § 8.36.050)



§ 120.075  COUNCIL HEARING; NOTICE.



   The Council shall set the application for a permit for hearing at the
next regular meeting of the Council and shall cause written notice thereof to
be given to the applicant, the notice of the hearing to be published once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least three days before the
date of the hearing.



('81 Code, § 8.36.060)



§ 120.076  CONSIDERATION AND ACTION BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   At the time of the hearing by the Council, the applicant and
all interested persons shall be heard for or against the granting of the
permit and the Council may consider any and all matters affecting the best
interests of the city, the public safety, health and general welfare and may
approve or disapprove the recommendations of the Planning Commission and, if
approved, may impose such conditions as it deems advisable.



   (B)   The action of the Council shall be final.



('81 Code, § 8.36.070)



§ 120.077  PERMIT FEE.



   (A)   The permit provided for in this subchapter, when granted,
shall be subject to a license fee in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council if the spreading or storing of oil field waste
will be completed within six months.



   (B)   An additional license fee in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council shall be paid for each six months thereafter,
or fraction thereof.



('81 Code, § 8.36.080)



CHAPTER 121:  PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   121.01   Definitions



   121.02   Permits required for solicitations



   121.03   Applications for permits



   121.04   Term of permits



   121.05   Transferability



   121.06   Revocation



   121.07   Appeals to city council



   121.08   Manner of solicitation



   121.09   Receipts



   121.10   Door-to-door solicitation



   121.11   Solicitation permit fees



   121.12   Vending on public streets, public or private property and
in various zones



   121.13   Operating regulations



   121.14   Exceptions



   121.15   Permits required



   121.16   Annual renewal



   121.17   Establishment of fees and procedures



   121.18   Notification of right to appeal



   121.99   Penalty



§ 121.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CATERING TRUCK.  A vehicle in which food is prepared and/or sold and
which commonly visits construction sites, offices or factories for such
operations.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE.  Benevolent, civic, educational, patriotic,
political, philanthropic or other similar purposes.



   COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION.  Any person who goes from door-to-door
taking, or attempting to take, orders for the sales of goods, wares and
merchandise, or for services to be furnished or performed; or conducting a
survey or poll.  COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION, as defined herein, does not
include solicitations by telephone, solicitations through the United States
mail, nor solicitations or selling agents selling their goods wholesale to
dealers.



   CONTRIBUTION.  The words alm, food, clothing, money, property,
subscription or pledge and donations under the guise of loans of money or
property.



   GOODS or MERCHANDISE.  Includes items and products of every kind and
description, including all food, produce, flowers and beverage items.



   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.  A nonprofit corporation that has obtained
recognized state or federal tax exempt status.



   OWNER.  Any person or entity owning, or otherwise controlling the
operation of any business or activity involving the vending of goods,
products or merchandise.



   PEDDLER.  Any person who goes from house to house or place to place
seeking to make concurrent sale and delivery of the goods, wares and
merchandise of any nature whatsoever.



   PERMIT HOLDER.  The person to whom a permit has been granted and the
organization or group on whose behalf solicitations will be made.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, society, organiza-tion, church, congregation, assembly or
league, and shall include any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other
similar representative thereof.



   PUSHCART.  Any wheeled human powered device used for the purpose of
assisting a vendor in conducting business.



   RELIGIOUS or RELIGION.  These terms shall have the meaning established
by the Supreme Court of the state or the Supreme Court of the United States.



   RELIGIOUS AND CHARITABLE SOLICITA-TION.  The request, directly or
indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things
of value, on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property,
financial assistance or other thing of value, or any portion hereof, will be
used for a charitable or religious purpose, as those purposes are defined in
this section, conducted door-to-door in any place of public accommodation, in
any place of business open to the public generally, on the city streets and
sidewalks, in the public parks, or in any public place.  RELIGIOUS AND
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION shall also mean and include, but are not limited to,
the following methods of securing such money, credit, property, financial
assistance, or other thing of value, when conducted in the manner set forth
in this section:



      (1)   Any oral or written request;



      (2)   The sale of any goods or services; and



      (3)   The sale of any ticket or right to admission to any
amusement, show, entertainment, lecture or other enterprise, where such
solicitation is made to persons other than the bona fide members of the
organization or institution causing the solicitation of, for or on whose
behalf the solicitation is made, and where it is represented or made to
appear that such solicitation, or any part of the proceeds therefrom, shall
be used for charitable or religious purposes.  RELIGIOUS AND CHARITABLE
shall not apply to solicitations through the United States mail, or to
charitable or religious solicitations which are conducted among the members
whether at regular assemblies or services or otherwise.



   VEHICLE.  As defined in the California Vehicle Code and shall include
human powered devices.



   VEND.  Any act of hawking, operating noise making devices to attract
attention to the vendor, or displaying, selling or offering for sale any
goods or merchandise to the pubic from any carrying device, box, bag, stand,
human-powered device or from a vehicle.



   VENDOR.  Any person or peddler who engages in the act of vending or
who drives or operates any such vehicle or human powered device for the
purpose of vending.



('81 Code, § 5.44.010)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85; Ord. 978, passed  - -94)



§ 121.02  PERMITS REQUIRED FOR SOLICITATIONS.



   No person shall directly or indirectly engage in solicitations without
a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.44.020)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.03  APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   Applications for solicitation permits shall be made to the
License Collector upon forms prescribed by the city.  The application shall
be made under penalty of perjury.  The License Collector shall have 10 days
to review the application prior to the issuance of the permit.



   (B)   Such applications shall contain the following information and
documentation:



      (1)   The full name, address, telephone number, date of birth
and physical description of the person applying for the permit;



      (2)   If the applicant will be engaged in solicitations on
behalf of a person, corporation, company or other such organization, the
name, street address and telephone number of such person or entity, and the
name, street address and telephone number of the person supervising the
applicant;



      (3)   If solicitation is for religious or charitable purposes,
a statement of the purpose for which the proceeds of the solicitation are to
be used;



      (4)   A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of
any of the crimes specified in § 121.10;



      (5)   A statement that the applicant is aware of the
provisions of state law relating to home solicitation contracts;



      (6)   A statement that the applicant has received and read a
copy of this chapter;



      (7)   A short outline of the method or methods to be used in
conducting the solicitation;



      (8)   The time when such solicitation will be made, including
preferred dates and hours of the day for commencement and termination of
solicitations;



      (9)   A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted it
will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or
any department or officer thereof.



   (C)   If, while the application is pending or during the term of any
permit granted, there is a change in fact, policy or method that would alter
the information to be given on the application, the applicant shall notify
the License Collector in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change.



('81 Code, § 5.44.030)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)



§ 121.04  TERM OF PERMITS.



   Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period of the
calendar year unless revoked or suspended pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.44.040)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)



§ 121.05  TRANSFERABILITY.



   No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned,
and any attempt at assignment or transfer shall be void.



('81 Code, § 5.44.050)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.06  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Whenever it shall be shown that any person to whom a permit
has been issued has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the
License Collector shall suspend the permit, after giving written notice to
the permit holder of not less than two business days, in person or by
registered special delivery, postage prepaid, and addressed to the permit
holder at the address specified in the permit application or any amendment
thereto, of the suspension and proposed revocation, stating with specificity
the reason therefor.  However, the two-day notice shall not be required if
the License Collector determines there is a need to protect the public
safety, in which case the permit shall be suspended immediately.



   (B)   The permit holder may file with the City Manager, within 10
days of the date of the notice of suspension and proposed revocation, a
written request for a hearing, which request shall have the effect of staying
the suspension until the City Manager has rendered his decision, except in
instances where the suspension is necessary to protect the public safety. 
The City Manager shall hold a hearing within 10 days after the filing of such
request.



   (C)   At the hearing, the City Manager shall hear all relevant
evidence, shall consider the merits of the proposed revocation, including any
actions which have been taken to cure the alleged violation, and shall render
a decision thereon within one business day after the hearing.  The decision
shall be communicated in writing to the permit holder within one day
thereafter, and shall state with specificity the reasons therefor.



   (D)   In the event that the permit holder does not request a hearing
within 10 days after the date of the notice of suspension and proposed
revocation, the permit shall be revoked, and the revocation shall not be
appealable.



('81 Code, § 5.44.060)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)



§ 121.07  APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL.



   Any applicant or permit holder aggrieved by an action of the City
Manager to deny, revoke or refuse to renew a permit may appeal to the Council
by filing with the City Clerk a statement addressed to the Council setting
forth the facts and circumstances regarding the action of the City Manager. 
Such appeal shall be filed within 10 days after the disputed action of the
City Manager, and the Council shall hear the appeal at its next regular
meeting, but not earlier than five calendar days after the receipt of the
appeal.  The filing of such an appeal with the City Council shall not stay
the action of the City Manager.  At the time of the appeal hearing, the
Council shall not receive new testimony, but shall review the record of the
hearing of the City Manager and shall determine the merits of the appeal, and
it shall render a decision thereon within three business days after the
hearing.  The decision shall be communicated in writing to the appellant
within two days thereafter, and shall state with specificity the reasons
therefor.  The action of the Council shall be final and appealable to the
Superior Court of the state pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.5. 
Such an action in the Superior Court shall be filed within 90 days following
the Council's action, pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.6.



('81 Code, § 5.44.070)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)



§ 121.08  MANNER OF SOLICITATION.



   (A)   Solicitations pursuant to permits under this chapter:



      (1)   Shall not be conducted by any person under the age of 16
years, unless supervised by an adult and in compliance with all laws of the
state; and



      (2)   Shall not be made at any house, apartment or other
dwelling unit, nor at any business to which is affixed a sign indicating
“No Solicitors” or similar indication that no solicitation contact is
desired by the occupants thereof.



   (B)   No solicitor shall:



      (1)   Affix any object to the person of any member of the
public without first receiving express permission therefor;



      (2)   Persistently and importunely engage in commercial
solicitation with the person being solicited after he or she has indicated
that he or she is not interested in the solicitation;



      (3)   Intentionally and deliberately obstruct the free
movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or other public place, or any
place open to the public generally.



   (C)   The permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be shown to
the person from whom a contribu-tion is sought upon request.



('81 Code, § 5.44.080)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.09  RECEIPTS.



   Upon request, the permit holder shall issue to the customer a written
receipt for the sale or order of any goods, wares, newspapers, magazines,
books, merchandise, services, or any other item or exchange of value, which
receipt shall be signed by the permit holder and shall plainly indicate his
name, the date, the items or services purchased, and the amount received.



('81 Code, § 5.44.090)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)



§ 121.10  DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION.



   No person shall conduct solicitations at residences if that person has
been convicted of any of the following crimes, as defined in the California
Penal Code:  murder, mayhem, assault, battery, rape, arson, burglary,
possession of burglarious instruments or deadly weapons, crimes of
embezzlement, bunco or fraud, or attempt to commit any of the aforementioned
crimes or any crimes requiring registration with the Police Department.



('81 Code, § 5.44.100)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.11  SOLICITATION PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   For each person engaged in commercial solicitation, as defined
in § 121.01, there shall be a permit fee in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council for each calendar year, and shall not be
prorated.  No permit shall be issued unless and until a permit for
commercial solicitation is granted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, and any such permit shall be subject to and limited by the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, the License
Collector may issue a principal commercial solicitor's license to every
person either employing or contracting with one or more individuals for
commercial solicitation services, as set forth in division (A) of this
section.  If a principal solicitor should elect to use the provisions of
this section, no principal commercial solicitor's license shall be issued
until the applicant files with the License Collector a list of all solicitors
employed or retained by the applicant with whom the applicant has a contract,
and unless the applicant executes an agreement that he will notify the
License Collector in writing of every change in personnel of those soliciting
for him within five days after such change is made.  In such event, the
principal commercial solicitor and each individual commercial solicitor must
still obtain a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter.  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to grant to a
principal commercial solicitor the privilege of commercial soliciting unless
there is maintained in full force and effect for each individual commercial
solicitor a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter.  The permit fees for a principal solicitor's permit shall be in an
amount to be established by resolution of the City Council, and shall not be
prorated.



   (C)   A business license, as defined in § 110.60, shall also be
payable by all commercial solicitors.



   (D)   Religious and charitable solicitors shall not be charged a fee
or be required to obtain a business license.



('81 Code, § 5.44.110)  (Ord. 830, passed  - -85)



§ 121.12  VENDING ON PUBLIC STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY AND IN
VARIOUS ZONES.



   No person, whether or not the person maintains or is employed at an
established place of business or is employed by a person who is licensed
pursuant to this chapter, shall engage in the business of peddling, operate a
vending stand, or vend from any vehicle or pushcart without first obtaining a
permit/decal pursuant to this chapter.



('81 Code, § 5.44.120)  (Ord. 978, passed  - -94)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.13  OPERATING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Requirements.  All vending shall be subject to and in
compliance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Business license.  Each owner shall have a valid and
current city business license.



      (2)   Peddler/vendor permit.  Each owner shall have a valid
and current peddler/vendor permit.



      (3)   Health permit.  Each owner causing the sale of or
offering for sale any produce, food or edibles shall have a valid health
permit issued by the appropriate governmental agency.



      (4)   Insurance.  Each owner shall have general liability
and, when applicable, automobile insurance with coverage in the amounts and
with the named additional insured as required by the City Attorney's office.



      (5)   Decal/public property use fee.  Each person engaged in
vending shall, in a conspicuous location on the vehicle or pushcart, display
a city-issued decal visible to the general public.  The decal shall be
issued when:



         (a)   The owner has provided the city with evidence of
compliance with subdivisions (1) through (4) above;



         (b)   The owner's proposed operation has been reviewed
and approved by the city as complying with the municipal code;



         (c)   The owner has paid the peddler/ vendor permit fee.



      (6)   Self-contained vehicle.  Any vehicle must be totally
self-contained and may not use the utilities on the site on which it is
operating.



      (7)   May not impede access.  Vehicles and pushcarts shall
not be located in such a way as to block required parking spaces or
driveways, impede vehicular or pedestrian access on public or private
property, create a hazardous disruption in the flow of traffic on public
roadways or sidewalks, or encroach on landscaped areas by the vehicle,
pushcart or customers.



   (B)   Areas allowed or prohibited.  Vending activities shall only
occur in commercial and industrial areas of the city.  Vending of ice cream,
snowcones and bakery products may be conducted in all areas of the city. 
Vehicles and pushcarts may park on private property, subject to the other
limitations in this chapter, only with the permission of the property
owner.  Vending shall not be permitted:



      (1)   On Harvard Blvd., 10th St., Ojai Rd., Main St. and
within one block north or south of Main St., 12th St., Oak St., Peck Rd.
south of Main St., and on Telegraph Rd. east of Calavo St., except for
traditional-style hot food carts and catering trucks operating as provided in
subdivision (A)(7) of this section;



      (2)   Upon any alley or roadway median;



      (3)   Within 100 feet of any residentially developed property
unless visiting a construction site where two or more dwellings are under
construction with an active, valid building permit;



      (4)   Within 100 feet of the nearest curb or edge of pavement
on the cross roadway of any inter-section of two or more public roadways;



      (5)   Within 100 feet of any freeway on-ramp or off-ramp as
defined in the California Vehicle Code;



      (6)   Within 500 feet of the property line of any place of
worship, or public or private school;



      (7)   On any public park unless the vendor has formal
authorization from the City Recreation Director;



      (8)   To take up more than 30 feet of parallel parking area on
a roadway for the vendor's vehicle, and the vendor shall not indicate
exclusive roadway parking or reserve any public parking area for its customer
parking;



      (9)   Upon any specific roadway, or portion thereof, which as
a result of the limited parking, limited line of sight, traffic control
impacts, high traffic flow is designated by the Public Works Director/City
Engineer as unsafe for vending.



   (C)   Signs.  The only signs permitted shall be a sign not to
exceed three square feet which may be affixed to two opposite, parallel sides
of a vehicle displaying, offering or storing goods or merchandise for sale.



   (D)   Number of vendors and sales persons.  The city may limit the
number of vendors at any one location or within an area, or limit the number
of sales persons or others engaged in the act of vending for any one owner at
the requested or approved location.



   (E)   Noise or music while parked.  No noise or music shall be
played, created or sounded while a vehicle or pushcart is parked or
stationary.



('81 Code, § 5.44.130)  (Ord. 978, passed  - -94)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.14  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not be applicable to:



   (A)   Any nonprofit organization, or person acting for it, with
respect to the sale of any goods or merchandise constituting or making a
statement carrying a religious, political, philosophical or ideological
message relevant to the purpose of the organization;



   (B)   Vending operations conducted by a business which sells food on
property it owns or leases, where the business occupied at least 10,000
square feet of enclosed floor area;



   (C)   The sale of newspapers, periodicals, pamphlets, booklets or
other constitutionally protected material;



   (D)   Farmers markets, art shows, special events, street fairs and
craft shows approved and designated by the city, except the requirements in
§ 110.64 shall still apply;



   (E)   Those delivery activities of any business with a fixed place
of business which generally only delivers its products, services or goods to
a specified address in response to a customer request, order or invoice
previously made to that fixed place of business;



   (F)   The sale on private property of tools customarily delivered by
truck or van.



('81 Code, § 5.44.140)  (Ord. 978, passed  - -94)



§ 121.15  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   No person or entity shall engage in the act of or business of peddling
or vending within the city without first obtaining a city peddler/vendor
permit as specified in this chapter.  The business owner shall make a
written application in a form and manner specified by the city.



('81 Code, § 5.44.150)  (Ord. 978, passed  - -94)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.16  ANNUAL RENEWAL.



   All peddler/vendor permits shall expire at the end of the calendar year.



('81 Code, § 5.44.160)  (Ord. 978, passed  - -94)



§ 121.17  ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES AND PROCEDURES.



   The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, establish
procedures to provide for the administration and implementation of this
chapter, including the establishment of fees to provide for processing of
applications.



('81 Code, § 5.44.170)  (Ord. 978, passed  - -94)



§ 121.18  NOTIFICATION OF RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   Upon the issuance or denial of a permit or the rejection of the
application, the applicant shall be notified in writing that should the
applicant object to the interpretation or decision of city staff under this
chapter, the applicant has the right to present such objection to the City
Council at any regularly scheduled meeting.



('81 Code, § 5.44.190)  (Ord. 978, passed  - -94)



§ 121.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person guilty of violating the provisions of § 121.02
shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine not exceeding $50.  A
second violation of said section shall constitute a misdemeanor and be
punished according to Chapter 13 of this code.



   (B)   Any person guilty of violating any other provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine not exceeding
$50 for a first violation and a fine not exceeding $100 for a second
violation.  A third violation shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punished
according to Chapter 13 of this code.  Upon conviction of a third in a
calendar year, the permit shall be revoked.



('81 Code, § 5.44.180)  (Ord. 978, passed  - -94)



CHAPTER 122:  RESTAURANTS



Section




Drive-In Restaurants




   122.01   Definitions



   122.02   Purpose



   122.03   Owner to maintain order on premises



   122.04   Regulations for motor vehicles



   122.05   Disposition of waste materials



   122.06   Trash receptacles to be provided



   122.07   Posting of restrictions on use of premises



   122.99   Penalty



DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS



§ 122.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.  Any restaurant or eating place where meals,
sandwiches, cold drinks, beverages, ice cream or other food is served
directly to or is permitted to be consumed by patrons thereof either while in
their automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle parked on the premises or while
within any portion of the restaurant premises.



   OWNER.  The legal owner of the restaurant premises of the lessee or
the operator thereof.



('81 Code, § 8.16.010)



§ 122.02  PURPOSE.



   The declared purpose of this subchapter is to preserve the public peace
and quiet, health and safety in the use of the premises occupied by drive-in
restaurants, including all driveways, parking places and access routes
thereto, and to that extent the open space of each of such premises is a
public place.



('81 Code, § 8.16.020)



§ 122.03  OWNER TO MAINTAIN ORDER ON PREMISES.



   The owner, lessee or operator of any drive-in restaurant shall maintain
peace and quiet and good order upon the premises and shall not permit noise
or nuisance upon the parking area or driveways.



('81 Code, § 8.16.030)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.04  REGULATIONS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Stopping or standing within driveways prohibited.  No person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any driveway.



('81 Code, § 8.16.040)



   (B)   Racing motor or creating loud noise prohibited.  No person
shall race the motor of any vehicle, nor needlessly and suddenly start or
stop a vehicle or sound the horn or cause any loud or needless noise to emit
from any vehicle in any drive-in restaurant.



('81 Code, § 8.16.050)



   (C)   Leaving vehicle on premises unattended.  No person shall park
a vehicle upon the premises of a drive-in restaurant and leave the premises
with such vehicle unattended without the consent of the owner or manager of
such restaurant.



('81 Code, § 8.16.060)



   (D)   Cruising and racing prohibited.  No person shall cruise or
race any vehicle in or along any driveway or use as a shortcut to another
street any driveway in any drive-in restaurant.



('81 Code, § 8.16.070)  Penalty, see § 122.99



Cross-reference:



   Traffic code, see Title VII



§ 122.05  DISPOSITION OF WASTE MATERIALS.



   No person shall place, deposit or dispose of any food or beverage paper
cup or napkin or food container of any kind or any other waste material upon
any drive-in restaurant premises or any driveway, parking area or any street
or sidewalk adjacent to and abutting upon any drive-in restaurant except in
receptacles provided therefor.



('81 Code, § 8.16.090)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.06  TRASH RECEPTACLES TO BE PROVIDED.



   The owner of any drive-in restaurant shall provide not less than two
receptacles sufficient for the deposit of trash, litter, papers, napkins and
cups, remnants of food and food containers, each such receptacle to be
located conveniently near to each exit to such drive-in restaurant and
reasonably available to the patrons thereof.



('81 Code, § 8.16.120)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.07  POSTING OF RESTRICTIONS ON  USE OF PREMISES.



   The owner shall post conspicuously on the premises two or more signs
bearing the following legend:



   Cruising in or congregating and loitering outside of a motor vehicle is
unlawful. No unoccupied vehicle may be left on these premises without the
consent of the restaurant operator.



('81 Code, § 8.16.130)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of this chapter is an infraction and punishable according
to Chapter 13 of this code.



('81 Code, § 8.16.140)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79)



CHAPTER 123:  SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY



Section




Garage and Yard Sales




   123.01   Definitions



   123.02   Limitation on garage and yard sales



GARAGE AND YARD SALES



§ 123.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARAGE SALE and YARD SALE.  A sale of personal property owned or used
previously by an individual residing on the premises where the sale is
conducted by such resident.  The terms shall not include the mere incidental
sale of one or two items of personal property when such sale is not part of a
general sale of a number of items of personal property.



('81 Code, § 17.71.010)  (Ord. 787, passed  - -82)



§ 123.02  LIMITATION ON GARAGE AND YARD SALES.



   No person shall conduct a garage or yard sale except in accordance with
the following limitations:



   (A)   No more than two garage sales shall be conducted in any
calendar year on any premises by the same residents, or by any person with
the permission of, or under the direction or control of, such residents.  No
single sale shall be conducted for longer than two consecutive weekends, or
72 hours, whichever is the shorter period.  Sales may be conducted during
daylight hours only.



   (B)   Personal property offered for sale at a garage sale or yard
sale may be displayed on a driveway, in a garage, in a rear yard, and on the
front lawn, but not on the parkway or elsewhere upon the premises.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided below, signs advertising a garage
sale or yard sale shall be displayed only on the premises on which the sale
is conducted.  Two such signs may be displayed.  Two off-site directional
signs may be permitted provided that written permission to erect or affix
such signs is received from the property owners on whose property such signs
are to be placed.  Signs may be displayed only during the hours the sale is
actively being conducted and shall be removed at the close of sale activities
or at nightfall, whichever first occurs, each day.  No sign may be placed in
any public right-of-way.



('81 Code, § 17.71.020)  (Ord. 787, passed  - -82; Ord. 799, passed  -
-84)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



CHAPTER 124:  DINING ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT



Section



   124.01   Purpose



   124.02   Definitions



   124.03   Applicability



   124.04   One-stop permitting



   124.05   Administration by Director



   124.06   Permit required



   124.07   Nature of the permit



   124.08   Fees



   124.09   Limitations on outdoor dining permits



   124.10   Issuing permits



   124.11   Permit denial



   124.12   Application for permit



   124.13   Review by city departments



   124.14   Time for review



   124.15   General permit conditions



   124.16   Special permit conditions



   124.17   Subsequent conditions



   124.18   Change in application information



   124.19   Permit modification, suspension, revocation



   124.20   Emergency suspension of permit



   124.21   Notices



   124.22   Administrative review



§ 124.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with California Constitution
Article XI, § 7, for the purpose of establishing uniform regulations for
allowing café entertainment within the central business district and outdoor
dining within the public right-of-way. The city's intent in adopting this
chapter is to establish reasonable restrictions on the ability for
restaurants to engage in café entertainment and use the public right-of-ways
to promote the public welfare while still protecting public health and safety.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   CAFÉ ENTERTAINMENT means any live entertainment presented at a
sit-down restaurant, where fewer than four  individuals provide such
entertainment and when the café entertainment is incidental to the primary
use of the premises. Examples of café entertainment include presentations,
acts, reading, performance, musical rendition, or recitation, when the café
entertainment is intended to divert, amuse, explain, focus, or attract the
attention of persons observing such activity. Such entertainment may be
provided free of charge or for a fee on a regularly scheduled daily, weekly,
or monthly basis



   CITY MANAGER means the City Manager or designee.



   DIRECTOR means the City of Santa Paula's Planning Director, or designee.



   EXTRAORDINARY LAW ENFORCEMENT OR PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES mean city
services that require more than two police units to adequately respond to a
situation, or that are beyond the course and scope of the services routinely
provided to other businesses and citizens, and stretch the resources of the
responding agency beyond those normally available for response.



   OUTDOOR DINING means areas located on public property used by sit-down
restaurants for dining purposes and approved for such use by the city as set
forth in this chapter.



   PERMITTEE means a person or entity to which the city issues a permit
pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.03  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter applies to sit-down restaurants in the commercial business
district zone (CBD) (see SPMC § 16.15.020, Table 15-1) seeking to provide
café entertainment, outdoor dining, or both.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.04  ONE-STOP PERMITTING.



   Persons who obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter are not also
required to obtain, for café entertainment, an entertainment permit or, for
outdoor dining, an encroachment permit under this code.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.05  ADMINISTRATION BY DIRECTOR.



   The Director will receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and
otherwise implement this chapter according to the procedures set forth below.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.06  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to conduct, sponsor, or
knowingly participate in any café entertainment without a valid permit
issued pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to allow, cause, or engage in
outdoor dining without a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.07  NATURE OF THE PERMIT.



   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are subject to the following
limitations:



   (A)   Permits are personal to the applicant, not to the premises
upon which the entertainment is conducted. No other individual may conduct
entertainment under the authority of a license issued to another. For
purposes of this chapter, a permit is not deemed transferred or assigned if
the permittee is a corporation or partnership which remains under the control
of the same individual or individuals who controlled it at the time the
permit was approved;



   (B)   Permits cannot be transferred or assigned;



   (C)   No property rights are conferred to the permittee;



   (D)   There is no right of renewal; and



   (E)   Permits are specific to the location for which it is applied.
A new permit must be obtained in the event there is a relocation of the
permitted activity or a major alteration to the existing facility.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.08  FEES.



   Except as otherwise provided by federal, state, or local laws, or other
City Council authorized restrictions, all fees applicable to this chapter
including, without limitation, fees for using public property, will be
established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.09  LIMITATIONS ON OUTDOOR DINING PERMITS.



   (A)   Permits cannot be issued for outdoor dining in a street or
alley.



   (B)   To provide for adequate pedestrian circulation, outdoor dining
must maintain a minimum of four feet of clearance between dining furnishings
and any curbline, street furniture, or above ground utilities. A minimum of
50 feet of clearance must be maintained between dining furnishings and the
centerline of intersecting perpendicular driveways, alleys or streets to
provide for adequate vehicle sight, unless a lesser distance is determined by
the Director to be adequate for the protection of the public safety.



   (C)   Tables and chairs used for outdoor dining must be of
substantial materials. Tables may be a maximum of three feet in diameter if
round and three feet along the longest side if rectilinear. All such
furnishings must be stored indoors after hours of operation unless otherwise
determined by the Director.



   (D)   Monocolored umbrellas, without lettering, may also be
permitted by the Director.



   (E)   No outdoor dining, including furnishings and signs, may block
visibility of display windows or signage of adjacent businesses unless
written consent of any affected adjacent business owner to block visibility
is obtained by the applicant and provided to the Director.



   (F)   The permittee must maintain the outdoor dining area in a clean
and safe condition at all times, including properly disposing of all trash
generated by the operation.



   (G)   The city may charge a rental fee for use of public property.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.10  ISSUING PERMITS.



   (A)   The Director must issue a permit if:



      (1)   The application was complete in accordance with this
chapter;



      (2)   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and



      (3)   The applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional
approval in writing.



   (B)   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform
to the general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special
permit conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the Director to protect
public safety or welfare.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.11  PERMIT DENIAL.



   A permit may be denied for the following reasons:



   (A)   The application is incomplete;



   (B)   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental
application information requested by the Director;



   (C)   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;



   (D)   The application is submitted by a person with a suspended
permit or whose permit was revoked;



   (E)   The location of the proposed café entertainment or outdoor
dining does not conform to the requirements of this chapter;



   (F)   The application seeks authorization for café entertainment or
outdoor dining that is prohibited by this code or unlawful under any other
local, state, or federal law; or



   (G)   Issuing the permit would endanger public health, safety, or
welfare as determined by the Director.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.12  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit applications must be filed by a natural person.



   (B)   Permit applications must be in a form prescribed by the
Director and, for all permits, will contain all of the following information:



      (1)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening
telephone numbers of the person filing the application;



      (2)   If the permit is obtained on behalf of an organization,
the name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the organization;
and if requested by the Director, written documentation of the authority
under which the applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the
organization; and



      (3)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening
telephone number of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and
the applicant is unavailable.



   (C)   For café entertainment permits:



      (1)   The nature of the café entertainment;



      (2)   Whether any sound amplification may be used during the
entertainment;



      (3)   Estimated starting and ending times for the café
entertainment;



      (4)   A diagram drawn to scale and dimensioned showing
location of the performance area on the premises with all seating and a list
of equipment or instruments to be used in the performance;



      (5)   The estimated number of participants in the café
entertainment;



      (6)   Parking requirements for the café entertainment; and



      (7)   Such other information as may be required.



   (D)   For outdoor dining permits:



      (1)   A diagram drawn to scale and dimensioned showing the
proposed location of the outdoor dining with all seating and signage;



      (2)   A graphical depiction, such as sample photographs,
depicting the appearance of the chairs, tables, and other equipment proposed
to be used in the outdoor dining area; and



      (3)   The proposed days and times of operating the outdoor
dining area.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.13  REVIEW BY CITY DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   After an application is filed, the Director will immediately
forward the application to the following city departments for review:



      (1)   The Fire Department;



      (2)   The Police Department;



      (3)   Building and Safety Department; and



      (4)   The Public Works Department.



   (B)   Upon receiving an application, these departments will consider
the application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide the
Director with written recommendations regarding:



      (1)   Any special conditions for a permit; and



      (2)   Any additional recommendations.



   (C)   The reviewing officers must complete their review within the
time that the Director must make a decision on the application.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.14  TIME FOR REVIEW.



   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for
a permit authorizing an event will be denied, approved, or conditionally
approved by the Director within 21 business days after receiving the
completed application.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, the applicant's acceptance of the
approval or conditional approval must be received by the Director within five
business days after the applicant was served with notification of the
decision and before any café entertainment or outdoor dining may occur.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.15  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Unless suspended or revoked, permits issued pursuant to this
chapter have a term of one year. Permits are automatically renewed on the
anniversary date of being issued for an additional one year term so long as
all material information regarding the permittee remains unchanged. Should a
permit expire, the permittee must comply with this chapter to obtain a new
permit.



   (B)   Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement, in a
form approved by the City Attorney, with the city which will, in part,
indemnify city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any liability
arising from a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   Insurance requirements. Permittees must obtain liability
insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and
having a financial rating in Best's Insurance Guide of not less than "A VII."
Such insurance will provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for
death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way
connected with such event. For outdoor dining, such insurance must be in a
minimum amount of $1,000,000. Insurance will name the city and the city's
elected and appointed officials, officers, and employees as additional
insureds under the coverage afforded. In addition, such insurance will be
primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance available to
the city and will include a severability of interest (cross-liability)
clause. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served during café entertainment,
the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability in an amount
not less than $1,000,000.



   (D)   Certificates of insurance. A copy of the policy or a
certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form
approved by the city's risk manager, must be filed with the Director not less
than five business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before
the date of the event unless the Director for good cause waives the filing
deadline.



   (E)   Permittees must attempt to notify all affected persons, by any
reasonable means, regarding the nature, date, and time of café entertainment
as specified by the Director. Failure of the permittee to give such notice
will not invalidate a permit.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.16  SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Grounds for special permit conditions. The Director may
condition a permit with reasonable requirements to protect public health,
safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Conditions may include, without limitation, the following:



      (1)   Accommodating pedestrian and vehicular traffic;



      (2)   Use of sound amplification equipment, and restrictions
on the amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the
course of café entertainment;



      (3)   Obtaining of any and all business licenses required by
this code for the sale of food, beverage or other goods or services; and



      (4)   The manner of which alcohol sales and service, if any,
will be conducted.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.17  SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS.



   The Director may condition previously issued permits upon learning or
discovering facts not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.18  CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Whenever any change occurs in the information contained in the
permit, the permittee must give the Director written notice of the change
within 30 days of the date that the change becomes effective.



   (B)   If a permittee fails to give the Director timely written
notice of a change in the information contained in the application, the
Director may charge the permittee an additional administrative fee.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.19  PERMIT MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Director may modify, suspend, or revoke a permit upon
learning or discovering facts requiring permit denial not previously
disclosed or reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   The Director may modify, suspend, or revoke a permit when the
permittee, café entertainment, or outdoor dining violates the permit's terms
and conditions, or when event participants violate applicable laws or
regulations; provided, however, that the Director will not revoke a permit
without warning the permittee and allowing him or her to correct the
violation(s) within a reasonable time.



   (C)   The Director may modify, suspend, or revoke a permit when
extraordinary law enforcement or public safety services were required as a
result of the permit activities to the extent that they create an
unreasonable burden on the city.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.20  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   The Director and any sworn public safety officer may temporarily
suspend a permit whenever there is an emergency that requires such action to
protect public safety.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.21  NOTICES.



   (A)   Where the provisions of this chapter require that an applicant
or permittee be served with notice, such notice will be deemed served when
personally delivered to such applicant or permittee or when deposited in the
first class U.S. Mail, addressed to such applicant or permittee at the
applicant's or permittee's last known address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a permittee
or applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the basis for
such decision.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



§ 124.22  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request
administrative review of the Director's decision pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be
commenced within five days from the date on which written notice of the
Director's decision is served on the applicant or permittee.



   (C)   If request is untimely, the Director may, nevertheless, extend
the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.



   (D)   A request for administrative review must be on a form provided
by the Director and contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
making the request;



      (2)   A description of the decision, determination or order
which is the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination
or order was made or issued;



      (3)   A brief description of all grounds for making the
request; and



      (4)   Such other information as may be required by the
Director.



   (E)   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the
Director will provide a copy of the notice to the City Manager within two
business days.



   (F)   Upon receiving a request for review from the Director, the
City Manager will review the request and, within ten days of receiving the
request notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:



      (1)   The Director's decision is affirmed;



      (2)   The Director's decision is modified;



      (3)   The Director's decision is reversed and a permit is
issued or issued without special conditions.



   (G)   The City Manager may, but is not required to, conduct a
hearing at a time and place determined at the City Manager's sole discretion.



   (H)   In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any
notification to the requestor must set forth any modifications of the
Director's decision.



   (I)   The City Manager's decision is final. There is no right to a
City Council appeal.



(Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



      132.   WEAPONS CONTROL



      133.   AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section




Intoxicating Substances




   130.01   Inhaling or drinking certain substances prohibited



   130.02   Drinking in public places unlawful




Gambling




   130.15   Gambling houses unlawful



   130.16   Use of house as gambling house unlawful



   130.17   Playing of certain games unlawful



   130.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Crimes against the person and against public decency and good morals,
see Cal. Penal Code §§ 261 et seq.



INTOXICATING SUBSTANCES



§ 130.01  INHALING OR DRINKING CERTAIN SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall inhale, breathe or drink any compound, liquid,
chemical, or any substance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, or
any other material or substance or combination thereof with the intent of
becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational, or in any other
manner changing, distorting or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process,
balance, or coordination of such person.  For the purpose of this
subchapter, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an
intoxicated condition.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not pertain to any person
who inhales, breathes, or drinks such material or substance pursuant to the
direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist, or
podiatrist authorized so to direct or prescribe.



('81 Code, § 9.04.010)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, it is unlawful for
any person to drink any alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of
any alcoholic beverage:



      (1)   Upon any street, sidewalk, pathway, parking lot,
highway, alley, or other public property;



      (2)   In any public school grounds or buildings, bleachers or
stadium thereon; or



      (3)   In any public park.



   (B)   The prohibitions in this section do not apply to:



      (1)   At the public park identified as “Mill Park” as
indicated by posted signs at the park;



      (2)   A group operating an organized event according to the
conditions of a permit issued by the city pursuant to this code that allows
consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages; or



      (3)   An outdoor dining facility that serves alcoholic
beverages pursuant to the terms of a permit issued by the state or the city.



('81 Code, § 9.04.020)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79; Ord. 801, passed  -
-84; Ord. 948, passed  - -91; Ord. 1127, passed 12-20-04)  Penalty, see §
130.99



GAMBLING



§ 130.15  GAMBLING HOUSES UNLAWFUL.



   It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, to keep, conduct or maintain within the city any house, room,
apartment or place, used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place
where any game not mentioned in Cal. Penal Code §§ 330, 330a and 337a is
played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device for
money, checks, chops, credit or any other representation of value.



('81 Code, § 9.12.010)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.16  USE OF HOUSE AS GAMBLING HOUSE UNLAWFUL.



   It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, knowingly to permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by
him or under his charge or control in the city to be used, in whole or in
part, as a gambling house or place for playing, conducting, dealing or
carrying on any game not mentioned in Cal. Penal Code §§ 330, 330a, and
337a, with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or
any other representation of value.



('81 Code, § 9.12.020)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.17  PLAYING OF CERTAIN GAMES UNLAWFUL.



   It is unlawful for any person to play or bet at any game not mentioned
in Cal. Penal Code §§ 330, 330a and 337a, which is played, conducted or
carried on with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit
or any other representation of value at any place within the corporate limits
of the city.



('81 Code, § 9.12.030)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor and
punishable according to Chapter 12 of this code.



('81 Code, § 9.12.040)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section




Curfew




   131.01   Minors in public places after 10:00 p.m. prohibited



   131.02   Parents permitting violation of curfew prohibited



   131.03   Loitering



   131.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Crimes against the public peace, see Cal. Penal Code §§ 403 et seq.



   CURFEW



§ 131.01  MINORS IN PUBLIC PLACES AFTER 10:00 P.M. PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
play, loiter or remain on or about the public streets, highways, alleys,
parks, playgrounds, public places, public buildings, place of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, or to be in any
automobile parked upon any public street or in motion thereon, between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and the time of sunrise of the following day, when not
accompanied by his parent or legal guardian having legal custody and control
of such person, or spouse of such person, over 21 years of age.



   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian;



      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by a parent, guardian,
or custodian;



      (3)   Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity as
directed by a parent, guardian, or custodian; or



      (4)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:



         (a)   Lawful employment;



         (b)   A lawful athletic, educational, entertainment,
religious, or social event; or



         (c)   Interstate travel.



('81 Code, § 9.16.010)  (Am. Ord. 994, passed 3-18-96)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.02  PARENTS PERMITTING VIOLATION OF CURFEW PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the
legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of 18 years to
allow or permit such person to violate § 131.01.



('81 Code, § 9.16.020)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.03  LOITERING.



   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in
a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals
under circum-stances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property
in the vicinity.  Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes
flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or
herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any
object.  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would other-wise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself
or herself and to explain his or her presence or conduct.  No person shall
be convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by the
police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.  Any police
officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or prowler
without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in arresting the
suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect's escape.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned
by a police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been
posted, to loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public
sidewalk, street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of
private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct
unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon.  It shall
be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the
entrance to any building open to the public.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACEhas the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:  an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general
public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment,
and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds
enclosing them.



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty
provided in Chapter 13 of this code.



   (B)   (1)   Minors who violate any of the provisions of §§
131.01 through 131.03 shall be dealt with under the provisions of the
California Welfare and Institutions Code.



      (2)   Any parent, guardian or other adult person who violates
§§ 131.01 through 131.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
according to Chapter 13 of this code.



('81 Code, § 9.16.060)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79)



CHAPTER 132:  WEAPONS CONTROL



Section



   132.01   Definition



   132.02   Permit to discharge firearms required



   132.03   Permit to carry concealed weapon required; authority to
issue; numbering and contents



   132.04   Record of permits issued; registration fees



   132.05   Unlawful acts by person with concealed deadly or dangerous
weapon



   132.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Weapons, see Cal. Penal Code §§ 12000  et seq.



§ 132.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEADLY OR DANGEROUS WEAPONS.  This includes, but is not limited to,
the following:



      (1)   Any dirk or dagger;



      (2)   Any knife with a blade three inches or more in length,
and any snap-blade or spring-blade knife, regardless of the length of the
blade;



      (3)   Any ice pick or similar sharp stabbing tool;



      (4)   Any straight-edge razor or any razor blade fitted to a
handle;



      (5)   Any dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of any
law of the state restricting the use thereof;



      (6)   Any cutting, stabbing or bludgeoning weapon or device
capable of inflicting grievous bodily harm; and



      (7)   Any firearm other than one carried pursuant to a valid
permit, issued by a duly authorized governmental authority; or an ordinary
rifle or shotgun lawfully carried for purposes of hunting or other lawful
sport.



('81 Code, § 9.24.010)



§ 132.02  PERMIT TO DISCHARGE FIREARMS REQUIRED.



   No person shall fire, shoot or discharge any gun, rifle, pistol or
other firearm, or any air gun, air rifle or air pistol or any spring gun,
spring rifle or spring pistol, or any carbon dioxide or other gas-operated
gun, rifle or pistol, without having first obtained a written permit from the
Chief of Police or other police officer designated by him.



('81 Code, § 9.24.020)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  PERMIT TO CARRY CONCEALED WEAPON REQUIRED; AUTHORITY TO ISSUE;
NUMBERING AND CONTENTS.



   (A)   No person, except a peace officer, shall wear or in any manner
carry concealed upon his person any loaded or unloaded gun, pistol or
revolver, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon permitted to be carried by
law, without having, at the same time, actually in his possession and upon
his person, an unexpired permit to do so issued by the Chief of Police or
other police officer designated by him.



('81 Code, § 9.24.030)



   (B)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall have the power to issue to
any person who, in his judgment, shall have such privilege, a written permit
to carry concealed any of the weapons specified in division (A) of this
section.



      (2)   Such permits shall be numbered con-secutively in the
order in which they are issued.



      (3)   No permit shall be granted for a longer period than 12
months.



      (4)   Each such permit shall state the name, address and
occupation of the person to whom the same is issued, and the date of its
expiration, and shall specify the kind and description of weapon authorized
to be carried concealed by such person.



('81 Code, § 9.24.040)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  RECORD OF PERMITS ISSUED; REGISTRATION FEES.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all permits issued
by him under § 132.03(B).



   (B)   No permit required by § 132.03(A) shall be issued to any
person until such person has paid to the Chief of Police or other police
officer designated by him a registration fee in an amount to be established
by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall pay to the City Treasurer, weekly,
all such registration fees received during the preceding week for deposit in
the general fund.



('81 Code, § 9.24.050)



§ 132.05  UNLAWFUL ACTS BY PERSON WITH CONCEALED DEADLY OR DANGEROUS WEAPON.



   (A)   Possession where liquor is sold.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to carry concealed upon his or her person any dangerous or deadly
weapon or to carry any dangerous or deadly weapon upon or about any place
where intoxicating liquors are sold.



   (B)   Engaging in fight or disorderly conduct.  It is unlawful for
any person who has concealed upon his person or who has in his immediate
physical possession any deadly or dangerous weapon to engage in any fight or
to participate in any other rough or disorderly conduct upon any public place
or way or upon the premises of another.



   (C)   Possession of weapon in automobile.  It is unlawful for any
person to have in his possession, in any automobile, any dangerous or deadly
weapon, but this restriction shall not be deemed to prohibit the carrying of
ordinary tools or equipment carried in good faith for uses of honest work,
trade or business, or for the purpose of legitimate sport or recreation.



('81 Code, § 9.24.060)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable according
to Chapter 13 of this code.



('81 Code, § 9.24.070)  (Ord. 726, passed  - -79)



CHAPTER 133:  AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION



Section



   133.01   Purpose



   133.02   Definitions



   133.03   Inapplicability



   133.04   Prohibited actions: public places; public restrooms; motor
vehicles; public transportation vehicles



   133.05   Prohibited actions: automated tellers and facilities



   133.06   Prohibited actions: parking lots



   133.07   Warning



§ 133.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with Article XI, § 7 of the
California Constitution for the purpose of protecting the community from
aggressive solicitors who, through their actions, intimidate the public;
inhibit pedestrian and vehicle traffic; and interfere with the public’s
customary and enjoyable use of private and public property.



(Ord. 1229, passed 6-21-10)



§ 133.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of words and phrases used in
this chapter:



   AFTER DARK means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half
hour before sunrise.



   AGGRESSIVE MANNER means any of the following:



      (1)   Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a
person before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct
is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to:



         (a)   Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage
to or loss of property, or



         (b)   Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or
other thing of value;



      (2)   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with
another person or an occupied vehicle without that person’s consent in the
course of soliciting, asking or begging;



      (3)   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or
free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle, by any means, or the blocking or
interfering with pedestrian or vehicular access to any building, including
unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action
to avoid physical contact or to gain entrance to a building;



      (4)   Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person
solicited either before, during or after soliciting, asking, or begging;



      (5)   Persisting in closely following or approaching a person,
after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by
words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not
want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or



      (6)   Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is
inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before,
during, or after solicitation.



   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE means any electronic information processing
device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit,
or convenience account.



   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY means the area comprised of one or
more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made
available to banking customers after regular banking hours.



   BANK means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank,
banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking
institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and
any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation.



   CHECK CASHING BUSINESS means any person duly licensed as a check
seller, bill payer, or prorater pursuant to Cal. Fin. Code §§ 12000 et seq.



   COMMERCIAL PARKING AREA means privately owned property which is
designed or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one
or more commercial establishments.



   CREDIT UNION means any federal credit union and any state-chartered
credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the
National Credit Union Administration.



   PUBLIC PLACE means a place to which the public or a substantial group
of persons has access, including, without limitation, any street, highway,
sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of
amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby, and
other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house, or hotel not
constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence.



   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE means any vehicle, including a trailer
bus, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten or more persons, including
the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten
persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire.



   SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION means any federal savings and loan
association and any “insured institution” as defined in Section 401 of
the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined
in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act, as may be amended from time to
time.



   SOLICIT, ASK, OR BEG includes using the spoken, written, or printed
word, or bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining
an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting he sale
of goods or services. Purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its
value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that
the purchase is in substance a donation, is a donation for the purpose of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1229, passed 6-21-10)



§ 133.03  INAPPLICABILITY.



   A person is not soliciting for the purpose of this chapter when the
person passively displays a sign or gives any other indication that the
person is seeking donations, and where the person does not address his or her
solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by
that person.



(Ord. 1229, passed 6-21-10)



§ 133.04  PROHIBITED ACTIONS: PUBLIC PLACES; PUBLIC RESTROOMS; MOTOR
VEHICLES; PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to solicit, ask or beg in an
aggressive manner in any public place.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to solicit, ask, or beg in any
public restroom or within 15 feet of the entrance to a public restroom.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to approach an operator or
occupant of a motor vehicle for the purpose of soliciting, asking or begging
while such vehicle is located in any public place.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to solicit, ask or begs in any
public transportation vehicle.



(Ord. 1229, passed 6-21-10)



§ 133.05  PROHIBITED ACTIONS: AUTOMATED TELLERS AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to solicit, ask or beg within 15
feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within
15 feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for
customers use. When an automated teller machine is located within an
automated teller machine facility, distance is measured from the entrance or
exit of the automated teller machine facility.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to solicit, ask or beg within an
automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should
know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or
other person lawfully in possession of such facility.



      (1)   Nothing in this section may be construed to prohibit the
lawful vending of goods and services within an automated teller machine
facility.



      (2)   This section does not apply to any unenclosed automated
teller machine located within any building, structure, or space whose primary
purpose of function is unrelated to banking activities, including, without
limitation, supermarkets, airports, and school buildings, provided that such
automated teller machine is available for use only during the regular hours
of operation of the building, structure, or space in which such machine is
located.



(Ord. 1229, passed 6-21-10)



§ 133.06  PROHIBITED ACTIONS: PARKING LOTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to solicit, ask or beg in any parking lot
or structure any time after dark. This prohibition does not apply to any of
the following:



   (A)   Solicitations related to business which is being conducted on
the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants;



   (B)   Solicitations related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or



   (C)   Solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the
operator or other occupant of a vehicle.



(Ord. 1229, passed 6-21-10)



§ 133.07  WARNING.



   Before any law enforcement officer may cite or arrest a person under
this chapter, the officer must warn the person that his or her conduct
violates this chapter and must give the person an opportunity to comply with
this chapter.



(Ord. 1229, passed 6-21-10)




TITLE XV:  LAND USE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



      152.   MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS



      153.   [RESERVED]



      154.   SWIMMING POOLS



      155.   [RESERVED]



      156.   ZONING



      157.   PAY PHONE PERMITS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




California Administrative Provisions




   150.001   Adopted by reference



   150.002   Amendments, additions and deletions




California Building Code




   150.015   Adopted by reference




California Plumbing Code




   150.025   Adopted by reference



   150.026   Amendments, additions and deletions




California Fire Code




   150.035   Adopted by reference



   150.036   Amendments, additions and deletions



International Urban-Wildland Interface Code



   150.040   Adopted by reference




California Electrical Code




   150.045   Adopted by reference



   150.046   Amendments, additions and deletions




California Mechanical Code




   150.055   Adopted by reference



   150.056   Amendments, additions and deletions




California Residential Code




   150.075   Adopted by reference




California Green Building Standards Code




   150.085   Adopted by reference




Post-Disaster Safety Assessment Placards




   150.095   Scope



   150.096   Application of provisions



   150.097   Definitions



   150.098   Placards




Post-Disaster Abatement




   150.110   Intent



   150.111   Application of provisions



   150.112   Definitions



   150.113   Abatement criteria



   150.114   Hazard abatement of historic buildings or structures




Disaster Repair and Reconstruction




   150.125   Intent



   150.126   Application of provisions



   150.127   Definitions



   150.128   Repair criteria



   150.129   Repair criteria for chimneys



   150.130   Repair criteria for historic buildings or structures



   150.131   Repair criteria for unreinforced masonry buildings and
structures




International Property Maintenance Code




   150.150   Adopted by reference



   150.151   Amendments, additions and deletions




California Energy Code




   150.160   Adopted by reference



California Referenced Standards Code



   150.170   Adopted by reference



International Existing Building Code



   150.180   Adopted by reference



 



   150.999   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate buildings and construction, see Cal. Gov't Code 
§§ 38601 and 38660



   Housing construction, see Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 17910 et seq.



CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 50022.1 to 50022.8, inclusive,
Division II Scope of Administration of 2016 Edition, published by the
California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130,
Sacramento, CA 95833-2936 is adopted by reference. This subchapter will not
be applicable to §§ 150.035 and 150.036, Chapter 151, and Chapter 16.106.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



§ 150.002  AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.



   (A)   Exempted Work.  Section [A]105.2 is amended and the following
provisions are added respectively to read:



   Building:



      1.   One-story detached accessory buildings not over 12 feet
in height used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, gazebos and similar
uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the
building has no plumbing, electrical or mechanical.



      2.   (a)   Fences not over 6 feet high.



         (b)   Masonry and/or concrete walls not over 3 feet 6
inches high.



      4.   Retaining walls which are not over 3 feet in height from
the top of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge
or impounding flammable liquids.



      10.   Deleted.



      12.   Awning supported by an exterior wall less than 3 lb. per
square foot when projecting not more than 54 square inches.



      14.   Dish receivers, antennas and flagpoles (including
supports):



         (a)   Dish receivers 18 inches or less in diameter, or
antennas, less than 30 feet in height and connected to the roof or structure.



         (b)   Dish receivers 18 inches or less in diameter, or
antennas, less than 50 feet in height and connected to the ground.



         (c)   Flagpoles less than 15 feet connected to the roof
or structure.



         (d)   Flagpoles less than 25 feet connected to the
ground only.



         (e)   Dish receivers 18 inches or less in diameter or
dish receivers less than 10 feet in height connected to the ground.



   Electrical



      1.   Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by
means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an
approved receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by the Electrical
Code.



      2.   Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers or
fixed approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same location.



      3.   Temporary decorative lighting.



      4.   Repair or replacement of current- carrying parts of any
switch, contactor or control device.



      5.   Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not
the outlets.



      6.   Repair or replacement of any over current device of the
required capacity in the same location.



      7.   Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of
the same size and capacity for the signs or gas tube systems.



      8.   Taping joints.



      9.   Removal of electrical wiring.



      10.   Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable
experimental laboratories.



      11.   The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or
television stage sets.



      12.   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or
equipment operating at less than 25 volts, and not capable of supplying more
than 50 watts of energy.



      13.   Low-energy power, control and signal circuits of Class
II and Class III as defined in the electrical Code.



      14.   A permit will not be required for the installation,
alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or  equipment or the
generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in
the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a public or
private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility.



   (B)   Permits. Section 105.2 is to read as follows:



      [A]105.2.1. Expiration. Every permit issued by the building
official will expire by limitation and become null and void if the work
authorized by such permit is not commenced, continued, or completed as
follows:



      a)   Work not commenced. If the work authorized by the permit
is not commenced within one (1) calendar year after the building official
issues the permit. Work is presumed to have commenced if the permittee
obtained a required inspection approval of work authorized by the permit.



      b)   Work stopped. If the work authorized by the permit
commenced, but is subsequently stopped for a period of six (6) consecutive
calendar months. Work is presumed to be stopped if the permittee has not
obtained a required inspection approval of work authorized by the permit
within the preceding six (6) month period.



      c)   Completion of work. Work authorized by a permit must be
completed within three (3) calendar years from the date the building official
issues the permit.Upon expiration of a permit, before work can be
recommenced, a renewal permit must be obtained as specified in Section
105.5.1.



      [A]105.5.1. Renewal. An expired permit may be renewed as follows:



      a)   Work not commenced. When a permit has expired because
work was not commenced within one (1) year from the date of permit issuance,
a renewal permit may be obtained provided:



      1.   The plans for the proposed work are essentially the same
as originally approved and permitted.



      2.   The expiration has not exceeded two (2) years from the
original issuance date;



      3.   The same edition of the technical codes are in effect as
used in the initial plan approval, or the plans have been updated to comply
with the codes currently in effect;



      4.   All city approvals required before the building official
issued a permit, including, without limitation, grading, zoning, fire code,
water and sewer connection, or other limitations customarily placed on such
permits, are currently valid at the time of issuance of the renewal permit.



         The fee for a renewal permit will be one-half (1/2) the
amount required for a new permit.



      b)   Work stopped. When a permit expires because work
authorized by the permit commenced but subsequently stopped for a period of
six (6) months, a renewal permit may be obtained provided:



      1.   The plans for the proposed work are essentially the same
as originally approved and permitted;



      2.   The expiration did not exceed three (3) years from the
date the building official issued the original permit;



      3.   The same edition of the technical codes are in effect as
used in the initial plan approval, or the plans have been updated to comply
with the codes currently in effect;



      4.   All city approvals required before the building official
issued a permit, including, without limitation, grading, zoning, fire code,
water and sewer connection, or other limitations customarily placed on such
permits, are currently valid at the time of issuance of the renewal permit;



      The fee for a renewal permit will be one-half (1/2) the amount
required for a new permit, except where construction progressed and all
inspections were approved except for the final inspection, the fee for the
renewal permit will be one-quarter (1/4) the amount required for a new permit.



      c)   Work not completed within three years. When a permit
expires because the work authorized by the permit was not complete within
three (3) years from the date the building official originally issued the
permit, a renewal permit may not be issued except upon action of the board of
appeals. The board of appeals may grant up to one (1) year additional time to
complete the work if it finds that:



      1.   The permittee diligently pursued completion of the work
authorized by the permit, but for good cause has not been able to complete
the work within the three (3) year limitation;



      2.   The permittee is not in violation of the permit
conditions, the technical codes, or any city or state code applicable to the
construction project;



      3.   The remaining work can be completed reasonably within the
additional time allotted.



      4.   All city approvals required before the building official
issued a permit, including, without limitation, grading, zoning, fire code,
water and sewer connection, or other limitations customarily placed on such
permits, are currently valid at the time the building official issues a
renewal permit;



      The fee for a renewal permit is one-half (1/2) the amount
required for a new permit, except where construction progressed and all
inspections were approved except for the final inspection, the fee for the
renewal permit is one-quarter (1/4) the amount required for a new permit.



      [A]105.5.2. Extension of an unexpired permit. The building
official may extend the time for action by a permittee to commence work, or
complete the work authorized by a permit within the three (3) year
limitation, for a period not exceeding six (6) months upon written request by
the permittee showing that circumstances, beyond the control of the permittee
prevented action from being taken. Not more than one such extension may be
granted. No extension may be granted when work stopped and the permit is
subject to expiration as described above.



   (C)   Fees.  Sections [A]109.2 the following provision is added to
read:



      Section [A]109.2.  Fees must be established by ordinance of the
City Council.



      a.   Investigative fees: work without a permit. Section
[A]109.2.1 is added as follows:



         [A]109.2.1  FEE.  An investigation fee, in addition to
the permit fee, will be collected whether or not a permit is then or
subsequently issued. The investigation fee will be equal to the amount of the
permit fee set forth in the Fee Schedule as adopted by this jurisdiction. The
payment of such investigation fee will not exempt any person from compliance
with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes from any
penalty prescribed by law.



      b.   Special processing fees.  Section [A]109.4 is modified
by adding Sections [A]109.4.1 and [A]109.4.2 to read as follows:



         [A]109.4.1  SPECIAL PROCESSING. When-ever any work for
which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first
obtaining a permit, a special processing review must be made before a permit
may be issued for such work.



         [A]109.4.2  FEE. A special processing fee, in addition to
the permit and investigation fee, will be collected whether or not a permit
is then or subsequently issued. The processing fee will be established by the
Fee Schedule as adopted by this jurisdiction. The payment of such processing
fee will not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of
either this code or the technical codes nor from any penalty prescribed by
law.



      c.   Fire damage inspection. The following will be added as
Section [A]109.7:



         [A]109.7:  A fire damage inspection will be required after
a fire which caused building, plumbing, electrical, or mechanical damage.



      d.   Business license inspection.  The following will be
added as Section [A]109.8:



         [A]109.8: A business license inspection will be required
with the issuance of a City business license for a new business, relocated
business, or a change of ownership.



      e.   Special Inspection.  The following will be added as
Section [A]109.9:



         [A]109.9:  When the building official determines to
achieve compliance with this code a special inspection or observation may be
required by the building official.



      f.   Board of Appeals.  Section [A]113 is deleted and the
following sections are added:



      [A]113.1 General.  The board of appeals is designated to hear
and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
building official relative to the application and interpretations of the
technical code. The building official will be an ex officio member and act as
secretary to the board but not have voting rights upon any matter before the
board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting
its investigations and will render all its decisions and findings on
contested matters, in writing to the building official, with a duplicate copy
for any appellant or contestant affected by such decision or finding, and may
recommend to the city council appropriate new legislation.



      [A]113.2 Applicability to Codes.  The appeals board will serve
as the appellate board or body whenever any of the codes adopted by reference
provides for same. The appeals board will also act as the general appeals
board for other city construction related adopted regulations.



      [A]113.3 Hearing Process.  Appeals to the board will be
processed in accordance with this Code and on application forms provided by
the building official. A fee established by city council resolution will
accompany an application for a hearing before the board of appeals. The fee
is refundable should the appellant prevail in a decision by the board. Copies
of any rules and regulations adopted by the board must be delivered to the
building official, who will make them freely accessible to the public. The
board’s decision constitutes the City’s final decision.



      [A]113.4 Limitations of Authority.  The board of appeals has no
authority to interpret the administrative provisions of this code or to waive
requirements of this code or the technical codes.



      g.   Violations.  Section [A]114 is amended by adding Section
[A]114.5 to the following:



      [A]114.5.  To the extent that any of the provisions adopted by
reference in this Title differ with the provisions of Chapter 13, and 14 the
provisions of Chapter 13, and 14 will govern.



      Whenever an act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful
or an offense or the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act
is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor in any of the codes adopted by
reference in this Title, the violation of any such provision will be subject
to punishment pursuant to the  provisions of Chapter 13, and 14 of this code.



      h.   Notice of Noncompliance. Section [A]116.3.1 is added to
read as follows:



      [A]116.3.1 Notice of Noncompliance.  Whenever the building
official determines that work was done on, over, or in any property in the
city without the required permit, or has otherwise not been completed in
accordance with the requirements of this code, the building official may
record a Notice of Noncompliance for that property with the office of the
County Recorder and notify the owner of the property of such action. The
Notice of Noncompliance will describe the property, will set forth the
conditions violating this code, and will state that the property owner has
been so notified.



   The Building Official must submit a Release of Noncompliance Notice to
the County Recorder when it is determined that the conditions violating this
code were corrected or removed. A fee as established by city council
resolution may be charged to the property owner for submitting a Release of
Noncompliance Notice.



      i.   Toilet facilities for workers.  The following Section
[A]117 will be added:



      [A]117.  Any person having charge of or causing work or projects
to be performed, which involves workers, must provide on the premises or
immediately adjacent, sanitary toilet facilities which are approved by the
Building Official.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1112, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07;
Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14)



CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE



§ 150.015  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain code known as the California Building Code, Volumes I and
II, (CBC) 2016 Edition, published by the California Building Standards
Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936, is
adopted by reference.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE



§ 150.025  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain code known as the California Plumbing Code 2016 Edition,
published by the California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park
Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 93833-2936, is adopted by reference, subject
to local amendments, additions and deletions.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



§ 150.026  AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.



   Administrative.  Division II of the 2016 California Plumbing Code
entitled Administration, are deleted from the 2016 California Plumbing Code,
and adopted in § 150.001 will apply to this chapter.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE



§ 150.035  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain code designated as the California Fire Code 2016 Edition,
published by the California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park
Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 93833-2936 is adopted by reference, subject
to the local amendments, additions and deletions set forth in § 150.036.



(Ord. 991, passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



§ 150.036  AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.



   (A)   Premises Identification. Section 505.1 is amended and the
following provisions are added respectively to read:



      505.1 Premises Identification. Numbers and letters must be a
minimum of 6 inches in height for commercial, and 12 inches in height for
industrial buildings and units and must not be located on doors or other
areas that will be obstructed from view.



   (B)   Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Section 903.2 is amended and the
following provisions are added respectively to read:



      903.2.20 In any existing building when any addition, or series of
additions, to that building, including but limited to lofts, mezzanines,
store rooms, or connected storage buildings increase the overall floor area
of the building by 500 square feet or more. In the case of any existing
single family residence, when addition or series of additions increase the
overall floor area of the residence by 1000 square feet or more.



      903.2.20 Exception:



      1.   Detached Group U occupancies less than 500 square feet.



      903.2.3 In any existing building before a change in its occupancy
classification to a group A, E, H, I, R1, R3, S1, S2, S3 occupancy from any
other occupancy classification as determined by current code definitions with
respect to currently permitted and proposed uses.



      903.2.4 High-piled storage. An automatic sprinkler system must be
provided as required in Chapter 23 in all buildings of Group M where storage
of merchandise is in high piled or rack storage arrays.



      903.2.5 Rubbish and linen chutes. An automatic sprinkler system
must be installed at the top of rubbish and linen chutes and in their
terminal rooms. Chutes extending through three or more floors must have
additional sprinkler heads installed within such chutes at alternate floors.
Chute sprinklers must be accessible for servicing.



   (C)   Roof Coverings. Section 705 is added as follows:



      All new buildings must be constructed with Class A roof
coverings. When 50% or more of the roof of an existing building is recovered,
Class A roof covering must be used, except when the existing roof support
structure will not support the weight of a Class A roof covering, Class B
roof covering may be approved with the consent of the fire official or
building official. Notwithstanding the forgoing, wood shake or wood shingles
roof covering are prohibited.



   (D)   Division II. Are hereby adopted as part of this code with
modifications as listed in this section.



      (i)   Division II, section 108 is deleted and the following is
added:



      108   General. The board of appeals is designated to hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire
official relative to the application and interpretations of the technical
code. The fire official will be an ex officio member and act as secretary to
the board but not have voting rights upon any matter before the board. The
board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and will render all its decisions and findings on contested
matters, in writing to the fire official, with a duplicate copy for any
appellant or contestant affected by such decision or finding, and may
recommend to the city council appropriate new legislation.



      108.1   Applicability to Codes. The appeals board will serve
as the appellate board or body whenever any of the codes adopted by reference
provides for same. The appeals board will also act as the general appeals
board for other city construction related adopted regulations



      108.2   Hearing Process. Appeals to the board will be
processed in accordance with this Code and on application forms provided by
the fire official. A fee established by city council resolution will
accompany an application for a hearing before the board of appeals. The fee
is refundable should the appellant prevail in a decision by the board. Copies
of any rules and regulations adopted by the board must be delivered to the
building official, who will make them freely accessible to the public. The
board's decision constitutes the City's final decision.



      108.3   Limitations of Authority. The board of appeals has no
authority to interpret the administrative provisions of this code or to waive
requirements of this code or the technical codes.



      (ii)   Violations. Section 109 is amended by adding Section
109.4 to the following:



      109.4   To the extent that any of the provisions adopted by
reference in this Title differ with the provisions of Chapter 13, and 14, the
provisions of Chapter 13, and 14 will govern.



   Whenever an act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is
declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor in any of the codes adopted by
reference in this Title, the violation of any such provision will be subject
to punishment pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 13, and 14 of this code.



(Ord. 991, passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1113, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07;
Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14)



INTERNATIONAL URBAN-WILDLAND INTERFACE CODE



§ 150.040  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain code known as the International Urban-Wildland Interface
Code 2012 Edition is adopted by reference.



(Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE



§ 150.045  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain code known as the California Electrical Code, 2016
Edition, published by the California Building Standards Commission, 2525
Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936, is adopted by
reference.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE



§ 150.055  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain code designated as the California Mechanical Code, 2016
Edition, published by the California Building Standards Commission, 2525
Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 93833-2936, is adopted by
reference.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



§ 150.056  AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.



   Administration. Division II of the 2013 California Mechanical Code
entitled Administration is deleted from the 2013 California Mechanical Code
and adopted in § 150.001 of this chapter will apply to this chapter.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14)



CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



§ 150.075  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain code known as the California Residential Code 2016
Edition, published by the California Building Standards Commission, 2525
Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936, is adopted by
reference.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1233,
passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE



§ 150.085  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain code known as the California Green Building Standards Code
2016 Edition, published by the California Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas
Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936, is adopted by reference,
subject to amendments, additions and deletions.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 1059,
passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



POST-DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS



§ 150.095  SCOPE.



   This subchapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate
the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or
man-made disaster.  It further authorizes the Inspection Services as well as
authorized representatives to post appropriate placards at each entry point
to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



§ 150.096  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter are applicable to all buildings and
structures of all occupancies regulated by the city following each natural or
man-made disaster.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



§ 150.097  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of this subchapter, or duly
authorized representative.



   SAFETY ASSESSMENT.  A visual examination of a building or structure
for the purpose of determining whether continued occupancy is appropriate
following a natural or man-made disaster.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



§ 150.098  PLACARDS.



   (A)   The following official placards shall be used to designate the
condition of buildings or structures following a disaster.



      (1)   “INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted” may be
posted on any building or structure where no apparent hazard has been
found.  Placement of this placard does not mean that there is no damage to
the building or structure.



      (2)   “RESTRICTED OR LIMITED ENTRY” may be posted on each
damaged building or structure where the damage has created a hazardous
condition which justifies restricted occupancy.  The Building Official who
posts this placard will note in general terms the hazard created and will
clearly and concisely note the restrictions on occupancy.



      (3)   “UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy” may be posted on
each damaged building or structure such that continued occupancy poses a
threat to life or health.  Buildings or structures posted with this placard
may be entered only after authorization in writing by the Building
Official.  Safety assessment teams are authorized to enter these buildings
at any time.  This placard must not be used or considered as a demolition
order.  The official who posts this placard shall note in general terms
damage encountered.



   (B)   Once the placard has been attached to a building or structure,
it must not be removed, altered or covered until authorized by the Building
Official.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)  Penalty, see §
150.999



POST-DISASTER ABATEMENT



§ 150.110  INTENT.



   This subchapter establishes abatement criteria for all buildings and
structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has
been declared by the City Council.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



§ 150.111  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter are applicable to all buildings and
structures regulated by the city.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



§ 150.112  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EVENT.  Any occurrence which results in the declaration of a disaster
by the City Council, including without limitation, wind storms, earthquakes,
and floods.



   HISTORIC BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.  Any building or structure registered
with a federal, state, county, or city government, or the register of points
of interest.  HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES will also include those
buildings and structures within a recognized historic district.



   STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER (SHPO).  The person appointed by
the Governor, pursuant to § 101(b)(1) of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966, being 16 USC 470a(b)(1), as amended, to administer the State
Historic Preservation Program.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



§ 150.113  ABATEMENT CRITERIA.



   (A)   Notice of determination.  Except as provided in division (B)
below, the Building Official will serve a written notice of determination to
each property owner as found on the latest available copy of the County
Assessor's Role.  Said notice of determination may be delivered by
hand-delivery, telephone, telegram, facsimile or other reasonable means, and
must clearly indicate that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous
and that, as such, it constitutes a public nuisance.  The notice must set
forth those factors which, in the opinion of the Building Official, make the
structure an imminent hazard and dangerous, and must also include a directive
from the Building Official of the specific action or actions to be taken by
the property owner.  The notice must specify that within 48 hours from the
time of issuance of the notice of determination, the owner or other party of
record with an equitable or legal interest in said property shall abate the
nuisance in accordance with the directives written in the notice of
determination by the Building Official.



   (B)   Notice of determination exception.  No  notice shall be
required when the Building Official, after considering all the facts,
determines, in writing, that the structure is an imminent hazard and
dangerous, and that it must be abated immediately and that time and
circumstances do not permit the giving of notice to the owner.  In those
cases where time and circumstances do not permit the city to give the owner
notice before abatement, the Building Official may cause the nuisance to be
abated by the city with city resources or city contractees.



   (C)   Appeal of notice of determination.



      (1)   A notice of determination delivered by the Building
Official, that a building or structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous
and therefore must be abated, may be appealed by the property owner or any
other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in said property. 
Such appeal must be made to the Building Official within 48 hours of delivery
of such notice of determination by the Building Official.
Such appeal must be accompanied by a written Hazard Abatement Plan signed by
a State of California licensed engineer or architect or by a written report
by a State of California licensed engineer or architect stating why the
engineer or architect feels the building or structure is not an imminent
hazard or dangerous at this time.  Such report must include a recommendation
by the engineer or architect as to what should and/or should not be done at
this time.  If the Building Official accepts the proposed Hazard Abatement
Plan in lieu of the notice of determination, the Hazard Abatement Plan must
be implemented within 24 hours of acceptance by the Building Official.  If
the Building Official accepts an engineer's report and agrees there is no
imminent hazard, the Building Official must rescind in writing his former
notice of determination.



      (2)   Should the Building Official disagree with the Hazard
Abatement Plan, or should the Building Official disagree with the engineer's
or architect's report, a hearing must be conducted within 24 hours by the
City Board of Appeals.



   (D)   Board of Appeals hearing.



      (1)   At the hearing, the appellant shall have the right to
call witnesses, submit evidence and to cross-examine the witnesses of the
city.  All witnesses must be sworn.



      (2)   A record of the entire proceedings will be made by tape
recording.  Any relevant evidence may be submitted regardless of the
existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the
admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in the courts of
this state.



      (3)   At the close of this hearing, the Board of Appeals will
act to either uphold, overrule or modify the determination and order of the
Building Official.  The determination and order of the Building Official
will be upheld, unless the Board of Appeals finds, based upon the evidence in
the record, that the Building Official erred in determining that the
structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous.  The decision of the Board of
Appeals, with the reasons therefor, may be given orally on the record.  If
given orally, the decision must be memorialized in writing and served upon
the applicant within 24 hours of the time the oral decision is rendered.



      (4)   If the Board of Appeals upholds the decision of the
Building Official, the property owners of record will be ordered to abate the
public nuisance within the time set forth in the order.  If the structure is
determined not to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, the Building
Official's determination and order will be vacated.  The decision of the
Board of Appeals will be final on the date it is rendered.



   (E)   Hazard Abatement Plan.



      (1)   If a Hazard Abatement Plan is approved by the Building
Official, the owner or other interested party of record must execute such
plan within 24 hours of obtaining approval of the plan from the Building
Official or Public Works Engineer/Director, or his designee.  Within 24
hours of completion of the abatement work, the owner or other interested
party of record will provide the Building Official with a written
certification that the public nuisance, as described in the Building
Official's notice of hazard, has been abated.



      (2)   If the work performed pursuant to the Hazard Abatement
Plan amounts to temporary abatement, the owner or other party of record,
before proceeding with permanent repairs, must obtain required permits and
file a damage assessment report with the Building Official.  The damage
assessment report must be reviewed and approved by the Building Official
before permanent repairs are performed.



   (F)   Failure to perform.  In those instances where the property
owner or other interested party of record either does not respond to the
Building Official's notice of hazard or approved Hazard Abatement Plan,
responds untimely, or responds timely but fails to abate the public nuisance
within the required time period, the imminent hazard and dangerous structure
will be subject to immediate abatement by the Building Official.



   (G)   Public nuisance.  All structures or portions which, after
inspection by an authorized city official, are determined to be an imminent
hazard and dangerous, either to the public, occupants of the subject
structure, or to any adjacent structures, are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and must be abated by the owner in accordance with the procedures
specified in divisions (D) and (E) of this section.



   (H)   Suspension of abatement work.  Notwithstanding any provisions
to the contrary, the Building Official is authorized to suspend abatement
work by the city, or the city's contractees, and to allow the property owner
or other party of legal interest to complete the abatement work.



   (I)   Change of status.  When the conditions making a structure an
imminent hazard and dangerous have been abated, the structure will no longer
be considered an imminent hazard and dangerous.  However, if the abatement
work is temporary in nature, as determined by the Building Official, the
structure will remain subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (J)   Demolition permit.  If the owner of any building or structure
has decided to demolish rather than repair, the owner, or the owner's
representative, must obtain a demolition permit.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



§ 150.114  HAZARD ABATEMENT OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Within 10 days after the event, the Building Official must
notify the State Historic Preservation Officer that one of the following
actions will be taken regarding any historic building or structure
deter-mined by the Building Official to represent an imminent hazard to the
health or safety of the public, or to pose an imminent threat to the public
right-of-way:



      (1)   Whenever possible, as determined by the Building
Official, the building or structure may be braced or shored in such a manner
as to mitigate the hazard to public health or safety or the hazard to the
public right-of-way.



      (2)   Whenever bracing or shoring is determined to be an
unreasonable alternative, the Building Official may cause the building or
structure to be condemned and immediately demolished. Such condemnation and
demolition may be performed in the interest of public health or safety
without a condemnation hearing as required by § 150.075 of this code.



   (B)   If, ten days after the event and less than 30 days after the
event, an historic building or structure is determined by the Building
Official to represent a hazard to the health or safety of the public or to
pose a threat to the public right-of-way, the Building Official may initiate
condemnation proceedings in accordance with § 150.075 of this code.  The
Building Official may also notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in
accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1986, being 16 USC
470 et seq., as amended, of its intent to hold a condemnation hearing.



   (C)   If the Building Official and the owner of any historic
building or structure agree that such a building or structure should be
demolished, the Building Official may submit a request to demolish to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, in accordance with the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1986, being 16 USC 470 et seq., as amended. Said request
must include all substantiating data.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



DISASTER REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION



§ 150.125  INTENT.



   This subchapter establishes standards and regulations for the
expeditious repair and reconstruction of structures damaged as a result of a
disaster for which a local emergency has been declared by the City Council. 
The subchapter does not allow exemptions from the building, fire, electrical,
mechanical, and plumbing codes, and other codes, or city ordinances.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)



§ 150.126  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter are applicable to all
buildings and structures regulated by the city following each disaster after
a local emergency has been declared by the City Council.



   (B)   The requirements of this subchapter may be waived by the
Building Official subject to an engineering evaluation as defined in §
150.127.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)



§ 150.127  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARCHITECT.  A person licensed by the State of California to practice
architecture as prescribed by the State of California Business and
Professions Code.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of this subchapter, or duly
authorized representative.



   CIVIL ENGINEER.  A person registered by the State of California to
practice civil engineering as prescribed by the State of California Business
and Professions Code.



   CURRENT CODE.  The edition of the Uniform Building Code published by
the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by the city in
accordance with operation of law pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code §
18938.  The edition to be applied shall be that edition in effect at the
time of the declaration of a local emergency by the City Council.



   ENGINEERING EVALUATION.  An evaluation of a damaged building or
structure, or suspected damaged building or structure, performed under the
direction of a structural engineer, civil engineer, or architect retained by
the owner of the building or structure.  ENGINEERING EVALUATIONS shall, at a
minimum, contain recommendations for repair with appropriate opinion of
construction cost for those repairs.  All ENGINEERING EVALUATIONS shall
include the engineer's or architect's stamp, wet-signature and license
expiration date.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICE FACILITY.  Those buildings or structures designated
by the city to house facilities necessary for emergency operations subsequent
to a disaster.



   REPLACEMENT VALUE.  The dollar value, as determined by a Building
Official, for replacing a damaged structure with a new structure of the same
size, same type of construction and same occupancy, and located on the same
site.



   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER.  A person registered by the State of California
to practice civil engineering and to use the title structural engineer as
defined in the State of California Business and Professions Code.



   VALUE OF REPAIR.  The dollar value, as determined by a Building
Official, for making necessary repairs to the damaged structure.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)



§ 150.128  REPAIR CRITERIA.



   Buildings and structures of all occupancies which have been damaged as
the result of a disaster, except as otherwise noted, shall be repaired in
accordance with the following criteria:



   (A)   When the estimated value of repair does not exceed 10% of the
replacement value of the structure, the damaged portion may be restored to
the pre-disaster condition; except that when the damaged elements include
suspended ceiling systems, the ceiling system shall be repaired with all
bracing required by current code.



   (B)   When the estimated value of repair is greater than 10% but
less than 50% of the replace-ment value of the structure, the damaged
elements shall be repaired and/or brought into conformance with the
structural requirements of the current codes.



   (C)   When the estimated value of repair is 50% or more of the
replacement value of the structure, the entire structure shall be brought
into conformance with the fire and life safety and structural require-ments
of the current applicable codes.



   (D)   In Group R, Division 3 occupancies, the repair value of
damaged chimneys may be excluded from the computation of percentage of
replacement value.  Damaged chimneys shall be repaired in accordance with §
150.129.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.129  REPAIR CRITERIA FOR CHIMNEYS.



   (A)   All damaged chimneys must be repaired or reconstructed to
comply with the requirements of Chapter 37 of the Uniform Building Code. 
Damaged portions of chimneys shall be removed in accordance with the
following criteria:



      (1)   When the damaged portion of the chimney is located
between the roof line and the top of the chimney, the damaged portion may be
removed to the roof line provided the roof and ceiling anchorage are in sound
condition.  The reconstruction portion of the chimney shall be braced to the
roof structure using an approved method.



      (2)   Of a single-story structure in which the damaged portion
of the chimney is below the roof line or the damaged portion extends from
above the roof line to below the roof line, the chimney may be removed to the
top of the firebox.



      (3)   For a multi-story structure, the damaged portion of the
chimney shall be removed from the top to a floor line where anchorage is
found.



      (4)   In any structure where the firebox has been damaged, the
entire chimney and firebox shall be removed to the foundation.  If the
foundation is in sound condition, the firebox and chimney may be
reconstructed using the existing foundation.  If the foundation has been
damaged, the foundation shall be removed and replaced.



   (B)   Where existing conditions preclude the installation of all
anchorage required by Chapter 37 of the Uniform Building Code, alternate
systems may be used in accordance with the alternate methods and materials
provisions of the Uniform Building Code when approved by the Building
Official.



   (C)   Where the portion of the chimney extending above the roof line
exceeds two times the least dimension of the chimney, that portion above the
roof line shall be braced to the roof structure using an approved method.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.130  REPAIR CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Buildings or structures which are included on a national,
state, or local register for historic places or which are qualifying
structures within a recognized historic district, which have been damaged as
a result of a disaster, shall have an engineering evaluation performed.



   (B)   The minimum criteria for repair shall be as included in §
150.128 with due consideration given to the historical rating and nature of
the structures.  Additional standards and criteria, as noted in Cal. Code of
Regs. Title 24, Part 8 shall apply.



   (C)   Where conflicts exists between the standards contained herein
and the State of California Historic Code, the Historic Building Code shall
govern.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)



§ 150.131  REPAIR CRITERIA FOR UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES.



   All damaged buildings determined to be bearing wall buildings
constructed of unreinforced masonry shall be repaired and strengthened to
fully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Code for Building
Conservation as adopted by the city.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)  Penalty, see § 150.999



INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY  MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 150.150  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



      That certain code known as the International Property Maintenance
Code 2009 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5203
Leesburg Pike, Suite 600, Falls Church, Virginia 22041-3401, is adopted by
reference, subject to amendments, additions, and deletions.



(Ord. 1059, passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233,
passed 12-20-10)



§ 150.151  AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.



   The Maintenance Code is amended, added to, or deleted from as set forth
below:



   (A)   Section 103.5 is amended by adding the following:



      103.5.1 The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code will be those
fees established by ordinance of the City Council.



   (B)   Section 202 Definitions is amended to include the following:



      FAMILY is an individual or two or more persons related by blood
or marriage or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants) who
need not be related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.



   (C)   Chapter 3 is amended by adding the following section:



      310 Substandard Buildings. Any building or portion that is
determined to be an unsafe building or any building or portion, including any
dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the
same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions referenced in
this section to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property,
safety or welfare of the public or the occupants, will be deemed and declared
to be substandard buildings.



      310.1 Inadequate Sanitation. Buildings or portions will be deemed
substandard when they are insanitary. Inadequate sanitation includes, without
limitation the lack of water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower facilities
and kitchen sink, lack of hot and cold running water, lack of heating
facilities, lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation, lack of
required room and space dimensions, lack of required electrical lighting,
dampness of habitable rooms, infestation of insects, vermin or rodents, lack
of connection to a sewage disposal system and general dilapidation or
improper maintenance.



      310.2 Hazards. Buildings or portions will be deemed substandard
when they are or contain structural hazards which include deteriorated or
inadequate foundations, flooring or floor supports, walls or vertical
supports that lean, list or buckle, members of ceilings, roofs and roof
supports or other horizontal members that sag, split or buckle, any or all
deteriorated required electrical wiring system or service, plumbing system
including supply, drain, waste and vent system or mechanical system that was
installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of
installation or not installed in accordance with generally accepted
construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or that has not
been maintained in good condition. Fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge or
settle due to defective material or deterioration.



      310.3 Hazardous or Insanitary Premises. The accumulation of
weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat
harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials, and similar materials or
conditions on a premises constitutes fire, health or safety hazards that will
be considered substandard.



      310.4 Improper Occupancy. All buildings or portions occupied for
living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes that were not designed or
intended to be used for such occupancies will be considered substandard.



   (D)   Section 404.4.1 Room area is amended to add the following.



      404.4.1.2 Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by
one person will contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every
bedroom occupied by more than one person must contain at least 50 square feet
of floor area for each occupant thereof.



(Ord. 1180, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE



§ 150.160  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 50022.8 inclusive, the 2016 California
Energy Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission, 2525
Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936, is adopted by
reference.



(Ord. 1059, passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 1252,
passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE



§ 150.170  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 Edition, as published in
Title 24 of the CCR, Part 12, is herein adopted by reference.



(Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE



§ 150.180  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   International Building Code, 2015 Edition is hereby adopted by
reference.



(Ord. 1265, passed 1-3-17)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and will be subject to
punishment to the provisions of Chapter 13 and 14 of this code.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 12-20-10)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Statutory authorization



   151.02   Findings of fact



   151.03   Statement of purpose



   151.04   Methods of reducing flood losses



   151.05   Definitions



   151.06   Applicability



   151.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   151.08   Compliance required



   151.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.10   Interpretation



   151.11   Warning and disclaimer of liability




Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction




   151.20   Standards of construction



   151.21   Standards for utilities



   151.22   Standards for subdivisions



   151.23   Standards for manufactured homes



   151.24   Floodways




Variance Procedure




   151.35   Appeals Board



   151.36   Conditions for variances




Administration




   151.45   Establishment of development permit



   151.46   Fees



   151.47   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.48   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The legislature of the State of California has in Cal. Gov't Code §§
65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry.  Therefore, the City Council does ordain the
regula-tions as set out in this chapter.



('81 Code, § 15.44.010)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



§ 151.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disrup-tion of commerce and governmental services, extra-ordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights
and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. 
Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from
flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.



('81 Code, § 15.44.020)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



§ 151.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:



   (A)   To protect human life and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and
bridges, located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second
use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;



   (G)   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is
in an area of special flood hazard; and



   (H)   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood
hazard assume responsibility for their actions.



('81 Code, § 15.44.030)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 1202, passed
5-4-09)



§ 151.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:



   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood-waters;



   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert flood-waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.



('81 Code, § 15.44.040)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



§ 151.05  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter. Words and phrases not given a meaning by this chapter have
the meaning set forth in the National Flood Insurance Program (42 U.S.C. §§
40001, et seq.) and the regulations promulgated to implement the National
Flood Insurance Program (44 Code of Federal Regulations §§ 59.1 to 59.30;
60.1 to 60.26).



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).  The base flood depths range from one to three
feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”).



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BREAKAWAY WALLS.  Any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and
whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other
suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the
building and which is designed to break away under wave action without
causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they
are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters.  A
breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than
10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.  Use of breakaway walls must
be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the
following conditions:



      (1)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load
less than that which would occur during the base flood; and



      (2)   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously in the event of the base flood.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.



   EXISTED MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads, and the construction of streets) are completed before the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANU-FACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or
pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets).



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of
floodwaters, the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source, and/or the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of
a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP. The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map of the community, on
which the Floodplain Administrator delineated both the special hazard areas
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administra-tion that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The opera-tion of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain manage-ment regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULA-TIONS.  Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power.  The term describes such
state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.  Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary
for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and
ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle.”



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUB-DIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or
rent.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For floodplain management purposes, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective
date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by this community.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.



   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD.  A flood which has a one
percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded.  It is identical to
the “base flood,” which will be the term used throughout this chapter.



   PERSON.  An individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or
corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its
agencies or political subdivisions.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION.  To bring the struc-ture or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance.  Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  An area having special flood or
flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM of FIRM as A, AO, A1-30,
AE, A99, or AH Zone.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes sub-stantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION
does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure either: Before the improvement or repair is started; or if
the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does
not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply
with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the require-ments of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.  A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



('81 Code, § 15.44.050)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 1202, passed
5-4-09)



§ 151.06  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the jurisdiction of the city.



('81 Code, § 15.44.060)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



§ 151.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City, dated September 3, 1997, and
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated September 3, 1997, and
all subsequent amendments and/or revisions are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this section. This FIS and attendant mapping is
the minimum area of applicability of this section and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas that allow implementation of this section and are
recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The FIS and
FIRM are on file in the office of the Floodplain Administrator at 200 South
10th Street, Santa Paula, California.



('81 Code, § 15.44.070)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 1037, passed
8-7-00)



§ 151.08  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.  Violations of the provisions of this
chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Nothing herein shall prevent
the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.



('81 Code, § 15.44.080)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 151.09  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



('81 Code, § 15.44.090)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



§ 151.10  INTERPRETATION.



   The following provisions apply when interpreting this chapter:



   (A)   The regulations set forth in this chapter are the minimum
requirements for implementing the National Flood Insurance Program;



   (B)   All regulations in this chapter must be liberally construed in
favor of the city;



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter limits or repeals any power the city
may exercise in accordance with applicable law; and



   (D)   These regulations are intended to implement the National Flood
Insurance Program, codified at 42 U.S.C. §§ 40001, et seq., and regulations
promulgated at 44 Code of Federal Regulations §§ 59.1 to 59.30 and 60.1 to
60.26. Any interpretation or implementation of this chapter should be made
with reference to the National Flood Insurance Program, as amended.



('81 Code, § 15.44.100)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 1202, passed
5-4-09)



§ 151.11  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer
or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.



('81 Code, § 15.44.110)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 151.20  STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are
required:



   (A)   Anchoring.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.



      (2)   All manufacturing homes shall meet the anchoring
standards of § 151.23.



   (B)   Construction materials and methods.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



      (4)   Require within the AH or AO Zones, adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.



   (C)   Elevation and floodproofing.



      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation.  Nonresidential structures may meet the
standards in subdivision (3) of this division.  Upon completion of the
structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by
the community Building Inspector to be properly elevated.  Such
certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.



      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
structure in the AO Zone shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two feet if no depth number
is specified.  Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in
subdivision (3) of this division.  Upon the completion of the structure, the
elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community
Building Inspector to be properly elevated.  Such certification or
verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



      (3)   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in
conformance with subdivisions (1) or (2) of this division or together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities:



         (a)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood
level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water;



         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the standards of this division are satisfied.  Such
certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



      (4)   Require, for all new construction and substantial
improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Either a minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.  The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than one foot above grade.  Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or



         (b)   Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing
standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.



      (5)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in §
151.23.



('81 Code, § 15.44.160)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88) Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 151.21  STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.



   (A)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.



   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



('81 Code, § 15.44.170)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 151.22  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood
hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.



   (B)   All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of
proposed structure(s) and pads.  If the site is filled above the base flood,
the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.



   (D)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (E)   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.



('81 Code, § 15.44.180)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 151.23  STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.



   All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to
manufactured homes shall:



   (A)   Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base
flood elevation; and



   (B)   Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.



   (C)   Other than expansion of an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, division (A) of this section shall not apply until October 1,
1988, to manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision except where the repair,
reconstruction, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads equals or
exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the
repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced.



('81 Code, § 15.44.190)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 151.24  FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
151.07 are areas designated as floodways.



   (B)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and
erosion potential, the following provisions apply:



      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



      (2)   If subdivision (1) of this division is satisfied, all
new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 15.44.200)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



VARIANCE PROCEDURE



§ 151.35  APPEALS BOARD.



   (A)   The Appeals Board of the city shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter and shall
hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator
in the enforcement of administration of this chapter.  Appeals procedures
shall be the same as established in the Uniform Administrative Code adopted
in § 150.001.



   (B)   Any interested person may appeal action taken by the Appeals
Board in the manner prescribed in § 150.002.



   (C)   In passing upon such applications, the Appeals Board and the
City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
and standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets
and bridges.



   (D)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing subdivisions (1) through
(11) of division (C) of this section have been fully considered.  As the lot
size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.



   (E)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (C) of this
section and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeals Board or City Council
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.



   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in a biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.



('81 Code, § 15.44.210)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 1037, passed
8-7-00)



§ 151.36  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   (A)   Variances may be granted in accordance with 44 C.F.R. §
60.6(a) and this chapter for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures
set forth in the remainder of this section.



   (B)   Variances cannot be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (C)   Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (D)   Variances can only be issued upon:



      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



   (E)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of divisions (A)
through (D) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the
base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.



   (F)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted must be given
written notice, over the signature of the Floodplain Administrator, that
issuing a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high
as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and such construction below the base
flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice must
be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County
Recorder and be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the claim of title
of the affected parcel of land.



('81 Code, § 15.44.220)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 1037, passed
8-7-00; Am. Ord. 1202, passed 5-4-09)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.45  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazards established in §
151.07.  Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing.



   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:



      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; in the AO Zone,
elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of
all structures;



      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any structure will be floodproofed;



      (3)   All appropriate certifications listed in division (D) of
§ 151.48; and



      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



('81 Code, § 15.44.130)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



§ 151.46  FEES.



   Fees for project reviews, permits, inspections, certifications,
appeals, and other services as may be provided pursuant to this chapter shall
be as established by resolution of the City Council.



('81 Code, § 15.44.135)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



§ 151.47  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Public Works Director/City Engineer is appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in
accordance with its provisions.



('81 Code, § 15.44.140)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



§ 151.48  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:



   (A)   Permit review.



      (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been
obtained;



      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;



      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the
carrying capacity of the floodway.  For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY
AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at
any point.



   (B)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with § 151.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer §§ 151.20
through 151.24 of this chapter.  Any such information shall be submitted to
the City Council for adoption.



   (C)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:



      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and the California
Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration.



      (2)   Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered
or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.



   (D)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available
as needed:



      (1)   The certification required in §§ 151.20(C)(1), (C)(2),
(C)(3)(c), and (C)(4)(a) and (b);



      (2)   The certified elevation required in § 151.22(B);



      (3)   The certification required in § 151.24(B)(1).



   (E)   Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions).  The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
§§ 151.35 and 151.36.



   (F)   Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified
in § 151.08.



('81 Code, § 15.44.150)  (Ord. 906, passed  - -88)



CHAPTER 152:  MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS



Section




Rent Stabilization




   152.01   Purpose



   152.02   Definitions



   152.03   Exemptions



   152.04   Maximum permitted rent



   152.05   Resident representatives



   152.06   Mobile Home Rent Review Commission



   152.07   Rent adjustments



   152.08   Rent increase by application to the Commission



   152.09   Hearings and procedures



   152.10   Maximum increase in 12-month period



   152.11   Registration, posting and fees



   152.12   Rules and guidelines



   152.13   Agreements



   152.14   Remedies



   152.15   Conflicting provisions



   152.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Use of mobile homes as dwellings, see § 156.027



   Required architectural features of single-family dwellings, see §
156.028



Statutory reference:



   Mobile homes, see Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 18200 et seq.



RENT STABILIZATION



§ 152.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The conditions which caused the city to adopt previous
ordinances of the municipal code regulating rent increased for spaces in
mobile home parks continue to exist.  Mobile home owners, unlike apartment
tenants or residents of other rental stock, are in the unique position of
having made a substantial investment in a mobile home for which they must
rent a space in a mobile home park.  Many have also made investments in
landscaping and exterior improvements to the mobile home and the rental space
on which it is located.  Alternative sites for the relocation of mobile
homes are difficult to find due to the shortage of vacant spaces, the
restriction on the age, size or style of mobile homes permitted in many parks
and requirements related to the installa-tion of mobile homes, including
permits, landscaping and site preparation.  Thus, if mobile home owners are
unable to pay the rent, or relocate for other reasons, they must sell their
homes.  Excessive rents or uncertainty as to the rent impairs the ability to
sell a mobile home and recover the investment, as well as fair return on the
homeowner's investment, in the mobile home.  At the present time, the cost
of moving a mobile home is $10,000 or more and the risk of damage in moving
is significant.  Typically, mobile homes may not be moved more than once in
their lifetime.  The creation of mobile home parks and mobile home park
spaces require approvals and permits by local government.  Neither the city
nor any other local political entities in the county have approved the
creation of any new mobile home parks or a substantial number of new spaces
in many years.  In fact, since 1985 a number of mobile home parks in the
county have closed, resulting in a dwindling number of mobile home park
spaces in the county available for rent.  The result of these conditions is
the creation of a captive market of mobile home owners and tenants. 
Consequently, the rental of spaces by mobile home park owners to mobile home
residents is a noncompetitive business venture in which, in the absence of
price regulation, price gouging is likely to and has occurred.  Also, the
immobility of mobile homes and the shortage of spaces, in turn, contributes
to the imbalance in the bargaining relationship between park owners and
mobile  home park  tenants.  Because mobile homes are often owned by
senior citizens, persons on fixed incomes, and persons of low and moderate
income, exorbitant rent increases fall upon these individuals with particular
harshness.



   (B)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect residents of
mobile home parks from excessive rent increases, to regulate the size of an
allowable space rent increase upon the vacation, either by sale or otherwise,
of a resident from a mobile home space in a park, while at the same time
providing a just and reasonable return to park owners.



   (C)   Previous ordinances enacted by the City Council have not been
sufficiently protective in terms of the conditions described above.  This
has resulted in a lack of uniformity in terms of space rent increases as
between mobile home parks, lack of a clear standard in determining fair
return to the park owner, and price gouging on increasing rents when a
resident vacates the space by sale or otherwise.



('81 Code, § 8.48.010)



§ 152.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.  The installation of new improvements and
facilities and/or the replacement or reconstruction of existing improve-ments
and facilities which consist of more than ordinary maintenance or repairs and
have a useful life of at least five years.  Keeping the streets and common
areas in good repair and/or replacing them shall not be considered capital
improvement.



   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (CPI).  The CPI published by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Metropolitan Area, All Urban
Consumers.



   HOUSING SERVICES.  Services connected with use or occupancy of a
rental space in a mobile home park which are provided to residents for the
rent charged for a space including, but not limited to, utilities, ordinary
repairs, replacement and maintenance, laundry facilities, recreational
facilities, a resident manager, refuse removal, parking street cleaning and
maintenance, and other benefits, privileges, facilities or terms and
conditions of the tenancy.



   MANUFACTURED HOME or MOBILE HOME.  A structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in
width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is 320 or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term
shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this
definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification and complies with the
standards established herein. MANUFACTURED HOME includes a mobile home
subject to National Manufactured Housing Construc-tion and Safety Act of 1974
(42 USC 5401 et seq.).



(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18007)



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  Any area of land within the city where two or more
spaces are rented, or held for rent, to accommodate mobile homes used for
human habitation, but shall not include parks which rent spaces exclusively
to recreational vehicles as that term is defined in Cal. Civ. Code § 799.29.



   OWNER.  A person or entity who receives or is entitled to receive rent
for the use or occupancy of a mobile home park space or an agent or
representative authorized to act on behalf of such person or entity.



   RENT.  The consideration paid for use or occupancy of a mobile home
space and the provision or related housing services.



   RENT ADMINISTRATOR.  The person desig-nated by the City Manager to
administer the pro-visions of this subchapter.



   RESIDENCY.  The right to entitlement of a mobile home owner to use,
occupy and place a mobile home on a rental space in a mobile home park and to
related housing services.



   RESIDENT.  An owner of a mobile home who has a residency.



   VACANCY.  A vacant space, or the sale by a resident of a mobile home
in place in a mobile home park to a new owner.



('81 Code, § 8.48.020)



§ 152.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   The rent regulation provisions in §§ 152.04, 152.07 and 152.08 of
this subchapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Mobile home spaces in parks constructed after the effective
date of the initiative codified in this subchapter;



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to the rent for a space while
the space is subject to a lease which exempts that space from rent regulation
pursuant to the California Mobile Home Residency Law, Cal. Civ. Code §§ 798
et seq.



('81 Code, § 8.48.030)



§ 152.04  MAXIMUM PERMITTED RENT.



   (A)   An owner shall not charge, demand, accept or retain rent for a
mobile home space exceeding the lawful rent in effect on December 31, 1991,
except as hereinafter provided.  Any rent increases, other than one
authorized by state law, charged between the dates of January 1, 1992, and
the effective date of the initiative codified in this subchapter shall be
rolled back to rent existing on December 31, 1991.  No notice of a rent
increase may be given by a park owner to the residents until the rent
increase has been approved pursuant to this subchapter and no rent increase
approved pursuant to this subchapter shall be charged, demanded, accepted or
retained until lawful notice of that increase has been given to the affected
residents by the park owner.



   (B)   No owner shall reduce the housing services provided for the
rent paid on the effective date of the initiative codified in this subchapter
or under any previous ordinance.  Any reduction in such housing services
shall be deemed a rent increase in violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   A resident may refuse to pay rent in excess of a maximum rent
permitted by this subchapter.  The fact that such unpaid rent is in excess
of the maximum rent permitted by this subchapter shall be a defense in any
action brought to recover possession of a mobile home space and for
nonpayment of rent to collect the illegal rent.



('81 Code, § 8.48.040)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 152.05  RESIDENT REPRESENTATIVES.



   The residents of each mobile home park in the city shall annually elect
by majority vote, with one vote per space, a resident representative to
receive all notices required by this subchapter.  The residents shall advise
the rent administrator of the name, address and telephone number of the
elected resident representative, in writing, no later than January 31 of each
year.



('81 Code, § 8.48.050)



§ 152.06  MOBILE HOME RENT REVIEW COMMISSION.



   (A)   Composition and compensation.  There is established a Mobile
Home Rent Review Commission (Commission) consisting of three members who,
along with their alternates, shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure
of the City Council.



      (1)   The City Council shall appoint three regular members and
may appoint two alternate members to serve in the absence of the regular
members.



      (2)   The three members of the Commission and their alternates
shall be persons who are not tenants of mobile home parks, and are not owners
of rental property.  The members and alternates shall file with the City
Clerk a financial statement reflecting the absence of any financial interest.



      (3)   All members and alternates shall be residents of the
city.



      (4)   Commission members and their alter- nates shall be
compensated for their services in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council and may receive reimbursement as provided by the City Council
for traveling and other expenses incurred while on official duty.



      (5)   Terms of Commission members shall be two years, or until
a successor has duly qualified and been appointed.



      (6) Commissioners appointed to fill vacancies  arising during
the term shall serve only for  the remainder of the term of the Commissioner
replaced.



   (B)   Powers and duties.  The Commission shall have the following
powers and duties:



      (1)   To meet from time to time as required by the rent
administrator of the city;



      (2)   To review and determine rent adjust- ment applications
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, to adjust maximum rents either
upward or downward or maintain rents upon completion of its hearings and
investigations;



      (3)   To render annually a written report to the City Council
generally concerning its activities;



      (4)   To adopt, promulgate, and amend and rescind
administrative rules to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 8.48.060)  (Am. Ord. 1029, passed 7-19-99)



§ 152.07  RENT ADJUSTMENTS.



   (A)   Annual adjustment based on the CPI.  On February 1 of each
year, the rent may be increased to an amount equal to the rent in effect on
January 31 of the prior year adjusted by 75% of the increase in the CPI. 
The increase in the CPI shall be equal to the percentage increase between the
CPI last reported as of October 30 of the most recent year and the CPI last
reported as of October 30 of the year prior to that year.  However, the
increase shall not exceed seven percent of existing rent.  The increase
shall be annually calculated by the rent administrator and posted by December
1 of each year.  The amount of the increase shall be routed to the nearest
one quarter of one percent.  In the event that the CPI decreases, no
increase or decrease shall be authorized pursuant to this section.  It shall
not be necessary for an owner to apply or submit an application for a CPI
increase.  Across-the-board rent increases allowed pursuant to this section
may be accumulated and implemented by the owner at any future time but not in
excess of 12 months after the date so permitted and subject to the maximum
limitation on increases set forth in § 152.10.



   (B)   Rent adjustment based on capital improve-ments.



      (1)   An application for a rent increase based on the cost of
a completed capital improvement may be filed with the rent administrator. 
It shall be approved if it satisfies the definition of a capital improvement
set forth in § 152.02 of this subchapter and any criteria for capital
improvements adopted pursuant to regulations; provided, that any increase
granted shall be amortized over the useful life of the improvement and
apportioned equally among all rental spaces in the mobile home park.  Any
increase granted under this division shall remain in effect only during the
useful life of the improvement.



      (2)   A rent increase application filed under this division
shall be granted or denied within 30 days of receipt of a complete
application and written notice of the determination by the rent administrator
shall be mailed to the applicant and affected residents within that time. 
Written notice that an application has been determined incomplete and the
reasons for that deter-mination shall be given to the applicant within 30
days of receipt of the application.  A written deter-mination to grant a
requested increase or a modified increase shall specify the duration and
amount of the monthly rent adjustment granted.  If a modified increase is
granted, the written determination shall specify the reason for the
modification.  If an increase is denied, the written determination that the
applica-tion shall be denied shall specify the reasons for the denial.



      (3)   A park owner may, but need not submit an application to
the rent administrator for a determination whether a proposed improvement
would qualify as a capital improvement adjustment under this section upon its
completion.  The determination by the rent administrator shall be limited to
the issue of whether the work proposed constitutes a capital improvement and
shall not address the amount of rent adjustment which would result from
completion of the improvement.  If an improvement is determined to qualify
as a capital improvement under this division, the only issue to be determined
when the improve-ment has been completed and an application for a rent
adjustment is received shall be the amount of the adjustment provided that
the improvement constructed conforms to the proposed improvement submitted to
the rent administrator.  Written notice of the rent administrator's
determination shall be mailed to the applicant and affected resident within
30 days of receipt of a complete application.  Written notice that an
application has been determined incomplete shall be mailed to the applicant
within 30 days of receipt of the application and shall specify the respects
in which the application is incomplete.



   (C)   Vacancy rent adjustment.  Each time a space becomes vacant or
a mobile home is sold on site in a mobile home park the new mobile home park
resident may be charged a one-time administra-tive fee of $25 upon moving
into the park.



   (D)   Rent reduction based on discontinuance or reduction of a
service or amenity.



      (1)   A park owner may reduce or dis-continue a service or
amenity upon a commensurate decrease in rent provided the service or amenity
is not required by other laws or to maintain health and safety and
habitability standards.  A park owner may not discontinue an amenity such
as, but not limited to, laundry facilities if doing so would unduly burden
the residents.



      (2)   The rent administrator shall grant, deny or modify the
requested rent decrease and dis-continuance or decrease in the service or
amenity within 30 days of receipt of a completed application therefore. 
Written notice of the determination shall be mailed to the applicant and
affected residents within that time and shall specify the reasons for the
determination.  If an application is incomplete, written notice thereof and
the respects in which the application is incomplete shall be mailed to the
applicant within 20 days of receipt of the application.



   (E)   Appeal.  Any decision of the rent admini-strator pursuant to
this section may be appealed to the Commission by filing an application for
appeal within 15 days of the date the rent administrator's written
determination is mailed to the affected park owner and residents.  Appeals
shall be processed, heard and determined pursuant to the procedures in §
152.09.



('81 Code, § 8.48.070)



§ 152.08  RENT INCREASE BY APPLICATION TO THE COMMISSION.



   A park owner may seek a rent increase in addition to those permitted by
§ 152.07 on the ground that it is required to permit a just and reasonable
return and maintain net operating income (NOI) in accordance with the
following criteria:



   (A)    NOI means gross income less operation expenses.



   (B)    GROSS INCOME includes rents computed as gross rental income
at 100% paid occupancy, plus interest from security deposits which shall be
imputed at the rate of six percent of all deposits or actual interest,
whichever is greater, plus late fees, fees collected for services and
amenities not included in space rent including but not limited to, fees for
recreational vehicle storage, cable TV, security, use of recreational
facilities, income from coin-operated facilities, collections for utility
services in excess of that paid by the park to the utility company, and any
other income received in connection with use, occupancy or operation of the
park, minus uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent that
the same are beyond the owner's control. Uncollected rents in excess of three
percent of gross rents shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless
established other-wise.  Where uncollected rents must be estimated, the
average percentage of the preceding three years experience shall be used or
some other comparable method.



   (C)    OPERATING EXPENSES includes license fees, real property,
taxes, assessments, utility costs, except to the extent charges for utilities
are not deemed rent and are passed through to residents, insurance,
management expenses (owner performed or contracted), including reasonable
advertising, accounting and managerial expenses, normal repair and
maintenance and allowable legal expenses as set forth below.  NORMAL REPAIR
AND MAIN-TENANCE includes, but is not limited to, painting, cleaning,
landscaping, repair of all standard services including plumbing, carpeting,
electrical, furnished appliances and recreational facilities. 
Owner-performed labor shall be set out separately, documented and computed as
compensated at the average hourly rate for such work.  OPERATING EXPENSES
shall not include:



      (1)   Avoidable and unnecessary increases since the base year;



      (2)   Mortgage principal, interest payments, and payments by
the owner under any ground lease;



      (3)   Any penalties, fees, sanctions or interest assessed or
awarded for this or any other law;



      (4)   Allowable legal fees include attorney's fees and costs
incurred in connection with successful actions to evict residents or recover
back rent and matters pertaining to the title of the mobile home park, but do
not include fees in actions filed against the city, the Commission or in
proceedings brought under this initiative except as follows:  reasonable
legal fees are allowable for successfully defending an NOI rent increase in
court successfully defending a vacancy rent adjustment in court, or defending
a rent increase in court approved by the Commission, whether successful or
not.  However, such legal fees allowable for litigation under this
initiative must be amortized over a five-year period.  No other attorney's
fees are allowable.  Park owners shall bear the burden of production and
proof of the amount and purpose of such fees including reasonable rate per
hour and hours spent and, should they fail to produce such evidence, all such
fees shall be disallowed;



      (5)   Depreciation of the property and fees charged to the
residents for capital improvements;



      (6)   Any expense for which the owner has been reimbursed for
any security deposit, insurance settlement, judgement for damages, settlement
or any other method;



      (7)   Reserve accounts.



   (D)   Park owners shall be entitled to increase the park's current
NOI by 75% of the increase in CPI since 1984 which shall be the base year. 
Base year operating expenses and gross income for purposes of these rent
adjustment provisions shall mean operating expenses and gross income in the
year January 1, 1984 to December 31, 1984.  For the purposes of this
division, the 1984 CPI shall be 100 and the current CPI utilized in reviewing
a rent increase application shall be the CPI last reported as of the date of
the application.  Gross income and operating expenses shall be adjusted to
reflect the portion of the mobile home park that is subject to the
initiative.  Net income from spaces that are exempted from the initiative
shall not be considered.



   (E)   Method of determination.



      (1)   To determine the net operating income during the base
year, there shall be deducted from the base year gross income a sum equal to
the actual base year operating expenses unless the owner demon-strates to the
satisfaction of the Commission that some other 12-consecutive-month period is
justified by exceptional reasons independent of the purpose of this
subchapter, provided that in all cases, February 1, 1984 shall fall within
the 12-month period utilized herein except as provided in subdivision (2) of
this division.



      (2)   In the event that the owner did not own the subject park
on January 1, 1984, the operating expenses for January 1, 1984, shall be
determined in one of the following manners, whichever the Commission
determines to be more reliable in the particular case:



         (a)   The previous owner's actual operating expenses as
defined above, or where proven to be not available;



         (b)   Actual operating expenses for the first calendar
year of ownership discounted by the formula set forth in subdivision (4) of
this division.



      (3)   It may be determined that the base year net operating
income yielded other than a fair return in which the base year net operating
income yielded other than a fair return in which the base year net operating
income may be adjusted accordingly.  In order to make such determination, at
least one of the following determinations is required:



         (a)   The owner's operating and maintenance expenses in
the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years.  In
such instances adjustments may be made in calculating such expenses so the
base year of operating expenses reflects average expenses for the property
over a reasonable period of time.  The following factors shall be considered
in making this decision:



            1.   The owner made substantial capital
improvements during the base year which were not reflected in the rent level;



            2.   Substantial repairs were made due to damage
caused by natural disaster or vandalism;



            3.   Other expenses were unreasonably high or low,
notwithstanding prudent business practices.



         (b)   The gross income during the base year was
significantly lower than normal because of destruction of the premises and/or
temporary eviction of construction or repairs, or other special
circum-stances.



      (4)   Where the schedule of rent increases, or other
calculations require projections of a prior year's income and expenses, it
shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal, that operating expenses, exclusive of
property taxes and management expenses, increased at the CPI, that property
taxes increased at two percent per year, and that management expenses are
five percent of gross income.



      (5)   The rent administrator shall grant an increase to an
owner, in excess of that allowed by § 152.07(A) and (B), if it finds and
determines that it is necessary to provide the owner with a net operating
income, after adjustment for 75% of the increase in the CPI, equal to the net
operating income, after adjustment of 75% of the increase in the CPI, equal
to the net operating income realized for the park during the base year.  The
percentage rent increase needed to cover increases in operating expenses
shall be calculated in the following manner:



Minimum %      Base Year         Current Year



Increase   =   Net Oper.   —   Net Oper.



Required      Income         Income



         (Adj by CPI)



                                               
 



            Current Year Gross Rent



('81 Code, § 8.48.080)



§ 152.09  HEARINGS AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   All applications pursuant to this section and appeals of
decisions of the rent administrator shall be filed on an application form
provided by the rent administrator reflecting the various categories of
information specified in this initiative that would justify a rent
increase.  The rent administrator shall have 30 days to determine the
completeness of an application and shall notify the applicant in writing
within that period of any deficiency in the application.



   (B)   Written notice of the application or appeal shall be mailed to
the affected residents or park owner on the date on which it is determined to
be complete.  The notice shall inform the affected residents or park owner
of the right to submit written, documentary and photographic responses to the
application or appeal to the rent administrator within 30 days of the date
notice of the application is mailed.  One copy of the application shall be
furnished to the resident representative of the affected residents or the
park owner (whichever is not the applicant or appellant) by the rent
administrator together with the notice of the application.  Other copies of
the application may be obtained by residents or other interested parties upon
payment of a reasonable charge.  The Commission shall hold a public hearing
on the application no later than 75 days after the application is determined
to be complete and shall render its decision in writing, including findings
of fact, within 90 days after the date the application is determined to be
complete.



('81 Code, § 8.48.081)



§ 152.10  MAXIMUM INCREASE IN 12-MONTH PERIOD.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this initiative, space rent may
not be increased in excess of 12% in any 12-month period.



('81 Code, § 8.48.085)  Penalty, see Ch. 12



§ 152.11  REGISTRATION, POSTING AND FEES.



   (A)   Every mobile home park shall file an annual registration
statement on a form provided by the rent administrator, which sets forth the
rent charged for each space in the park, the services included in that rent,
and each space that is subject to a long-term lease pursuant to Cal. Civ.
Code § 798.17, specified therein and any provisions for periodic increases
in rent in such lease no later than February 15 of each year.



   (B)   The City Council shall adopt fees for the following by
resolution:



      (1)   Annual registration fees not to exceed $2 per space per
month based on the number of spaces in the mobile home park to be used for
the cost of administering this subchapter.  Such fees shall be paid by each
park owner to the city at the time the initial and annual statements are
filed.  The fee may be apportioned equally among the spaces in the mobile
home park and charged by the park owner to the residents according to such
apportionment in 12 equal monthly installments which may be included with the
monthly statement of rent due, but must be separately itemized.  This fee
shall not be included in the rent base when calculating rent adjustments;



      (2)   Application fees to cover the costs of processing an
application on appeal, including but not limited to, mailing and notice
costs, duplication costs, and the cost of an audit by a certified public
accountant.



   (C)   A copy of this subchapter shall be posted in the office of
every mobile home park and in the recreation building or clubhouse of every
mobile home park.  A copy of this subchapter shall be shown to every
prospective resident of a mobile home park before the resident agrees to any
rental agreement or lease.  Verification that each prospective resident has
reviewed this subchapter prior to agreeing to any rental agreement or lease
shall be provided to the rent administrator by filing with the rent
administrator a city certification form signed by the resident.



('81 Code, § 8.48.090)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



Editor’s note:



   Pursuant to Res. 5416, passed 2-5-01, the annual registration fee shall
be $1.00/month.



§ 152.12  RULES AND GUIDELINES.



   The rent administrator may adopt rules and procedures to implement the
applications, notices, definitions and other provisions of this subchapter,
including any forms required in connection therewith, and for the review of
rent increase applications and the conduct of hearings.  Such rules and
guidelines shall be submitted to the Commission for review and approval.



('81 Code, § 8.48.100)



§ 152.13  AGREEMENTS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall operate to restrict the right of the
resident or management to enter into a agreement in accordance with Cal. Civ.
Code § 798.17.  Pursuant to Cal. Civ. Code § 798.17(c), the resident shall
have the option to reject the offered rental agreement and accept a rental
agreement for a term of 12 months or less, including a month to month
agreement. No owner may require, directly or indirectly, that any resident or
prospective resident sign a lease or rental agreement with a term in excess
of 12 months or that provides that it shall be exempt from local rent control
as a condition of residency in the park, and no owner may deny a tenancy to a
prospective purchaser of a mobile home in the park on the ground that the
prospective purchaser will not sign such a lease or rental agreement.



('81 Code, § 8.48.105)



§ 152.14  REMEDIES.



   (A)   Any person who demands, accepts or retains any rent in excess
of the maximum rent permitted by this subchapter shall be liable in a civil
action to the person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted or retained
in the sum of the amount by which the payments demanded, accepted or retained
exceed the maximum rent permitted by this subchapter together with reasonable
attorney's fees and costs determined by the court.  In the case of wilful
violation, such person shall be liable for three times the amount together
with reasonable attorney's fees and costs.  An affected park resident may
bring a civil action for declaratory and injunctive relief as well as damages
for any violation by a park owner of this subchapter, and the affected park
resident shall be awarded attorney's fees and costs if he prevails.



   (B)   The City Council may institute a civil action to compel
compliance with this subchapter.  The city shall be vigorous in defense of
any and all litigation directed toward this initiative.



   (C)   If the owner retaliates against the resident because of the
exercise by the resident of any rights under this initiative the owner shall
be liable for actual damages, punitive damages in the sum of up to $1,000,
costs, and reasonable attorney's fees.



('81 Code, § 8.48.110)



§ 152.15  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   In the event the provisions of this chapter conflict with any code,
ordinance or regulation of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.



('81 Code, § 8.48.120)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty
provided in Chapter 13 of this code.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 152.25
through 152.39 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $500.  Each violation of §§ 152.25
through 152.39 of this chapter and each day during which any such violation
is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense.



('81 Code, § 8.48.110(B))



CHAPTER 153:  [RESERVED]




[RESERVED]




CHAPTER 154:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   154.01   Purpose; administration



   154.02   Definitions



   154.03   Location



   154.04   Fees



   154.05   Pool design and construction



   154.06   Decks



   154.07   Drainage and disposal



   154.08   Special inspection



   154.09   Barrier protection



§ 154.01  PURPOSE; ADMINISTRATION.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to protect
life, limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality and materials and fencing of swimming pools
and bodies of water.  The Building Official is designated as the
administrator of this chapter.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABOVE GROUND/ON GROUND POOL.  See the definition of “swimming
pool.”



   APPROVED SAFETY POOL COVER.   A manually or power-operated safety pool
cover that meets all of the performance standards of the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) in compliance with standard F1346-91.



   BARRIER.  A fence, wall, or building wall which completely surrounds
the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool, spa or hot
tub.  When approved by the enforcement agency, BARRIERS may also incorporate
natural or man-made features, such as topography, waterways, restricted areas
and similar features including geographically isolated areas which provide an
effective access barrier to the pool area.



   BODY OF WATER.  Pools, spas, hot tubs, man-made lakes, fish ponds, or
any body of water which is capable of containing water 18 inches deep or
deeper, but does not apply to plumbing fixtures (such as bathtubs), natural
lakes, streams, or man-made irrigation or flood control channels.



   GRADE.  The underlying surface, such as earth or a walking surface.



   HOT TUB.  See the definition of “spa.”



   IN-GROUND POOL.  See the definition of “swimming pool.”



   SEPARATION FENCE.  A barrier which separates all doors of a building
or building accessory thereto with direct access to a swimming pool, spa, hot
tub from that swimming pool, spa or hot tub.



   SPA.  A structure intended for recreational bathing, designed to
contain water over 18 inches (457 mm) deep or deeper and outside dimensions
not exceeding 160 square feet (14.72 sq. meters).



   SWIMMING POOL.  Any structure intended for swimming or recreational
bathing that is designed to contain water over 18 inches (457 mm) deep or
deeper.  This includes indoor, outdoor, in-ground, above-ground, on-ground
swimming pools, fixed-in wading pools, and excludes spas.



   SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR.  Any swimming pool which is not an indoor
swimming pool.



   SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR.  A swimming pool which is totally contained
within a structure and surrounded on all sides, including the top, by said
structure.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99)



§ 154.03  LOCATION.



   The distance from the inner surface of a swimming pool, spa or hot tub
wall to a property line shall not be less than three feet.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 154.04  FEES.



   Fees for plan checking and permits shall be as adopted in the Master
Fee Schedule as adopted by ordinance of the City Council.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)



§ 154.05  POOL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   General.  Pool design and construction shall be in accordance
with accepted engineering practice, shall be in conformity with applicable
provisions of the adopted building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical
codes, and shall be structurally suitable for the soil, topographic and
geologic conditions prevailing at the construction site.



   (B)   Expansive soil design.



      (1)   Pools constructed below grade shall be designed on the
assumption that their construction is to be in an area of moderately
expansive soil having an expansion index of 51-90 and an equivalent fluid
pressure of not less than 45 pounds per cubic foot (45 p.c.f.).  Where tests
indicate that soils at a pool site are non-expansive or have low expansion
charac-teristics from the ground surface to the full depth of the pool,
structural design may be based on an equivalent fluid pressure not less than
30 p.c.f.



      (2)   In highly expansive soils having an expansion index of
91-130, pools shall be designed for not less than 60 p.c.f. equivalent fluid
pressure.



      (3)   In very highly expansive soils having an expansion index
over 130, pool design shall be subject to special requirements based on a
site investigation, soil testing, and engineering analysis by a registered
civil engineer to determine appropriate design parameters for the site.



   (C)   Hydrostatic uplift.  In areas of anticipated high water table
an approved hydrostatic relief system or device shall be installed.



   (D)   Thermal protection for plastic piping.



      (1)   Between the inlet of pool water piping connected
thereto, a check valve shall be installed to prevent thermal damage to such
piping due to back flow.



      (2)   Between the outlet of the pool heating equipment and any
plastic water piping connected thereto, not less than five feet of approved
metal pipe shall be installed for the purpose of dissipating heat.



   (E)   Safeguarding suction drains.  Bottom drains and suction
intakes in pools and spas shall be covered with grates or other protective
devices which cannot be removed except with tools.  The slots or openings in
these covers shall be of such area, shape and arrangement as to prevent
bathers from being drawn thereto with such force as to constitute a safety
hazard.



   (F)   Grab bars.  Wherever egress from a pool by bathers is
restricted by the presence of a vertical wall or other barrier which extends
more than 12 inches above the water surface at the pool's edge, permanent
handrails, grab bars, or equivalent device(s) shall be installed within 12
inches of the water surface, capable of being securely grasped and adequate
to support the weight of a user of the pool.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 154.06  DECKS.



   (A)   General.  A deck shall be provided around below-grade
swimming pools except when a special engineering design is furnished which
indicates that such deck is not necessary for the purpose of main-taining the
structural integrity of the pool and/or for controlling surface water and
moisture content in the soil adjacent to the pool.  Decks shall not be
required for spas and hot tubs.



   (B)   Deck design and construction.



      (1)   Required decks shall be constructed of concrete or other
approved impervious material and shall be sloped to provide positive drainage
away from the perimeter of the pool.  Except as provided below, decks shall
have a minimum width of four feet and shall be at least three and one-half
inches in thickness.  Reinforcement shall be #3 bars spaced not over 24
inches o.c. each way, or equivalent reinforcing.



      (2)   Approved joints shall be provided in the deck at
corners, at maximum 10 foot intervals, and wherever necessary in order to
control cracking, to allow for differential movement, and to minimize damage
to the deck from such movement should it occur.



   (C)   Cutoff walls.



      (1)   At the outer perimeter of pool decks, a cutoff wall of
approved material shall be installed below grade to a depth of at least 15
inches so as to form a permanent and effective vertical moisture barrier.



      (2)   Exceptions:



         (a)   A cutoff wall may be omitted when a deck at least
six feet wide is installed.



         (b)   Decks less than four feet in width may be
installed provided that the required cutoff wall is increased in depth beyond
the minimum by an amount directly proportional to the reduction in deck width.



   (D)   Pre-saturation, highly expansive soils.  When the soil below
the deck has an expansion index of 91 or greater it shall be saturated with
water to a depth of at least 18 inches prior to installation of the deck.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 154.07  DRAINAGE AND DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Surface water adjacent to other properties.  When a pool deck
extends to within three feet of any adjacent property, means shall be
provided to conduct splash water to a satisfactory point of disposal.



   (B)   Waste water.  Pool waste water and swimming pool or spa deck
drains shall be collected and conducted through non-erosive devices and drain
to the street, storm drain or other approved disposal area. Prior to emptying
a pool or spa, the waste water shall be dechlorinated and then may be
discharged into the street storm drain system in a manner approved by the
Public Works Director.



   (C)   Drywells.  Drywells shall not be employed for pool waste
water disposal except when specifically approved for the purpose and when it
has been deter-mined that such installations are not likely to have adverse
effects on the structural stability of the pool and other structures on the
site.  The Building Official may require a percolation test, soils report
and/or geological report to make such a determination.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



§ 154.08  SPECIAL INSPECTION.



   Special inspection as required by Chapter 17 in the Uniform Building
Code shall be provided for pneumatically placed concrete (shotcrete/gunite)
in swimming pools.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95)



§ 154.09  BARRIER PROTECTION.



   (A)   Every person in possession of land within the city either as
owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is
situated a body of water as defined in § 154.02, shall erect and maintain
thereon an adequate barrier sufficient to make such body of water
inaccessible to small children.



   (B)   When barriers are required, the barrier shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches (1524
mm) above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the
swimming pool.  The maximum vertical clearance between grade and bottom of
the barrier shall be two inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier
which faces away from the swimming pool.  The maximum vertical clearance at
the bottom of the barrier may be increased to four inches (102 mm) when grade
is a solid surface, such as a concrete deck, or when the barrier is mounted
on top of the above-ground pool structure.  When barriers have horizontal
members spaced less than 45 inches (1143 mm) apart, the horizontal members
shall be placed on the pool side of the barrier.  Any decorative design work
on the side away from the swimming pool, such as protrusions, indentations or
cutouts, which renders the barrier easily climbable, is prohibited.



      (2)   (a)   Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage
of a one and three-fourths-inch-diameter (44 mm) sphere.



         (b)   Exceptions.



            1.   When vertical spacing between such openings
is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, the opening size may be increased such that
the passage of a four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere is not allowed.



            2.   For fencing composed of vertical and
horizontal members, the spacing between vertical members may be increased up
to four inches (102 mm) when the distance between the tops of horizontal
members is 45 inches (1143) or more.



      (3)   Chain link fences used as the barrier shall not be less
than 11 gauge.



      (4)   Access gates shall comply with the requirements of
subdivisions (1) through (3).  Pedestrian access gates shall be self-closing
and have a self-latching device.  Where the release mechanism of the
self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom
of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the
barrier at least three inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate, and the gate
and barrier shall have no opening greater than one-half inch (13 mm) within
18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism. Pedestrian gates shall swing
away from the pool.  Any gates other than pedestrian access gates shall be
equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and shall remain locked at all
times when not in use.



      (5)   (a)   Where a wall of a Group R, Division 1 or 3
Occupancy or Group U, Division 1 Occupancy serves as part of the barrier and
contains door openings between the dwelling unit and the outdoor swimming
pool, which provide direct access to the pool, a separation fence meeting the
require-ments of subdivisions (1) through (4) shall be provided.



         (b)   Exception:  when approved by the Building
Official, one of the following may be used:



            1.    Self-closing and self-latching devices
installed on all doors with direct access to the pool with the release
mechanism located a minimum of 54 inches (1372 mm) above the floor.



            2.   An alarm installed on all doors with direct
access to the pool.  The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30
seconds immediately after the door and its screen, if present, are opened,
and be capable of providing a sound pressure level of not less than 85 dBA
when measured indoors at 10 feet (3048 mm).  The alarm shall automatically
reset under all conditions.  The alarm system shall be equipped with a
manual means, such as a touchpad or switch, to temporarily deactivate the
alarm for a single opening.  Such deactivation shall last no longer than 15
seconds.  The deactivation switch shall be located at least 54 inches (1372
mm) above the threshold of the door.



            3.   A spa or hot tub with a locking safety cover
which complies with the ASTM Standard F 1346-91 shall not be required to
provide other barriers.  Where a locking safety cover is not provided, the
spa or hot tub shall comply with the requirements of subdivisions (1) through
(5) of this division.



            4.   The pool is equipped with an approved safety
pool cover.



            5.   Other means of protection may be acceptable
so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than that afforded
by any of the devices described above.



      (6)   Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a
barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the
means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps shall be
capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access or the ladder
or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of
subdivisions (1) through (5) of this division.  When the ladder or steps are
secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall be protected by a
barrier complying with subdivisions (1) through (5) of this division.



      (7)   Doors with direct access to an indoor swimming pool
shall comply with this chapter.



      (8)   The provisions of this chapter shall be completed and
approved in writing before a pool or body of water shall be filled.  All
persons main-taining existing pools or bodies of water shall comply with the
provisions of this section.



      (9)   The Building Official may permit alternative means of
pool protection, provided the protection is not less than that provided by
the fencing, gates, latches and alarms described in this section.



(Ord. 990, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 7-6-99)  Penalty, see Ch. 13



CHAPTER 155:  [RESERVED]




[RESERVED]




CHAPTER 156:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   156.001   Title



   156.002   Purpose



   156.003   Interpretation



   156.004   Chapter supersedes existing zoning ordinances; exception



   156.005   Chapter not to be construed as validating illegal use



   156.006   Definitions



   156.007   Certificate of occupancy




Regulations, Conditions and Exceptions




   156.020   Regulations subject to certain provisions



   156.021   Conflicting regulations



   156.022   Less restrictive uses prohibited



   156.023   Similar uses permitted



   156.024   Additional excluded uses



   156.025   Land may be used in accordance with specific plan



   156.026   Architectural features projecting into required front yard



   156.027   Use of mobile homes as dwellings



   156.028   Required architectural features of single-family dwellings



   156.029   [Reserved]



   156.030   Buildings under construction prior to effective date of
chapter



   156.031   Applicability to nonconforming uses resulting from
amendments



   156.032   Location of dwellings; easement width



   156.033   Uses to be conducted inside buildings



   156.034   [Reserved]



   156.035   Height of structures



   156.036   Screening of industrial storage areas



   156.037   Rear and side yard requirements for dwellings above other
occupancies



   156.038   [Reserved]



   156.039   [Reserved]



   156.040   [Reserved]



   156.041   Yard encroachments



   156.042   Storage in yards



   156.043   Temporary real estate offices



   156.044   [Reserved]



   156.045   Requirements of specific plans shall prevail



   156.046   Surface mining permits and reclamation plans



   156.047   Special study areas



   156.048   Conditions for meeting front yard requirements



   156.049   Junk



   156.050   Temporary sales of alcoholic beverages



   156.051   [Reserved]



   156.052   [Reserved]



   156.053   Fees




Preservation, Cutting and Removal of Trees on Public Property




   156.580   Intent and purpose



   156.581   Scope



   156.582   Prohibition of removal



   156.583   Definitions



   156.584   Tree removal permits



   156.585   Exceptions



   156.586   Defacing or scarring of native oak, sycamore, heritage or
historic trees, and other mature trees



   156.587   Establishment of fees and procedures



   156.588   Appeals



   156.589   Nonliability of city; duty of private property owners




Adult Entertainment Establishments




   156.780   Purpose and intent



   156.781   Definitions



   156.782   Allowable locations



   156.783   Standards and requirements



   156.784   Video booth regulations



   156.785   Permit required



   156.786   Expiration



   156.787   Suspension



   156.788   Revocation



   156.789   Transfer



   156.790   Employee permit required



   156.791   Employee permit expiration



   156.792   Denial, suspension or revocation



   156.793   Fees and procedures



   156.794   Other lawful action to prevent or remedy violation



   156.795   Immunity from prosecution




Enforcement




   156.910   Enforcement agencies



   156.911   Each day separate offense



   156.912   Violation deemed public nuisance



   156.999   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Administration, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65900 et seq.



   Local authority to regulate the use of land and buildings, see Cal.
Gov't Code § 65850



   Local Planning and Regulation; generally, see Cal. Gov't Code §§
65100 et seq.



   Planning in general, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65000 et seq.



Cross-reference:



   Development Code, see Title XVI



   Zoning map changes, see T.S.O. IV



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the zoning regulations of the city.



('81 Code, § 17.02.010)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The text and zoning maps of this chapter constitute the
comprehensive zoning plan and regula-tions for the city and are adopted to
protect and promote the public health, safety, morals and welfare and to
provide the economic and social advantages which result from an orderly,
planned use of land resources.



   (B)   Such regulations are designed and intended to preserve the
natural environment whenever possible; to lessen congestion in the streets;
to secure safety from fire, panic, and other man-made and natural dangers; to
promote the health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentra-tion of
population; to facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks, roads and other public facilities and improvements;
and to establish the most beneficial and convenient relationships among the
residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational,
institutional and undeveloped areas, having regard to their suitability for
the various uses appropriate to each of them and their potentiality for such
uses, as indicated by existing conditions and trends in population, in the
direction and manner of the uses of land, in building development, in
economic activity and to encourage, guide and provide a definite plan for the
future growth and development of the city based on the city's general plan
and adopted elements.



('81 Code, § 17.02.020)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.003  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirement for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.



   (B)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or
abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties.



   (C)   When this chapter imposes a greater restric-tion upon the use
of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations
or by easements, covenants or agree-ments, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.



('81 Code, § 17.02.030)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.004  CHAPTER SUPERSEDES EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCES; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   This chapter supersedes previous zoning ordinances of the city
and, to the extent that this chapter is inconsistent therewith, said zoning
ordinances are repealed.



   (B)   If any of the provisions of this chapter shall be determined
to be not applicable to land regulated by any of said zoning ordinances, the
provisions of said zoning ordinances shall continue to apply.



('81 Code, § 17.02.040)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.005  CHAPTER NOT TO BE CONSTRUED AS VALIDATING ILLEGAL USE.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as validating or
legalizing any land use or building or structure conducted, constructed,
erected, or main-tained in violation of any city ordinance, and nothing in
this chapter shall prevent or bar the filing of a complaint, issuing of a
citation, or punishment of any action in violation of the zoning ordinances
mentioned in § 156.004 or bar the bringing of an action to compel the
discontinuance of any use or the removal of any building or structure
conducted, constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of said zoning
ordinances.



   (B)   Insofar as the provisions of this chapter impose the same
regulations as imposed by the zoning ordinances mentioned in § 156.004, this
chapter shall be construed as a continuation of the zoning ordinances
mentioned in § 156.004, and not as a new document.



('81 Code, § 17.02.050)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 725, passed  -
-79)



§ 156.006  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESS.  The place or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have
safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property or use required
by the provisions of this chapter.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  Attached or detached subordinate building, the
use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the
main use of the land and which is located on the same lot with the main
building or use.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use of a lot or a building or other structure located upon the same
lot as the accessory use.



   AGRICULTURE.  The science and art of farming, producing crops,
floriculture, horticulture and the work of cultivating the soil.



   ALLEY.  Any public thoroughfare for the use of pedestrians, or
vehicles, not less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet wide, which has been
deeded or dedicated to the city as a secondary means of access to abutting
property.



   ANTENNA, SATELLITE or DISH.  Any exterior or external receiving device
whose purpose is to receive communications or other signals from a
transmitter relay in planetary orbit in space.



(Ord. 846, passed  - -85)



   APARTMENT.  A room or flat occupied, or intended or designed to be
occupied, by one family for living and sleeping purposes and containing one
kitchen.



   APARTMENT HOTEL.  A building or portion thereof, designed for or
containing both individual guest rooms or suites of rooms and dwelling units.



   APARTMENT HOUSE or MULTIPLE DWELLING UNIT.  A building or a portion of
a building, designed or used for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other and containing three or more dwelling units.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE.  A building used for the overhaul and repair
of vehicles, including body repairs, engine overhaul, upholstery work, parts
rebuilding and like activities.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.  A gasoline service station, with
attendant facilities for the servicing and maintenance of automobiles, having
gasoline pumps and maintenance facilities; provided, that services do not
include body repair work, engine overhaul, upholstery work, parts rebuilding
and such like services.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING.  The dismantling or destruction of one or more
automobiles, motor-cycles or any other motor vehicles.



   AVIARY.  A collection of more than five ornamental or song birds on a
parcel, not including birds kept or maintained for commercial purposes or
poultry.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which
is partly below and partly above grade, as defined in this chapter, but so
located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is less than
the vertical distance from grade to ceiling (see “story”).



   BEDROOM.  Any room used, or intended or designed to be used for
sleeping purposes, provided such room has a minimum size of 90 square feet.



   BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMINGHOUSE.  A building or portion thereof which is
used to accommodate, for compensation, three or more boarders or roomers, not
including members of the occupant's immediate family, who might be occupying
such building.



   COMPENSATION.  Compensation in money, services or other things of
value.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattel, or property of any kind.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance from the average finished
ground level of the site to the highest point of the structure.



   BUILDING SITE.  The area, including all required yards, open space and
parking, which a main building and its accessory buildings and uses occupy.



   BUNGALOW COURT.  A group of three or more detached one-story,
one-family or two-family dwellings located upon a single lot, together with
all open spaces as required by this chapter, but not including tourist courts
or motels.



   BUSINESS.  A use or activity involving the sale or rental of goods or
the sale or furnishing of services of any kind.



   CAMPGROUND, PUBLIC.  A public area wherein major recreational
equipment may be placed as temporary dwellings.



   CARPORT.  A permanent roofed structure with not more than three
enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.



   CHURCH.  A building used for public or private purposes, including
prayer, worship, weddings, or special services.  Such building shall be
fully enclosed with walls, including windows and doors, and shall conform to
applicable legal requirements affecting design and construction.



   CLUB.  Any building or premises used by an association of persons,
whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose,
but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service
customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.



   COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the city.



   CONVALESCENT HOMES.  A building used for the housing of more than one
hospital outpatient.



   DAY NURSERY.  Any type of group child day care programs, including
nurseries for children of working mothers, nursery schools for children under
the minimum age of education in public schools, parent cooperative nursery
schools, play groups for preschool children, and programs covering
after-school care for school children, provided such establishment is
institutional in character and is licensed by the state or county and
conducted in accordance with state requirements.



   DETACHED BUILDING.  Any building that is not physically joined to
another building by a common wall.



   DIRECTOR.  The Planning Director of the city.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.  Any building or structure in which food and
drink are prepared for service to customers outside such building or
structure, even though the food and drink are served to customers inside such
building or structure or to customers occupying vehicles outside such
structure and includes self-service restaurants for take-out food.



   DUPLEX.  A building containing two dwelling units.



   DWELLING.  A building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied
exclusively for residential purposes.



   DWELLING, GROUP.  A combination or arrangement of dwellings on one
building site.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE.  A building, or a portion of a building, designed
or used for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each
other and containing three or more dwelling units.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A building or portion thereof designed for
or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other.



   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY.  A detached building designed or used
exclusively for occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A detached building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families living independently of each other.



   DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment house or
apartment hotel designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping
purposes and having not more than one kitchen.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  An institu-tion offering academic
instruction or training leading to a degree, or accredited by the state,
including private colleges or trade schools but not including dance schools,
business schools and similar commercial establishments.



   FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood or
marriage, living by themselves, or living with a group of not more than four
other persons who are not related by blood or marriage, and living together
as a single housekeeping unit in a one-family dwelling unit; or a group of
not more than five persons who are not related by blood or marriage, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a one-family dwelling unit.



   FLAGPOLE.  A freestanding structure or a structure attached to a
building or to the roof of a building on a parcel of record and used for the
sole purpose of displaying flags of political entities.



   FOSTER HOME.  A home licensed by state or county agencies, wherein
food, lodging and like needs are provided for children under 16 years of age
by an individual, association, corporation, society or public agency
designated by a court of competent jurisdiction to be entrusted with the care
of such minors.  Such care can be provided on a 24-hour per day basis.



   FRONTAGE.  That portion of a lot, parcel or site that abuts a
dedicated public street.



   GARBAGE, PRIVATE.  An accessory building, or an accessory portion of
the main building, designed and used primarily for the shelter or storage of
operable vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building and
having a minimum of four walls.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC.  A building, other than a private garage, used for the
storage, care, repair or servicing of automobiles.



   GARBAGE.  All waste food or discarded food of all kinds, including,
but not restricted to, meat, fish, fruit, bakery goods, and vegetable refuse,
or any putrid or offensive organic matter, except manure or fertilizer used
for agricultural purposes.



   GRADE.  The average of the finished ground level at the center of all
walls of a building.  In the event walls are parallel to and within five
feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.



   GROSS FLOOR AREA.  The total dimensions on each floor as measured from
the outside wall.



   GROSS LOT (OR LAND) AREA.  The total dimensions on the lot as measured
along property lines.



   GROUP HOUSES.  Two or more separate buildings, each containing one or
more dwelling units.



   GUESTHOUSE.  Living quarters, having no kitchen facilities, located
within an accessory building located on the same premises with a main
building and occupied for the sole use of members of the family, temporary
guests, or persons permanently employed on the premises.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling or building, accessory thereto, and carried on by the inhabitants
thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
structure for dwelling purposes and in connection with which there is no
display, no stock in trade nor commodity sold upon the premises, no person
employed upon the premises and no mechanical equipment used, except such as
is necessary for housekeeping purposes, and which use does not change the
character thereof, does not encumber any parking spaces, and does not
adversely affect the uses permitted in the zone of which it is a part.  HOME
OCCUPATIONS shall be subject to a home occupation permit.



   HOSPITAL.  An institution providing physical or mental health
services, inpatient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care
of the sick or injured.



   HOTEL.  A building providing separate bedrooms for the accommodation
of travelers, semi- permanent residents and the like, where no individual
kitchen facilities are provided, whether known as a hotel, motel or
roominghouse.



   INSTITUTION.  An organization having a social, educational, or
religious purpose as a school, church, hospital, club or lodge.



   JUNK.  Any combustible, noncombustible, putrescible or non-putrescible
waste or material, including but not limited to trash; refuse; paper; glass;
cans; bottles; rags; fabrics; bedding; ashes; trimmings from lawns, shrubbery
or trees, except when such trimmings are used for mulch or like agricultural
purposes; household refuse other than garbage, including lumber, metal,
plumbing fixtures, bricks, building stones, plaster, wire or like material,
whether from demolition, alteration or construction of buildings or
structures, or from other sources; tires or inner tubes, auto, aircraft or
boat parts; plastic or metal parts or scraps; damaged or defective boats,
machinery, vehicles or engines, whether or not repairable; and damaged or
defective toys, recrea-tional equipment or household appliances or
furnishings, whether or not repairable.



   KENNEL and DOG KENNEL.  Any lot or premises on which five or more dogs
and cats at least four months of age are kept, boarded, or trained, whether
in special buildings or runways or not.



   KITCHEN.  Any room used or intended or designed to be used for cooking
or the preparation of food, including any room having a sink and either a
three-fourths-inch gas opening or provision for an electric stove.



   LABOR SUPPLY CAMP.  Any place, area, or building where living
accommodations are maintained or intended for persons performing agricultural
or other types of labor on property other than property owned or leased by
the owner of such accommoda-tions.



   LANDSCAPING.  Unless otherwise defined elsewhere in this chapter, the
planting, including replanting in case of death, disease, disfigurement or
dismemberment, of live trees, shrubs and ground cover which, at the time of
planting, are healthy, vigorous, and free of diseases, and of a species that
is able to thrive in the environment and soil type in which it is planted,
and maintenance thereof sufficient to sustain plant life, including an
underground irrigation system with a useful life of not less than 10 years. 
LANDSCAPING also includes decorative rock, fountains, and artificial surfaces
when inter-spersed with shrubs and/or trees.



   LOT.



      (1)   A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel
of land with a number or other designation on a final map of subdivision
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Ventura County; or



      (2)   A parcel of land which was a recorded parcel separate
from any adjacent parcel of land and was indicated as a separate parcel on
the records of the Ventura County Assessor on November 3, 1960, provided such
parcel has legally recorded access to a public street, either directly or by
way of an access strip at least 20 feet in width, which is topo-graphically
traversable by vehicular traffic; or



      (3)   A parcel of land created subsequent to November 3, 1960,
pursuant to a lot split or parcel map approved by the Planning Commission of
the city and, in the case of a parcel map, duly recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Ventura County.



   LOT AREA.  The number of square feet enclosed within the lot lines of
a lot.  For the purposes of computing the permitted number of units in
residential zones, however, LOT AREA shall mean the net area remaining in the
lot after required dedications for public streets are made and the area
necessary for private streets and main access driveways are deducted.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot or parcel of land situated at the intersection of
two or more streets or highways, which streets or highways have an angle of
intersection, measured within such lot or parcel of land, of not more than
135°.



   LOT DEPTH.  The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot having lots adjoining on two sides.



   LOT, KEY.  The first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner
lot, whether or not separated by an alley.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  The property line dividing a lot from a street.  On
a corner lot only one street line shall be considered as a front line.  The
shorter street frontage shall be considered the front lot line.  In the case
of lots without street frontage, the Planning Director shall designate the
front lot line.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  The lot line most nearly parallel to the front lot
line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any lot lines other than front lot lines or rear lot
lines.



   LOT, REVERSE CORNER.  A corner lot, the side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of a lot or parcel of land
which adjoins the rear lot line of such corner lot.



   LOT, THROUGH.  A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two
parallel streets.



   LOT WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and
rear lot lines.



   MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Recreational equipment designed to be
used as temporary dwellings for recreational outings, or designed to be used
for other recreational purposes, such as travel trailers, trailer coaches,
pickup campers, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, and boat trailers,
and the like.



   MOBILE HOME.  A structure one or more sections, which, when erected on
site, measures eight feet or more in width and 32 feet or more in length, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling,
with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, air-conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein.



(Ord. 755, passed  - -81)



   MOTEL.  A building or group of buildings or units attached,
semi-attached or detached, designed to serve as temporary sleeping quarters
for transient persons, whether known as a motel, auto court, tourist court or
bungalow court.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  A device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a public street, excepting a device moved by
human power.



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING.  A building or structure, or portion thereof,
which was lawfully erected or altered and maintained but which, because of
the application of the provisions of this chapter to it, no longer conforms
to the regulations of the zone in which it is located.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  A use which was lawfully established and
maintained but which, because of the application of this chapter to it, no
longer conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.



   NURSERY OR CHILD CARE HOME.  A facility licensed by state or county
agencies in which children's recreation or educational activities, or both,
are provided for compensation.



   OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF.  A dis-continuance of an existing use and
substitution therefor of a use of a different kind or class.



   OCCUPIED.  Arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented or
leased or intended to be occupied.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON USABLE.  Land areas within a multiple-dwelling
project not occupied or intruded upon by any structure, which may be used for
scenic or recreational purposes by all the residents of the project.  COMMON
USABLE OPEN SPACE does not include land areas occupied by streets, driveways,
parking areas, service areas, required front yards or required side yards
abutting a street; provided, however, that land areas occupied by
recreational structures and facilities shall be deemed to be common usable
open space.



   OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE USABLE.  Areas within a multiple-dwelling project
not occupied or intruded upon by any structure which are devoted exclusively
to the private recreation and leisure use of the residents of one dwelling
unit and does not include any space within a dwelling unit.



   PARKING LOT, PUBLIC.  A parking lot for motor vehicles created to
serve the public either as a separate business or as an accessory use to a
business, whether owned by a governmental agency or by a private person or
business.



   PARKING SPACE.  A space, clearly delineated on the ground or pavement,
of dimensions required elsewhere in this chapter, to be used for the parking
or stopping of motor vehicles.



   PATIO.  A deck or paved area not extending above the first floor level
of a building and open to the sky.



   PATIO COVER.  A covered shelter for semi-outdoor recreational
activities, which meets the standards of Chapter 49 of the Appendix of the
Uniform Building Code.



   PERMANENT STRUCTURE.  Any object having a solid foundation or fixed
location on the ground.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, copartnership, joint venture,
association, club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
receiver, organization, syndicate, city, county, municipality, district or
other political subdivision of any other group or combination acting as a
unit.



   POULTRY.  Domestic fowl, chickens, ducks, geese and turkeys, but
specifically excluding guinea fowl.



   PUBLIC ROAD OR STREET.  Any road, street, or thoroughfare of whatever
nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the
purposes of vehicular travel.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  The company or companies distributing natural gas,
electricity, water, telephone, cable TV or similar services.



   REST HOME.  Any place or institution which makes provision for bed
care or for chronic or convalescent care for one or more persons exclusive of
relatives, who by reason of illness or physical infirmity are unable to care
for themselves; but in which no alcoholics, drug addicts, persons suffering
from mental sickness, disease, disorder or ailment or from contagious or
communicable diseases are kept and in which no surgical or other primary
treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums or hospitals are
performed.  REST HOME includes all places as defined in Cal. Code of Regs.
Title 22, § 97005 and licensed as nursing or convalescent homes.



   ROOM, HABITABLE.  Any room used, or intended or designed to be used,
for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes excluding such enclosed
spaces as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting
corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars,
utility rooms and similar spaces.



   SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL.  A school providing training or personal
improvement (beauty college, dance school, business school, gymnasium, and
the like).



   SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR HIGH.  An institution of learning which offers
instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be
taught in the public schools by the California Educational Code.  High
schools include junior and senior.



   SCHOOL, PRIVATE.  An accredited private school or college, providing
academic or trade education.



   SECRETARY.  The secretary of the Planning Commission.



   SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY.  An establishment for laundering where there is
no pickup or delivery service and no steam or hand laundry of any type;
however, that all washing machines and accessory extractors and dryers shall
be installed on a single floor without double decking and there shall be no
intermingling of customers' laundry.



   SERVICE STATION.  See “automobile service station.”



   SIGN.  Any writing (including letters, words or numerals), pictorial
presentation (including illustration or decoration) or emblem (including
device, symbol or trademark), visible from any public or private street or
means of access thereto, used to advertise or direct attention to an
activity, product, place, person, organization, business or enterprise.



   SIGN AREA.  This is computed as including the entire area within a
regular geometric form or combination of regular geometric forms comprising
all the display area of the sign.  Frames and structural members not bearing
advertising matter are not included in computation of area.  One face of a
double-faced sign shall be considered in determining the sign area, provided
both faces are parallel or the angle between the faces does not exceed 30°.



   SIGN, OFF-SITE.  A sign other than an on-site sign.



   SIGN, ON-SITE.  A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises
on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services or
activities sold, rendered or conducted on the premises.  ON-SITE SIGNS do
not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry.



   STABLE, COMMERCIAL.  A stable other than a private stable.



   STABLE, PRIVATE.  An accessory building or structure used for the
keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for
remuneration, hire or sale.



   STORY.  Any portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.  If the finished
floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused underfloor space is
more than six feet above grade as defined in this section for more than 50%
of the total perimeter, or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined in
this section at any point, such basement, cellar or unused underfloor space
shall be considered as a story.



   STREET.  A county road, state highway, public road, street or alley,
or private thoroughfare not less than 10 feet in width connecting with a
county road, state highway, public road, street or alley which affords
primary access to an abutting lot.



   STREET, PRIVATE.  A privately-owned vehicular right-of-way used as
access by two or more lots which do not have frontages on a public street.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change to a bearing wall, column, beam,
joist, roof, rafter or other supporting member of a building or structure.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected which requires a location
in or on the ground, or which is attached to something having a location on
or in the ground, such as signs, flagpoles, or similar appurtenances,
including a building or a building's architectural features and roof
appurtenances required to operate and maintain the building, but not
including fences, or walls used as fences, less than six feet in height.



   SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.  All, or any part of, the process involved
in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining
directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally
exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work
incident to an underground mine.  SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS shall include,
but are not limited to:



      (1)   In-place distillation, retorting or leaching;



      (2)   The production and disposal of mining waste;



      (3)   Prospecting and exploratory activities.



   SWIMMING POOL.  A tank or pool created by artificial means designed
for the purpose of containing a body of water and offering the possibility of
use for swimming, bathing, and/or bodily immersion by any person, any portion
of which tank or pool exceeds 18 inches in depth.



   TOWNHOUSE.  A single-family dwelling unit attached to one or more
other single-family dwelling units provided only one such dwelling unit is
located on a lot.



   TRAILER PARK, TRAILER COURT, MOBILE HOME PARK AND PUBLIC TRAILER CAMP.
Any area or tract of land used or designed to accommodate two or more
automobile trailers, including trailer camps as defined by law, and used as
living or sleeping quarters.



   TRAILER, TRAVEL.  A vehicular portable unit, mounted on wheels, of
such a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when
drawn by a motorized vehicle; primarily designed and constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.



   TRANSIENT.  Tourists or other persons abiding in the city for a short
period of time.



   USE.  The purpose for which land or building is designed, arranged or
intended or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained.



   USE AREA.  An open or yard area, uncovered by building or structures,
used as the main use or accessory use of a lot or parcel.



   YARD.  An open space, other than a court, on a lot, which space is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise
expressly provided in this chapter.



   YARD AREA.  The area of yard on a given lot expressed in numbers of
square feet.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending across the full width of a lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line parallel thereto on the lot, except that where there is an
official plan line or a future street line, front yards shall be measured
from such official plan line or future street line and a line parallel
thereto on the lot.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending across the full width of a lot, having
at no point a depth of less than the minimum required horizontal distance as
measured from the part of the main building nearest the rear lot line towards
the rear lot line, and such measurement shall be along a line representing
the shortest distance between said part of the main building and rear lot
line.  The required rear yard shall be that portion of the rear yard
contiguous to the rear lot line having at no point a depth less than that
required for the rear yard.  The area to the rear of the rear lot line of an
interior triangular or gore-shaped lot shall be considered a part of the
required rear yard.



   YARD, REQUIRED.  That yard area required by this chapter.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard extending from the required front yard or the
front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear lot line, the
width of which is the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and
a line parallel thereto on the lot, except that where there is an official
plan line or a future street line, side yards shall be measured from such
official plan line or future street line and a line parallel thereto on the
lot.



   YARD SPACE, INTERIOR.  That area on the lot behind the front setback
line which is open from ground to sky and used as private open space except
as otherwise permitted in this chapter.



('81 Code, §§ 17.04.005—17.04.645)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.007  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, structurally altered or moved shall be occupied or used until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Department.



('81 Code, § 17.82.010)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)  Penalty, see §
156.999



REGULATIONS, CONDITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS



§ 156.020  REGULATIONS SUBJECT TO CERTAIN PROVISIONS.



   The regulations set forth in this chapter pertaining to the several
zones shall be subject to the general provisions, conditions and exceptions
contained in this subchapter, Ch. 152, Ch. 16.40, Ch. 16.44, Ch. 16.70, and
Ch. 16.110 et seq.



('81 Code, § 17.06.010)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Am. Ord. 1169, passed
2-5-07)



§ 156.021  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Where any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent
requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or
required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance or by private
covenants, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern.



('81 Code, § 17.06.020)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.022  LESS RESTRICTIVE USES PROHIBITED.



   The express enumeration and authorization in this chapter of a
particular class of building, structure, premises or use in a designated zone
shall be deemed a prohibition of such building, structure, premises or use in
all zones of more restrictive classification, except as otherwise specified.



('81 Code, § 17.06.030)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.023  SIMILAR USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   When a use is not specifically listed in the permitted uses
section of a zone, it shall be understood that the use may be permitted if it
is determined by the Planning Director or designee that the use is similar to
other uses listed.



   (B)   It is further recognized that every conceivable use can not be
identified in this code, and anticipating that new uses will evolve over
time, this section establishes the Director's authority to compare a proposed
use and measure it against those listed in the permitted uses section and the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual for determining similarity.



   (C)   In determining “similarity” the Director shall make all of
the following findings:



      (1)   The proposed use shall meet the intent of, and be
consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan;



      (2)   The proposed use shall meet the stated purpose and
general intent of the district in which the use is proposed to be located;



      (3)   The proposed use shall not adversely impact the public
health, safety and general welfare of the city's resident; and



      (4)   The proposed use shall share characteristics common
with, and not be of greater intensity, density or generate more environmental
impact, than those uses listed in the permitted uses section.



('81 Code, § 17.06.040)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Am. Ord. 986, passed
5-15-95)



§ 156.024  ADDITIONAL EXCLUDED USES.



   Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this chapter as uses
excluded from any zone may be excluded therefrom; provided, such uses are, in
the opinion of the City Council, as evidenced by a resolution in writing
after a report and recommenda-tion by the Planning Commission, not less
obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community than the excluded
uses specifically mentioned in any zone.



('81 Code, § 17.06.050)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.025  LAND MAY BE USED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SPECIFIC PLAN.



   After a specific plan of streets, lots, and other features of design is
adopted in the matter prescribed by law, the land covered by such specific
plan may be authorized for uses conforming to such specific plan by
reclassification of such land.



('81 Code, § 17.06.060)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.026  ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES PROJECTING INTO REQUIRED FRONT YARD.



   Sidewalk arcades and similar architectural features of commercial
buildings may be established and maintained in a required front yard upon the
issuance of a conditional use permit.



('81 Code, § 17.06.070)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.027  USE OF MOBILE HOMES AS DWELLINGS.



   A mobile home shall be permitted to be used as a single-family dwelling
unit on a lot in the A-1, R-A, and R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones subject to the
following provisions:



   (A)   The mobile home shall be certified under the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et
seq.).



   (B)   The mobile home shall be placed on a foundation system,
pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18551.



   (C)   The mobile home shall meet all of the provisions of the zone
in which it is placed, including, but not limited to, building setback
standards, front, side and rear yard requirements, parking requirements,
accessory building regulations, access, and the architectural provisions of
§ 156.028; provided, however, that only one such mobile home shall be placed
on any one lot.



   (D)   A building permit for the placement of the mobile home on the
foundation and the construction of any and all accessory buildings shall be
obtained from the city.



('81 Code, § 17.06.073)  (Ord. 755, passed  - -81)



Cross-reference:



   Mobile homes and mobile home parks, see Ch. 152



§ 156.028  REQUIRED ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES OF SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   (A)   All single-family dwelling units, including mobile homes
placed on a permanent foundation in accordance with § 156.027, constructed,
erected or moved onto a permanent foundation on property in any A-1, R-A or
R-1 Zone, shall conform to the following standards:



      (1)   No sheet metal roofs shall be permitted; provided,
however, that metal roofs which simulate wood shake and shingle roofs shall
be permitted, as shall metal patio roofs.



      (2)   All main buildings or structures shall have eave
overhangs of a minimum of 16 inches or a minimum one-foot-high parapet
extending above roof level.



      (3)   No metal siding shall be permitted with the exception of
metal lap siding.



   (B)   Variances from the provisions of this section may be requested
under the provisions of Ch. 16.220.



('81 Code, § 17.06.076)  (Ord. 755, passed  - -81)  Penalty, see §
156.999



Cross-reference:



   Mobile homes and mobile home parks, see Ch. 152



§ 156.029  [RESERVED].



§ 156.030  BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHAPTER.



   Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be
completed and used in accordance with the plans, specifications and permits
on which such building permit was granted if construction is commenced within
60 days after the issuance of such permit and diligently prosecuted to
completion.



('81 Code, § 17.06.090)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.031  APPLICABILITY TO NONCONFORMING USES RESULTING FROM AMENDMENTS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to uses which become
nonconforming by reason of any amendment to this chapter as of the effective
date of such amendment.



('81 Code, § 17.06.110)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.032  LOCATION OF DWELLINGS; EASEMENT WIDTH.



   (A)   Except where otherwise provided for in this chapter, every
dwelling shall face or have frontage upon a street or permanent means of
access to a street by way of a public or private easement or passageway other
than an alley.



   (B)   Such easements shall be not less than 20 feet in width.



('81 Code, § 17.06.120)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.033  USES TO BE CONDUCTED INSIDE BUILDINGS.



   Except where otherwise provided for in this chapter, all uses in
commercial and manufacturing zones shall be conducted entirely within
enclosed buildings.



('81 Code, § 17.06.130)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.034  [RESERVED].



§ 156.035  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)   No penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators,
stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment, towers, steeples,
roof signs or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this
chapter.



   (B)   Flagpoles, chimneys and smokestacks may extend not more than
30 feet above the height limit provided in this chapter; provided, that the
same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the
surrounding conditions and circum-stances.



('81 Code, § 17.06.140)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 846, passed  -
-85)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.036  SCREENING OF INDUSTRIAL STORAGE AREAS.



   (A)   Outside storage or operations yards in all industrial zones
shall be confined to the area to the side and rear of the principal building
front or the rear two-thirds of the property and screened from view of any
property line and the nearest public street by walls, fencing, earth mounds,
or landscaping or a combination thereof.



   (B)   The use of slats in chain-link fencing to provide screening
shall not be permitted unless redwood or heavy slats of metal or other strong
material are used and unless, in the opinion of the Planning Director and
Chief Building Inspector, the use of such materials will adequately screen
the site.



   (C)   The design, materials and location of the required screening
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Director or Chief Building
Inspector.



   (D)   No storage of materials or equipment shall exceed the height
of such required screening.



('81 Code, § 17.06.150)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 761, passed  -
-81)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.037  REAR AND SIDE YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLINGS ABOVE OTHER
OCCUPANCIES.



   Where a dwelling is located, placed or erected above other types of
uses in zones other than O, A-1, H(PD), R-A, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 Zones, the
setbacks for the dwelling shall be as established in the conditional use
permit which is required for such a use.



('81 Code, § 17.06.160)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 812, passed  -
-84)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.038  [RESERVED].



§ 156.039  [RESERVED].



§ 156.040  [RESERVED].



§ 156.041  YARD ENCROACHMENTS.



   (A)   Cornices, canopies, carports, eaves or other similar
architectural features not providing additional floor space within the
building may extend into a required front or side yard not to exceed two feet.



   (B)   Open, unenclosed, uncovered porches, platforms or landing
places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building
may extend into any front or side yard not more than six feet; provided,
however, that an open work railing of not more than 30 inches in height may
be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place.



   (C)   Cornices, canopies, eaves or other similar architectural
features not providing additional floor space within a building may extend
into a required rear yard not more than two feet.



   (D)   Swimming pools may occupy required rear yards but not required
front or side yards.



('81 Code, § 17.06.200)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.042  STORAGE IN YARDS.



   (A)   No portion of any required front yard or side yard on the
street side of a corner lot, 20 feet from the face of the curb or 10 feet
from the inside portion of any sidewalk or walkway which is adjacent to a
public street or alley shall be used for the permanent storage of recreation
vehicles, motor vehicles, trailers, airplanes or boats.



   (B)    PERMANENT STORAGE, as used in this section, means the
presence for a period of 48 or more consecutive hours in such required front
or side yard.



('81 Code, § 17.06.210)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.043  TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE OFFICES.



   A temporary real estate sales office for the original public sale of
property in a subdivision tract is permitted in the tract after the final map
has been recorded.  Such office may be maintained for a period of 18 months
from the date of recordation or until all lots in the subdivision have been
sold, whichever is earlier.  The 18-month period may be extended for
six-month periods by special permission of the Planning Commission.



('81 Code, § 17.06.220)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.044  [RESERVED]



§ 156.045  REQUIREMENTS OF SPECIFIC PLANS SHALL PREVAIL.



   If the yard requirements, area requirements or any other requirements
established by this chapter are less than the yard requirements, area
requirements or such other requirements established by a specific plan
adopted pursuant to law, the requirements of such specific plan shall prevail.



('81 Code, § 17.06.240)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.046  SURFACE MINING PERMITS AND RECLAMATION PLANS.



   Reclamation plans and surface mining operation permits required
pursuant to the provisions of the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975,
Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 2710 et seq., as the same may be amended from time
to time, shall be processed, approved, modified and revoked in the same
manner as is specified in this subchapter, Ch. 152, Ch. 16.40, Ch. 16.44, Ch.
16.70 and Ch. 16.110 et seq. for conditional use permits.  No reclamation
plan shall be approved and no surface mining operation permit shall be issued
without a public hearing thereon.  Surface mining operations governed by
these provisions shall be inspected at least annually for compliance with
permit conditions.  As a condition of approval of reclamation plans and/or
surface mining operation permits, surface mining operators may be required to
consent to the creation of liens and/or to post surety bonds and/or other
sufficient security to guarantee reclamation in accordance with the
reclamation plan.



('81 Code, § 17.06.250)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Am. Ord. 1169, passed
2-5-07)



§ 156.047  SPECIAL STUDY AREAS.



   No building permits for any new structures, no divisions of land, and
no annexations shall be approved in any area designated as a special study
area on the general plan unless a conditional use permit is granted.



('81 Code, § 17.06.260)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.048  CONDITIONS FOR MEETING FRONT YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   Any front yard requirement shall be deemed to be met when the depth of
the front yard provided at least equals the average of that established by
existing buildings which occupy 50% or more of the lots within the same block
and zone.



('81 Code, § 17.06.270)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78)



§ 156.049  JUNK.



   (A)   Accumulations prohibited; exceptions.  No person shall
accumulate junk or permit junk to be accumulated, or store or permit the
storage thereof, on any portion of a lot or parcel of land within the city,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Accumulations declared a public nuisance.  The accumulation
of junk contrary to this chapter is a public nuisance.  Upon the direction
of the City Council, the City Attorney shall bring an appropriate action to
abate such public nuisance in a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (C)   Storage of junk permitted under certain conditions.



      (1)   As to any lot or parcel of land within the city improved
with residence buildings or occupied by a bona fide residence, the person so
occupying the same may store on the rear one-third of the lot or parcel of
land on which the residence is situated, for a period of not to exceed 30
days, junk as defined in this chapter, if such junk, as junk, was not brought
upon the premises and stored but was or is accumulated through wear and tear
in the house-hold use of the family occupying such premises; provided, that
such person may store materials of a noncombustible and non-putrescible
character in a building upon the premises.



      (2)   It shall be lawful for the occupant of the residence
upon any lot or parcel of land at all times to have and to store upon such
premises such motor vehicles as are in daily use of such occupants or members
of his immediate family, or as are usable, registered and currently licensed
by the Motor Vehicle Department of the state, in the name of the occupant or
the names of his immediate family residing upon the premises involved; and,
in addition, to store and keep no more than one motor vehicle, one boat or
other vehicle whether usable or not and coming within the definition of junk
as set forth in this chapter; provided, that any unusable vehicle or boat
must be stored in an area which is completely screened from the view of
neighboring properties and streets and; provided, that any usable vehicle or
boat is stored in accordance with the provisions of § 156.042.



      (3)   It shall be lawful for the occupants of residences at
all times to accumulate and store for periods not to exceed 30 days junk
which it is the intent of such occupant within such 30-day period to take or
have taken to a public dump or other place where disposal lawfully may be
made; provided, that it is stored upon the rear portion of the lot as defined
in subdivision (1) of this division, and that any garbage accumulating from
kitchen or household material such as food, cereals, bread, meat, soap or
grease, shall be kept within plastic or metal containers fully covered so
that flies or other vermin shall not have access to the contents of such
containers.



      (4)   This section does not prohibit the accumulation of wood,
used lumber, lumber scraps or materials fabricated out of wood for use as
firewood or fuel; provided, that any such accumulation shall be neatly
stacked and shall be maintained behind the front yard setback or, if on a
corner lot, behind the front and side yard setbacks adjacent to a street of
the lot or parcel of land, as defined in subdivision (1) of this division,
that the components of such an accumulation shall be sawed or otherwise
reduced in size so that no piece thereof exceeds five feet in length, and
that such accumulation is accumulated and  kept upon the premises for use by
the actual occupant as fuel and is so used.  The determination of whether or
not the firewood is neatly stacked shall be made by the Chief Building
Inspector or, on appeal, by the City Council.



   (D)   Enforcement.



      (1)   The Chief Building Inspector, either in person or
through his agents, shall investigate all complaints of violation of this
section and, in addition thereto, it is his duty, either in person or through
his agent, to examine and investigate the various parts of the city to
ascertain whether this section in any of its parts is being violated or
observed.  If, in the opinion of the Chief Building Inspector, after
investigating complaints or making examinations and observations on his own
account, any provision of this section is being violated, he shall notify, in
writing, the persons who are violating this section at the address where the
violation occurs, of such violation, with a warning that if such person does
not desist from the violation and correct the conditions complained of within
two days from the date such notice is served, such person will be prosecuted
in a court of competent jurisdiction.



      (2)   In serving the notice of violation it shall be
sufficient to deliver a written copy thereof to the person to be prosecuted;
or such written notice may be sent to such person by United States mail, in
which case such written notice shall be placed in an envelope addressed to
the person at the address where the violation occurs, with postage prepaid,
and deposited in the United States post office in the city.  The delivery in
the post office shall constitute service.



('81 Code, § 17.06.280)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 725, passed  -
-79; Ord. 738, passed  - -80)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.050  TEMPORARY SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 16.15.020, sales of
alcoholic beverages may take place for a maximum of one day without the
necessity of obtaining a conditional use permit.  Such one-day events are
prohibited within 1,000 feet of community street fairs, carnivals, festivals
and parades that hold valid permits issued pursuant to this code.  This
prohibition does not preclude the sale of alcohol at such permitted community
events.



   (B)   The City Council must approve temporary sales of alcoholic
beverages lasting not more than three days. The City Council may establish
conditions regarding such sales to ensure compliance with city codes and the
health, safety and welfare of the public.  The City Council may deny such
requests if it finds that the prior history of the organization or individual
requesting the sale warrants such a denial or if the potential impacts of
traffic congestion, crime, public drunkenness or other matters affecting
public health, safety, or welfare cannot be mitigated through conditions. 
Such events are prohibited within 1,000 feet of community street fairs,
carnivals, festivals and parades that hold valid permits issued pursuant to
this code.  This prohibition does not preclude the sale of alcohol at such
permitted community events.



   (C)   All other sales of alcoholic beverages require a conditional
use permit.



('81 Code, § 17.06.290)  (Ord. 800, passed  - -84; Ord. 842, passed  -
-85; Ord. 1127, passed 12-20-04)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.051  [RESERVED].



§ 156.052  [RESERVED].



§ 156.053  FEES.



   The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, establish fees
for the processing of applications which are authorized or required within
this chapter.



('81 Code, § 17.06.320)  (Ord. 889, passed  - -87)



PRESERVATION, CUTTING AND REMOVAL OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY



§ 156.580  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It is the determination of the Council that proper and necessary steps
should be taken in order to protect and preserve, to the greatest extent
possible, mature trees on public property and native oak, sycamore and
heritage and historic trees, especially where these trees are associated with
proposals for urban development, as trees are a significant, historical,
aesthetic and valuable ecological resource.  It is the intent of this
subchapter to maintain and enhance the general health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the city by assisting in counteracting air pollution, by
minimizing soil erosion and other related environmental damage and by
enhancing the aesthetic environment of the city.  It is also the intent of
this subchapter to preserve and enhance property values through conserving
and enhancing the distinctive and unique aesthetic character of many areas of
the city in which oak, sycamore, heritage and historic and other mature trees
live.



('81 Code, §17.56.010)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)



§ 156.581  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all mature trees on
public property and all living native oak, sycamore, heritage and historic
trees, including but not limited to, where those trees are associated with
proposals for urban development, on all public or private property within the
limits of the city, except as specified in § 156.585.



('81 Code, § 17.56.020)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)



§ 156.582  PROHIBITION OF REMOVAL.



   No mature tree on public property or any native oak tree, sycamore,
heritage or historic tree on public or private property or associated with
urban develop- ment or zoned for further development shall be removed, cut
down, or otherwise destroyed, except as provided for in this subchapter.



('81 Code, § 17.56.030)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.583  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASSOCIATED WITH A PROPOSAL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT.  Shall apply to any
land area for which an application for an entitlement, other than for a zone
clearance, has been filed with and is pending consideration by the city or
land zoned for further development.  If such entitlement has been approved
but the related project or applicable phase thereof has not been completed,
the city shall attempt to work with the applicant to save as many trees which
are protected by this subchapter as possible.



   DIAMETER.  That area equal to the full breadth of the tree measured on
the tree's trunk at four and one half feet from its basal root crown.  Limb
diameter is measured at the trunk.



   DIRECTOR.  In a matter involving private property, means the Planning
Director.  DIRECTOR, in a matter involving public property or property to be
dedicated for public use, means the Director of Public Works.



   DRIPLINE.  The outermost edge of the tree's canopy.  When depicted on
a map, the dripline will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows
the contour of the tree's branches as seen from overhead.



   HERITAGE OR HISTORIC TREE.  A living tree designated by resolution of
the City Council following a public hearing as a heritage or historic tree
because of an association with some event or person of historical
significance to the community or because of special recognition due to size,
rareness, condition, aesthetic or unusual qualities that add to the heritage
of the community.



   LOT.  An area of land created or established for purposes of sale,
lease, finance, division of interest or separate use, separated from other
lands by description on a final map or parcel map.



   MATURE TREE.  Any other (non-oak or sycamore) single-trunked tree
species equal to or greater than 12 inches in diameter as measured four and
one-half feet above the root crown, or, in the case of a tree with more than
one trunk, any such tree for which the sum of its two largest trunks equals
or is greater than 14½ inches as measured four and one-half feet above the
root crown.  MATURE TREE shall apply to trees on public property or
associated with a proposal for urban development or on land zoned for further
development, but shall not apply to any tree grown or held for sale in a
licensed nursery, nor to the first removal transplanting of a tree pursuant
to the operation of a licensed nursery business.



   NATIVE OAK TREE.  A living tree of the genus Quercus and species
lobata, agrifolia, dumosa or hybrids thereof.



   OAK TREE (OR HYBRIDS THEREOF).  Any single-trunked living tree of the
Quercus genus and species lobata, agrifolia, dumosa, equal to or greater than
five and one-half inches in diameter as measured four and one-half feet above
the root crown, or, in the case of an oak with more than one trunk, any such
tree for which the sum of its two largest trunks equals or is greater than
seven and one-half inches as measured four and one-half feet above the root
crown.  OAK TREE shall not apply to any tree grown or held for sale in a
licensed nursery, nor to the first removal or transplanting of a tree
pursuant to the operation of a licensed nursery business.



   PRUNING AND/OR TRIMMING.  The cutting of any limb or branch.



   ROOT CROWN.  That portion of a tree trunk from which roots extend
laterally into the ground.



   SYCAMORE TREE.  Any tree of the Platanus genus equal to or greater
than 25 inches in circum- ference as measured four and one-half feet above
the root crown, or, in the case of a sycamore with more than one trunk, any
such tree with a circumference of any two trunks of at least 32 inches as
measured four and one-half feet above the root crown.  SYCAMORE TREE shall
not apply to any tree grown or held for sale in a licensed nursery, nor to
the first removal or transplanting of a tree pursuant to the operation of a
licensed nursery business.



('81 Code, § 17.56.040)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)



§ 156.584  TREE REMOVAL PERMITS.



   The appropriate reviewing department(s) shall give priority to
inspection of those requests based upon hazardous conditions, and may refer
any request to the appropriate committee/commission for determination.



   (A)   Permit required.  No native oak and sycamore tree, heritage
or historic tree, where that tree is on public or private property, or any
other mature tree on public property except as provided for in division (B)
of this section, or is associated with a proposal for urban development,
shall be removed, cut down or otherwise destroyed, unless a tree removal
permit has been issued by the city.  The Planning Director shall establish
the format and information required for a tree removal permit consistent with
this subchapter.  In no event shall a permit be denied if to do so would
eliminate all reasonable economic use of the property.



   (B)   Single parcel review requirement.  Permits for removal of
native oak and sycamore trees, heritage or historic trees, and other mature
trees on any single parcel shall be required from the appropriate
committee/commission or director or designee.



   (C)   Site inspection.  Prior to the issuance of such permit, the
appropriate director, or designee, shall inspect the premises involved and
shall designate the tree(s) to be removed or moved.  Failure to provide
access to the premises shall be grounds for denial of the permit.



   (D)   Project approval required.  No tree removal permit shall be
issued for the removal of any tree on any lot associated with a proposal for
urban development unless the project has been approved by the city or unless
the Director of Planning, or his or her designee, determines that the
immediate removal of the tree is required because of the condition of the
tree with respect to disease, danger of collapse of all or any portion of the
tree, proximity to an existing structure or interference with utility
services.



   (E)   Removal not associated with a proposal for urban
development.  Where tree(s) are proposed for removal that are not associated
with a proposal for urban development, the Director, or designee, may
condition a tree removal permit upon the replacement of certain tree(s). 
Any applicant for a tree removal permit shall not be required to expend more
on the replacement tree(s) than the appraised value of the tree(s) for which
a permit is required.  An appraisal shall be done in accordance with the
adopted procedures for implementation of the tree ordinance.



   (F)   Removal associated with a proposal for urban development. 
Where tree(s) are proposed for removal that are associated with a proposal
for urban development, the Director, or his or her designee, shall cause an
appraisal of the value of said tree(s) to be prepared in accordance with the
adopted procedures.  The resulting value shall be applied to upgrading the
size of tree plantings associated with the project.  Trees for which no tree
report has been required pursuant to the guidelines for reports on native
oak, sycamore, heritage, historic and mature trees associated with proposals
for urban development (a) and (b) of the procedures for implementation shall
not be subject to appraisal or replacement by value.



   (G)   Tree replacement waiver.  In no case shall an applicant for a
tree removal permit be required to replace or otherwise pay for the value of
any tree which:



      (1)   The city has directed the applicant to remove so that a
public street may be constructed along an alignment determined or approved by
the City Engineer or adequate line-of-sight distance may be achieved in order
to assure public safety; or



      (2)   Removal was necessitated due to the poor health of the
tree.



('81 Code, § 17.56.050)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.585  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:



   (A)   Emergency situation.  Cases of emergency where the Planning
Director or designee or any member of a law enforcement agency or the Fire
Department, in the performance of his or her duties, determines that a tree
poses an imminent threat to the public safety or general welfare.  If
conditions and circumstances permit, the public official shall consult with
the Public Works Director, or designee, prior to ordering the removal of any
mature tree.



   (B)   City Engineer.  Removal or relocation of trees necessary to
obtain adequate line-of-sight distances as required by the City Traffic
Engineer.



   (C)   Public improvement damage.  Removal of trees from within
public right-of-way, which in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, or
his or her designee, will cause serious damage to existing public
improvements.



   (D)   Public utility.  A public utility, regulated by the
California Public Utilities Commission, is exempt from the requirements of
this subchapter.



   (E)   Trees for sale.  Trees planted, grown or held for sale by a
private individual or nursery.



   (F)   Pruning and trimming.  Pruning or trimming which does not
endanger the life of the tree.



('81 Code, § 17.56.060)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)



§ 156.586  DEFACING OR SCARRING OF NATIVE OAK, SYCAMORE, HERITAGE OR
HISTORIC TREES, AND OTHER MATURE TREES.



   No person shall injure, deface or scar any native oak, sycamore,
heritage or historic tree, or other mature trees.



('81 Code, § 17.56.070)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.587  ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES AND PROCEDURES.



   The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, issue
procedures to provide for the administration and implementation of this
subchapter, including the establishment of fees to provide for processing of
applications.  The city shall have the right to review, approve
conditionally, or deny any application submitted to it under the procedures
contained herein or established by resolution of the City Council.



('81 Code, § 17.56.080)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)



§ 156.588  APPEALS.



   Decisions relating to proposals for urban development and single
parcels which are made by the Planning Director may be appealed to the
Planning Commission.  Decisions regarding trees on public property which are
made by the Public Works Director may be appealed to the City Council.



('81 Code, § 17.56.100)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)



§ 156.589  NONLIABILITY OF CITY; DUTY OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to impose any liability or
duty upon the city or upon any of its officers, employees or agents, nor to
relieve the owner and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep
native oak and sycamore trees, heritage or historic trees, or other mature
trees upon such property or under his control, in a safe condition.



('81 Code, § 17.56.110)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)



ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 156.780  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The City Council has reviewed land use studies concerning the
secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses in other cities including, but
not limited to:  Garden Grove, California (1991); Phoenix, Arizona (1986);
Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980); Houston, Texas (1983); Indianapolis, Indiana
(1984); Amarillo, Texas (1977); Los Angeles, California (1977); Cleveland,
Ohio (1977); Austin, Texas (1986); Seattle, Washington (1989); Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma (1986); Beaumont, Texas (1982); Tucson, Arizona (1990); and
Whittier, California (1987).



   (B)   The Council finds that the secondary effects  of adult
businesses include, among other things, an increase in crime, a decrease in
property values and retail trade, unlawful sexual activities including
prostitution and pandering, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession
and distribution of obscene materials, child pornography, possession and 
sale of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and
property.



   (C)   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens  of the city by regulating adult
businesses, by specifying appropriate locations for such businesses, and by
requiring the separation of such businesses by a minimum distance, thereby
reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects of such businesses. 
The purpose of this subchapter is not to limit or restrict the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials, to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
United States or California Constitutions, or to  deny access by
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented materials and entertainment
to their intended  market.  The purpose of this subchapter is not to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.



   (D)   It is further the intent of the City Council that adult
businesses shall exhibit the same high standards of site planning,
architecture, landscape, and exterior design required of all commercial or
industrial developments, while minimizing general  public view of sexually
explicit adult-oriented materials or activities, particularly as such
materials or activities might cause harm or offense to “captive viewers”
of such materials or activities, i.e., passersby or other visitors to the
area who are not customers of an adult business and would not choose to be
exposed to such materials or activities.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



Cross-reference:



   Business license taxes, see Ch. 110



§ 156.781  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT.  A person who is at least 18 years old.



   ADULT BUSINESS.  Those businesses defined as follows:



      (1)    ADULT ARCADE.  An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machine, for
viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
charac-terized by the depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.



      (2)    ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO
STORE.  An establishment that has a significant or substantial portion of
its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its advertising
to the sale, rental or viewing for any form of considera-tion, books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations
characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas
or specified sexual activities, or instruments, devices or paraphernalia
designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use.



      (3)    ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant,
“bottle club,” or similar public or private establishment, whether or not
alcoholic beverages are served, that regularly features persons who appear
nude; live performances characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or the presentation of specified sexual activities; or films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      (4)    ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR.  Any place where, for any form
of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rubs, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment
involving manipulation of a part of or in connection with specified sexual
activities, are provided, and where any person providing such treatment,
manipulation or services related thereto, exposes his or her specified
anatomical areas.  ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR does not include the practice of
massage as described in Chapter 120 of this code.



      (5)    ADULT MOTEL.  A motel, hotel or similar commercial
establishment that offers public accommodations, for any form of
consideration, that provide patrons with closed-circuit television
transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions charac-terized by the depiction of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and advertises  the
availability of this type of material by means of a sign visible from the
public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including
but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, radio or
television.



      (6)    ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  An establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar  photo-graphic
reproductions characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of
considera-tion.



      (7)    ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium,
or similar establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear nude or live performances characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or the presentation of specified
sexual activities.



      (8)    ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business that as one of
its significant business purposes and for a fee, tip or other consideration
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts. ESCORTS are
persons who, act as companions, guides or dates or privately model lingerie
or perform a striptease.



      (9)    NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who
appears nude or displays specified anatomical areas is provided for money or
any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.  NUDE MODEL
STUDIO does not include a class in which nude models pose and which is
offered by a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation; offered by a private college or university for class
credits that are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or held in a structure having no
sign or other advertising visible from the exterior of the structure
indicating that a nude model is available for viewing, where no more than one
nude model is on the premises at the same time, and where in order to
participate in the class a student must enroll at least three days in advance
of the class.



      (10)    SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment
that as one of its significant business purposes offers for any form of
consideration a place where two or more persons, at least one of whom is
nude, may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of engaging in
specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTAB-LISHMENT does not include an establishment where a
medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar licensed
professional person engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who works or performs in and/or for an adult
business, regardless of whether the person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of the business.



   ESTABLISH, ESTABLISHING and ESTAB-LISHMENT.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of an  adult business as a
new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not
an adult business, to an adult business; or



      (3)   The relocation of an adult business.



   NUDE.  The display of the unclothed human buttocks, anus or genitals,
or the areola or nipple of the female human breast, or a state of dress that
fails to opaquely and fully cover such areas of the body.



   OPERATOR.  The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, or person in
charge of the premises of an adult business.



   PERMITTEE.  A person in whose name an adult business permit has been
issued under this subchapter, as well as the persons listed as applicants in
the application for such permit.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other entity.



   PLANNING DIRECTOR.  The Planning Director of the city or a city
employee designated by the Planning Director.



   PUBLIC BUILDING.  Any building owned, leased or held by the United
States, the State of California, the County of Ventura, the city, a school
district, or any other special district, agency or political subdivision of
the state or the United States, which building is used for governmental
purposes and which is open to the public.



   PUBLIC PARK or RECREATION AREA.  Public land within the city that has
been designated for park, recreational, or arts activities, including but not
limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir,
athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian or bicycle path, open
space, wilderness area, or similar public land under the control, operation,
or management of the city.



   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or
building used primarily for religious worship or related religious activities
recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service.



   RESIDENTIAL ZONE.  Property zoned for residential use.



   SCHOOL.  Any public or private educational facility, including but not
limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, colleges, and universities.  SCHOOL includes the school grounds,
but does not include facilities used primarily for non-educational purposes
and only incidentally as a school.



   SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areolae; or



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;



      (2)   Actual or simulated sex acts, including intercourse,
oral copulation, and anal intercourse;



      (3)   Actual or simulated masturbation;



      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence; or



      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the matters set forth in subdivisions (1) through (4) of this definition.



   YOUTH ORGANIZATION FACILITY.  Any building used primarily for meetings
of a social, educational or athletic club or group composed primarily of
persons under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



§ 156.782  ALLOWABLE LOCATIONS.



   (A)   Adult businesses may be established, subject to all other
provisions of this subchapter and the zoning code, only in M-1, M-1-L, M-2,
C-1, C-2 and I-P(PD) Zones.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, no adult
business may be established:



      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of any residential zone, religious
institution, hospital, convalescent home or similar facility, youth
organization facility, school, public building, public park or recreation
area (“protected locations”).  Adult businesses are allowed within 1,000
feet of a “protected location” if the two locations are separated by the
freeway, unless a pedestrian or vehicular crossing of the freeway is also
located within 1,000 feet of the adult business and the “protected
location.”



      (2)   Within 200 feet of another adult business.



   (C)   Each adult business defined in § 156.781 shall be considered
a separate business, whether or not owned or operated by the same persons and
more than one adult business shall not be established in the same building,
structure or portion thereof or in violation of the criteria contained in
divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section.



   (D)   Distance between any two adult businesses shall be measured in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
exterior wall of each business.  Distance between any adult business and any
residential zone, religion institution, hospital, convalescent home or
similar facility, youth organization facility, school, public building,
public park or recreation area, shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior wall of the adult
business to the nearest property line of the residential zone, area or
facility listed above.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the zoning code to the
contrary, none of the locational criteria set forth in this section may be
waived, reduced, or modified in any manner by the variance procedures set
forth in Ch. 16.220.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.783  STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No adult business may be established unless the applicant
first demonstrates that the proposed adult business meets, or shall meet, all
of the following standards and requirements:



      (1)   The locational criteria set forth in § 156.782.



      (2)   All the building openings, entries, and windows from
adult businesses shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to
prevent a view into the interior, from any public sidewalk, street, arcade,
hallway or passageway, or from other uses, of any material or activity which
has as its primary or dominant theme matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (3)   Exterior advertising and signage which  is visible from
any public sidewalk, street, arcade, hallway or passageway, or from other
uses, may advertise the existence and location of the business but shall not
display any material which has as its primary or dominant theme matter
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.  Adult businesses are subject to all applicable
provisions of the city's sign ordinance.  The exterior lighting and signage
shall be substantially similar to that found at other uses in the area.  All
off-street parking areas and premises entries of an adult business shall be
illuminated from dusk to the close of the business.



      (4)   Exterior development shall meet all other development
design and landscape design requirements of the applicable zones.



   (B)   The adult business shall be established, maintained and
operated in a manner which complies with all other applicable provisions of
law.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.784  VIDEO BOOTH REGULATIONS.



   An applicant, operator or permittee of an adult business, other than an
adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 25
square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, shall comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   The application for an adult business permit shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing the location of one or more
manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and any
portion of the premises to which patrons will not be admitted.  The Planning
Director may waive the diagram requirement for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered since the diagram was
prepared.



   (B)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without prior approval of the Planning Director.



   (C)   At least one employee shall be on duty and  situated at each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



   (D)   The interior of the premises shall be configured so that there
is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is admitted for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.  Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.  If the
premises have two or more manager's stations designated, the interior of the
premises shall be configured so that there is an unobstructed view of each
area of the premises to which any patron is admitted for any purpose from at
lease one of the manager's stations.  The view required in this division
must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.



   (E)   The view area specified in division (D) of this section shall
remain unobstructed at all times by any doors, walls, merchandise, display
racks or other materials.  No patron shall be admitted to any area of the
premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
admitted in the diagram submitted pursuant to division (A) of this section.



   (F)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
one time.  The entry to each viewing room shall be open and not be covered
by any door, panel, curtain or other obstruction to view.



   (G)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
admitted such that a person standing at the managers station(s) can
adequately see all portions of the interior of the premises.  Such
illumination shall be maintained at all times that any patron is present on
the premises.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.785  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No adult business shall operate without a valid adult business
permit for a particular type of adult business at a particular location.



   (B)   The application shall be granted unless it is denied for one
or more of the reasons set forth in division (E) of this section.  The
permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult business premises.



   (C)   If the application is granted or if the application is neither
granted or denied within 30 days after the application is deemed complete,
the applicant may begin operating the adult business.



   (D)   Applicants shall promptly supplement the application if the
information therein, including the names of employees required by §
156.790(A) of the procedures changes in any way.



   (E)   An application for an adult business permit shall be denied
for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   If the applicant is an individual under 18 years of age.



      (2)   The applicant has failed to provide information required
by the permit application or has provided false information in the
application.



      (3)   The application and annual permit fees have not been
paid.



      (4)   The applicant is in violation of, or is not in
compliance with, any of the provisions of this subchapter, including but not
limited to the locational requirements for an adult business set out in §
156.782.



      (5)   The granting of the application would violate a statute,
ordinance, or court order.



      (6)   If the information on the application changes, including
employees required to be licensed under § 156.790(A), and the application is
not updated with the new information within 30 days of the date the
information changed.



   (F)   If a person applies for a permit or renewal of a permit for a
particular location within one year from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit or renewal of a permit at the same location, and
there has not been a change in circumstances that could reasonably be
expected to lead to a different decision regarding the reasons for the
previous denial, the application shall be denied.



   (G)   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or
city permits or licenses (including but not limited to a business license, a
special use permit, a massage permit, an arcade permit, a dance permit or any
entertainment permit) does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of
obtaining an adult business permit.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.786  EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Each permit shall expire at the end of each calendar year and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 156.785
accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be
renewed.  Application for renewal shall be made before the expiration date
of the permit.



   (B)   Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided for new
applications.



   (C)   Requests for renewal shall not be denied because a religious
institution or other use listed in § 156.782(B)(1) is located within 500
feet of the adult business, as described in § 156.782(D), if the religious
institution or other use was permitted to operate, established, constructed
or began operation at that location after the date the adult business permit
was originally approved.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



§ 156.787  SUSPENSION.



   If a permittee or an employee of a permittee violates or is not in
compliance with any section of this subchapter, the permit shall be suspended
until the violation is corrected.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



§ 156.788  REVOCATION.



   (A)   A permit shall be revoked for the following reasons:



      (1)   If a permittee or an employee violates or is not in
compliance with any section of this subchapter and the permit has been
suspended twice within the preceding year;



      (2)   A permittee gave false information in the application;



      (3)   A permittee or an employee of a permittee operated the
adult business during a period of time when the permit was suspended;



      (4)   A permit is transferred in violation of § 156.789.



      (5)   An applicant has employed a person who does not have an
adult business employee permit, as required by § 156.790 of this subchapter.



   (B)   Permits shall be revoked for a period of one year from the
date the revocation became effective.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



§ 156.789  TRANSFER.



   (A)   A permittee shall not operate an adult business under the
authority of a permit at any place other than the address of the adult
business stated in the application for the permit.



   (B)   (1)   A permittee shall not transfer the permit to another
person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit
stating that the transferee is now the permittee.



      (2)   Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee
files an application with the city in accordance with § 156.785, accompanies
the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the
City Council, and the city determines in accordance with § 156.785, that the
transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit.



   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the city has notified the
permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.790  EMPLOYEE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall be employed in an adult business to engage in
the services rendered by a nude model studio, escort agency, sexual encounter
establishment or adult massage parlor without a valid adult business employee
permit issued by the city.



   (B)   The application shall be granted unless the application is
denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in division (D) of this
section.  The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult
business premises.



   (C)   If the application is granted or if the application is neither
granted or denied within 30 days after the application is deemed complete,
the applicant may begin employment in the capacity for which the permit was
sought.



               (D)      The application shall be denied for any
of the following reasons, based on the report from the Police Department:



      (1)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading,
or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license
or in any report or document required to be filed with the application;



      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (3)   (a)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal act for which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified
criminal act.



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the specified
criminal act;



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the
specified criminal acts occurring within any 24-month period.



         (b)    SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS shall mean sexual crimes
against children, sexual abuse or rape, or crimes connected with an adult
business, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity,
prostitution or pandering, or any act for which the perpetrator is required
to register with any law enforcement agency.



         (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.  An applicant who has
been convicted of a specified criminal act may qualify for an adult business
employee permit only after such periods have elapsed.



      (4)   The adult business employee permit is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by state or city law.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.791  EMPLOYEE PERMIT EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Each adult business employee permit shall expire at the end of
each calendar year and may be renewed only by filing a written request for
renewal with the city, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the
permit to be renewed.  The request for renewal shall be made before the
expiration date of the permit.



   (B)   On receiving a request for renewal, accompanied by the annual
permit fee, the city shall renew the permit within 30 days, unless the Police
Department reports that the applicant has been convicted of any specified
criminal act or committed any act during the previous permit period that
would have been grounds to deny the initial permit applica-tion, in which
case the renewal shall be denied.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



§ 156.792  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   After denial of an application for an adult business permit or an adult
business employee permit, or denial of renewal of a permit, or suspension or
revocation of a permit, or denial of transfer of a permit, the applicant or
person to whom the permit was granted may seek prompt review of such
admini-strative action.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



§ 156.793  FEES AND PROCEDURES.



   The procedures for reviewing, issuing, trans-ferring, denying,
suspending and revoking permits, appeals of staff decisions, and the fees
required for all actions shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



§ 156.794  OTHER LAWFUL ACTION TO PREVENT OR REMEDY VIOLATION.



   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city from taking
such other lawful action in any court as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation or non-compliance.  Such other lawful actions shall include,
but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an
action at law for damages.  All remedies and penalties provided for in this
section shall be cumulative and independently available to the city, and the
city shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this
section to the full extent allowed by law.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



§ 156.795  IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.



   The city, the Police Department, and all other city departments and
agencies, and all city officers, agents and employees charged with
enforcement of state and city statutes and laws shall be immune from
prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon an
adult business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this
subchapter.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 156.910  ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Building Department, the
Planning Department and the City Police Department to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Chief Building Inspector, Planning Director and Police
Chief or their designated subordinates shall have the power of arrest without
warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be
arrested has committed in their presence a misdemeanor,
misdemeanor-infraction or infraction.



('81 Code, § 17.84.010)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 725, passed  -
-79)



Statutory reference:



   Public officers and officials; arrest without a warrant, see Cal. Penal
Code § 836.5



§ 156.911  EACH DAY SEPARATE OFFENSE.



   Each person found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of
any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such
person and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter, and
any use, occupation or building or structure maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance.



('81 Code, § 17.84.020)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 725, passed  -
-79)



§ 156.912  VIOLATION DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   (1)   Any building or structure erected, constructed,
altered or maintained and/or any use of property contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall be and the same is unlawful and a public nuisance and,
any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit as required by the terms
of this chapter, shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that the nuisance
has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, alteration
or maintenance of any building or structure erected, constructed, altered or
maintained or used contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The city staff is authorized to proceed with the
necessary steps to bring about the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment
thereof in the manner provided by law.



   (B)   All of the remedies provided for in this subchapter shall be
cumulative and not inclusive.



('81 Code, § 17.84.030)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 725, passed  -
-79)



§ 156.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter for which no other penalty is otherwise provided
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to the penalty provided in Chapter 13 of this code



(‘81 Code, § 17.84.040)  (Ord. 704, passed  - -78; Ord. 725, passed  -
-79)



   (B)   Violation of §§ 156.580 through 156.589 is a misdemeanor and
punishable according to Chapter 13 of this code.



(‘81 Code, § 17.56.090)  (Ord. 954, passed  - -92)



   (C)   In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the
California Penal Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with
or violates any of the provisions of §§ 156.780 through 156.795 of this
chapter, such person, upon conviction of such offense shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in the Ventura County Jail, or both, in
the discretion of the court.  Each violation or instance of non-compliance
shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.  Further, each day of
continued violation or non-compliance shall be considered as a separate
offense.



(Ord. 987, passed 6-19-95)



CHAPTER 157:  PAY PHONE PERMITS



Section



   157.01   Purpose



   157.02   Definitions



   157.03   Permit required



   157.04   Fees



   157.05   Administration



   157.06   General application requirements for permits



   157.07   Action on permit applications - Approval and issuance of
permit



   157.08   Pay phone permit - Annual renewal



   157.09   Overconcentration of pay phones



   157.10   Prohibition of pay phones at alcohol beverage sales
establishments



   157.11   Prohibited locations - Public nuisances



   157.12   Installation of pay phones in the public right-of-way - Use
agreement required



   157.13   Pay phone permit and use agreements - Required findings for
approval and operation



   157.14   General conditions - indemnity and hold harmless



   157.15   General conditions -joint and several liability



   157.16   General conditions - Comprehensive liability insurance



   157.17   General conditions - Surety bond or other security



   157.18   General conditions - operating standards



   157.19   Special conditions of permits



   157.20   Action on permit applications - Denial of application



   157.21   Permit revocation



   157.22   Removal and restoration work



   157.23   Right of administrative review



   157.24   Time for administrative review



   157.25   Commencement of administrative review



   157.26   Administrative review



   157.27   No right to City Council appeal



   157.28   Replacement prohibited



   157.29   Enforcement, forfeiture--Right to recover costs



§ 157.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with the city's police powers and
Cal. Gov’t Code § 37359 for the purpose of regulating the placement and
installation of pay phones within the city's jurisdiction. Such regulation is
intended to ensure quality pay phone service and avoid the possible secondary
effects of public nuisances and criminal activity that can result from
operations of unregulated pay phones.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   ADMINISTRATOR means the Public Works Director.



   APPLICANT means the person, whether corporate or natural, applying for
a pay phone permit.



   BLOCK-FACE  means the length of land between intersections.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE  means any drug, substance, or immediate
precursor, as listed in the Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Cal. Health &
Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.).



   EXISTING PAY PHONE means those phones that were lawfully installed as
of May 1, 2004.



   HEARING OFFICER  means the City Manager, or designee.



   OUTDOOR PAY PHONES  means any telephone booth, mounted telephone, or
other form of publicly accessible pay phone, located on public property or on
private property as an accessory, not enclosed within the interior of a
building.



   PAY PHONE SERVICE PROVIDER  means any person, corporate or natural,
that owns pay phones or manages and operates a business that directly
provides pay phone services.



   PAY PHONE  means any coin- or credit card- operated telephone
installed on public or private property. Public property includes public
rights-of- way.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY  means any city street, sidewalk, pedestrian path,
bike path or any other "public way," as defined by Cal. Sts. & High. Code §
18609.



   USE AGREEMENT means an agreement between the city and any person
intending to place phones on public property that requires payment of a
specified percentage of revenue to the city in exchange for the use of the
public property.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to install, maintain, or operate
a telephone booth, mounted telephone, or other form of publicly accessible
pay phone not enclosed within the interior of a building, whether on public
or private property without first obtaining a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.



   (B)   A permit is not deemed issued until the administrator receives
the applicant's written acceptance in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.04  FEES.



   Persons applying for a permit under this chapter must pay a permit fee
as established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.05  ADMINISTRATION.



   The administrator is authorized to administer this chapter, including,
without limitation, acting on all applications for a permit required by this
chapter. In addition, the City Manager may promulgate administrative policies
and procedures to implement the purpose of this chapter.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.06  GENERAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITS.



   Applications for a permit required by this chapter must be filed with
the administrator in a form, and with the information, prescribed by the
administrator. At a minimum, applications must include the following:



   (A)   An application fee;



   (B)   Except for existing pay phones, the real property owner and
pay phone service provider must be co-applicants for a permit;



   (C)   For existing pay phones, the pay phone service provider must
provide proof of a valid current contract with the real property owner or
tenant. Failure to submit such proof will cause the application to be deemed
for installation of a new pay phone.



   (D)   Evidence that the applicant notified all persons owning
property within 300 feet, as determined by the last equalized assessment
roll, of the proposed installation site regarding the application; and



   (E)   Plans indicating the proposed or existing location of the pay
phone in relation to public property.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.07  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS - APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   After receiving an application, the administrator will seek
comments and recommendations from the Police Chief;



   (B)   If an application is complete and there are no grounds for
denial, the administrator will approve the application and issue a permit
subject to all of the conditions provided for by this chapter, including such
special conditions as may be appropriate, upon the applicant providing proof
of insurance and compliance with all conditions precedent to the issuance of
the permit.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.08  PAY PHONE PERMIT - ANNUAL RENEWAL.



   All pay phone permits are effective for 12 months from the date of
issuance and must be renewed annually. The amount of a renewal fee will be
established by City Council resolution. The administrator may deny a permit
renewal application if the pay phone subject to a permit renewal is found not
to be in compliance with approved conditions of approval or if it is found to
be a public nuisance. The annual renewal fee is due and payable 30 days
before the expiration of the permit. If the annual renewal fee is not paid by
this date, the city may revoke the permit. Late fees may be established by
City Council resolution. The city may use any and all lawful means to collect
outstanding fees including liening the real property, legal action, or
holding of removed pay phones until all fees are paid.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.09  OVERCONCENTRATION OF PAY PHONES.



   No pay phone permit may be issued for a pay phone at an intersection
when there are already two or more pay phones at an intersection. No pay
phone permit may be issued for any city block when there are already two or
more pay phones on the block-face between intersections. This applies to all
outdoor pay phones, whether on public or private property. The administrator
may grant an exception to this requirement upon the finding that it will
enhance service to the public and will not create a public nuisance at that
particular location.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.10  PROHIBITION OF PAY PHONES AT ALCOHOL BEVERAGE SALES
ESTABLISHMENTS.



   No pay phone permits may be issued for outdoor pay phones located on
the property of alcohol beverage sales establishments selling alcohol
beverages except at establishments with 25 or more full time equivalent
employees and a minimum total floor area of 20,000 square feet. Unless
otherwise required in this chapter, nothing in this subsection requires the
removal of existing pay phones.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.11  PROHIBITED LOCATIONS -PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (A)   Prohibited locations. Except for existing pay phones, no pay
phone may be installed, located, or maintained on unimproved or abandoned
property. For existing pay phones, the service provider must provide proof of
a valid contract currently in effect with the property owner, or the phone is
subject to removal. Once such pay phones are removed, the prohibition in this
section applies and no permits or other approvals can be issued by the city.



   (B)   Public nuisance. Any pay phone used as an instrumentality for
or contributes substantially by its presence to any of the following
conditions, is declared to be a public nuisance:



      (1)   The selling or giving away of controlled substances;



      (2)   The soliciting, agreeing to engage in, or engaging in
any act of prostitution;



      (3)   The conduct of any other criminal activity;



      (4)   The consumption of alcoholic beverages on nearby outdoor
public or private property except where outdoor consumption of alcoholic
beverages is specifically authorized pursuant to the Department of Alcoholic
Beverages Control or by law;



      (5)   Disturbing the peace;



      (6)   Any acts which threaten the public health and safety
including, without limitation, public urination.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.12  INSTALLATION OF PAY PHONES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY - USE
AGREEMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   A use agreement is required for all pay phones, existing and
new, installed on:



      (1)   Public property;



      (2)   Private property where the pay phone overhangs public
property or requires a person to stand in that public property to use the
phone;



      (3)   Pay phones located such that a minimum distance from the
pay phone to the public property is less than that required for property
owner's, property tenant's or pay phone service provider's compliance with
the Americans With Disabilities Act or the California Building Code, as
adopted by this code.



   (B)   It is unlawful to install a pay phone on the public property
unless the installation is made pursuant to a use agreement entered into
under this chapter. Any pay phone installed or maintained in violation of
this section may be immediately removed by the city at the owner's or service
provider's expense.



   (C)   The City Manager has authority to enter into use agreements
with pay phone service providers that grant the privilege of installing and
maintaining pay phones in the public right-of-way.



   (D)   The City Manager or designee may deny any application for a
use agreement without the right of appeal.



   (E)   Use agreements in existence before the effective date of this
chapter will continue to be in effect until the expiration date noted in the
agreement. New use agreements are required after the expiration of any
existing agreements.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.13  PAY PHONE PERMIT AND USE AGREEMENTS - REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR
APPROVAL AND OPERATION.



   A pay phone permit and use agreement may be authorized by the
administrator only upon making the following findings:



   (A)   That the physical site, building conditions, and established
uses on the property on which the phone is to be located, comply with this
code and any other applicable local, state or federal laws or regulations;



   (B)   That the applicant has provided assurance that the proposed
phone will be maintained at all times in compliance with all usage control
measures required by this chapter or included in the conditions of approval
of the pay phone permit or use agreement;



   (C)   That the granting of the pay phone permit or use agreement
will not adversely affect the established or planned character and land uses
of the surrounding area nor be injurious to the property or improvements in
such vicinity and zone in which the property is located;



   (D)   That the design, location, establishment, maintenance, or
operation of the use for which the pay phone permit or use agreement is
sought will not, under the particular case, be detrimental to the public
interest, health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, or welfare of persons
or other permitted uses operating nearby;



   (E)   That the phone is and will be maintained in accordance with
this chapter.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.14  GENERAL CONDITIONS - INDEMNITY AND HOLD HARMLESS.



   (A)   The city is not liable for any injury or damage occurring to
any person or property from any cause whatsoever arising from the use,
operation, or condition of a pay phone.



   (B)   As a condition of issuing a pay phone permit, the permittee
must enter into an indemnification agreement with the city in a form approved
by the City Attorney.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.15  GENERAL CONDITIONS - JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.



   The property owner and the pay phone service provider are jointly and
severally liable for violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.16  GENERAL CONDITIONS - COMPREHENSIVE LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   (A)   Insurance requirements. Unless otherwise provided, no pay
phone permit can be issued unless and until an applicant obtains
comprehensive general liability insurance policy from an insurance company
licensed to do business in the State of California and having an A.M. Best
rating of at least "B," which provides insurance coverage for all liabilities
out of or in any way related to the proposed pay phone.



   (B)   Amount of insurance. The insurance contemplated by this
chapter will be in an amount of at least $250,000, combined single limit.



   (C)   Form of insurance. The insurance obtained pursuant to this
chapter will include an endorsement naming the city, the city's officers,
employees and volunteers as additional insureds under the coverage afforded,
will be primary with respect to any other insurance available to the city,
will include a severability of interest (cross-liability) clause, will
require the insurer to provide city at least 30 days prior notice of
cancellation, and will otherwise be in a form approved by the city's risk
manager.



   (D) Proof of insurance. An applicant must provide proof of insurance in
a form approved by the City Attorney at the time a permit is issued and will
be filed with the administrator before a permit is issued.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.17  GENERAL CONDITIONS - SURETY BOND OR OTHER SECURITY.



   (A)   Security requirements. Except as provided by this chapter, a
pay phone permit cannot be issued and a use agreement cannot be executed for
pay phones installed on public property unless and until the permittee
obtains and provides the city a surety bond or other security guaranteeing
permittee's performance of all duties and obligations under such permit
including, in particular, the duty and obligation to remove the pay phone in
the event a permit is revoked or as otherwise required.



   (B)   Amount of security. The surety bond or other security obtained
and provided by a permittee will be in the amount of at least $500 except
when the administrator.



   (C)   Form of security. The permittee's surety bond must be in a
form approved by the City Attorney and be conditioned upon the duties and
obligations contained in the permit and set forth in this chapter. In lieu of
a surety bond, a permittee may obtain and provide to the city a cash deposit,
certificate of deposit naming the city as the payee thereof or such other
kind of security acceptable to the City Attorney.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.18  GENERAL CONDITIONS - OPERATING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Pay phone permit and use agreements issued pursuant to this
chapter will contain such conditions as are deemed necessary by the
administrator to implement the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   No pay phone permit or space use agreement can be issued
unless the following minimum standards for the installation, operation, and
maintenance of outdoor pay phones are met:



      (1)   The applicant must maintain a valid city business
license tax certificate at all times;



      (2)   The phone must be capable of dialing emergency, phone
repair, and information numbers such as "911," "211," "411," at all times;



      (3)   The phone must be maintained in a clean, neat,
damage-free, graffiti-free, and operable manner at all times;



      (4)   Encroachment permits as required by this code are not
required for pay phones. However, the phone must comply with any and all
required conditions from the city's encroachment permit procedures and be
maintained such that it does not interfere with any operations of any
established use of the property such as emergency fire exits and parking;



      (5)   The phone must be installed and maintained in accordance
with all requirements of the California Public Utilities Commission and the
Federal Communications Commission, and comply with all state and federal
rules including Americans With Disabilities Act and California Building Code,
Title 24 requirements, as adopted by this code;



      (6)   Light must be provided to the phone location and
immediate vicinity to assist in safe and easy use. Such lighting must be
permanently maintained to ensure that any user of the phone is clearly
visible to nearby traffic, pedestrians, or public areas and to allow easy
readability of telephone numbers or signage during all evening hours. Such
lighting must be directed away from any adjacent residential uses;



      (7)   Other operating restrictions or modifications to the
above may be required as necessary to address regulatory or technological
changes or other public nuisance issues that may develop;



      (8)   The property must be returned to its original condition
if the pay phone is removed.



      (9)   Prices for use of the pay phone must be clearly posted
in accordance with applicable law.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.19  SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.



   When acting on a permit required by this chapter, the administrator may
condition the issuance of a permit on compliance with any special
requirements which the administrator determines are necessary to ensure that
the proposed pay phone installation, maintenance, or operation is
accomplished in a manner that protects the safety of persons or property and
does not unreasonably interfere with the use by the city or general public of
any public or private property.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.20  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS - DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Grounds for denial. The administrator must deny an application
for a permit required by this chapter if the administrator determines that:



      (1)   The pay phone, if installed in the proposed manner,
would unreasonably interfere with use of public or private property;



      (2)   The pay phone, if installed in the proposed manner,
would threaten the safety of life or property; or



      (3)   The pay phone, if installed, would violate any provision
of this chapter.



   (B)   Notice of denial. When the administrator denies an
application, the administrator must promptly serve notice on the applicant.
That notice will state the reasons for denial and set forth the applicant's
right to apply for administrative review and appeal in the manner provided by
this chapter.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.21  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   Determination by the administrator to revoke a permit.
Whenever the administrator determines that a permittee violated the terms and
conditions of the permit or that the permit was issued based on an
application that contained a material misrepresentation of fact, the
administrator, may, by service of the notice required by this section, revoke
the permit.



   (B)   Service of notice of order revoking a permit. Upon revoking a
permit, the administrator will cause written notice of such order to be
served on the permittee. In addition to notice regarding the revocation, the
notice will contain a brief description of the reasons why the permit is
being revoked and contain a statement that the permittee has the right to
apply for administrative review of the order and to appeal the order as
provided by this chapter.



   (C)   Effect of order revoking a permit. A permittee served with a
notice of revocation must promptly remove the pay phone subject to the permit
and restore the public or private property to the same condition as before
the pay phone was installed.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.22  REMOVAL AND RESTORATION WORK.



   (A)   Administrator's decision to remove and restore. Where the
administrator determines that a pay phone was installed on public or private
property without a permit, in violation or contrary to the terms and
conditions of a permit or order issued pursuant to this chapter, or in any
manner that endangers the safety of persons or property, the administrator
may remove such pay phone. If such removal occurred on public property, the
administrator may restore the public property to the same or substantially
the same condition as it was before the pay phone was installed, all at the
permittee's or responsible person's cost, after serving any notice required
by this chapter.



   (B)   Notice of removal and/or restoration. Upon determining to
restore public property, the administrator will cause written notice of such
determination to be served on the permittee or other responsible person. In
addition to setting forth the administrator's decision to perform such work,
the notice will include the reasons for restoration and state that the work
will be performed at permittee's cost. Unless the work is needed to protect
public health, safety, or property, the notice will also allow the permittee
to immediately undertake restoration work at the permittee's sole cost and
expense, provided the work is completed by the permittee within a reasonable
time as determined by the administrator and set forth in the notice.



   (C)   Liability for cost of restoration. Unless the permittee or
other responsible person accomplishes the restoration work themselves, any
permittee or other responsible person who caused the condition that requires
restoration work will, upon the restoration work being complete, be liable to
the city for the full cost thereof. In addition, where a surety bond or other
security was provided to the city as a condition of a permit authorizing pay
phone installation on public property, such surety or other security will be
liable to the city for the cost of such work to the full amount of the surety
bond or other security.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.23  RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   Except as otherwise provided, an applicant or permittee may request
administrative review of the administrator's decision pursuant to this
chapter.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.24  TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be
commenced within five days from the date on which written notice of the
administrator's decision is served on the applicant/permittee.



   (B)   If a request is untimely, the administrator may, nevertheless,
extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.25  COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   A request for administrative review will be on a form provided by the
administrator, be accompanied by an administrative fee, and contain the
following information:



   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the person making
the request;



   (B)   A description of the decision, determination or order which is
the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order
was made or issued;



   (C)   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and



   (D)   Such other information as may be required by the administrator.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.26  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the
administrator will promptly provide a copy of the notice to the hearing
officer.



   (B)   Upon receiving a request for review from the administrator,
the hearing officer will review the request and, within ten days of receiving
the request notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:



      (1)   The administrator's decision is affirmed;



      (2)   The administrator's decision is modified;



      (3)   The administrator's decision is reversed and a permit is
issued or issued without special conditions.



   (C)   The hearing officer may, but is not required to, conduct a
hearing at a time and place mutually agreeable to the parties. If the parties
cannot agree on the time or place, then it will be held the next business day
at 4:00 p.m. at the hearing officer's office.



   (D)   In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any
notification to the requestor must set forth any modifications of the
administrator's decision.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.27  NO RIGHT TO CITY COUNCIL APPEAL.



   The hearing officer's decision is final. An applicant does not have any
right to appeal that decision to the City Council.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.28  REPLACEMENT PROHIBITED.



   No pay phone may be installed on any parcel, or any abutting parcel
owned by the same property owner, for a period of two years after the date of
removal of any pay phone determined to be a public nuisance.



(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)



§ 157.29  ENFORCEMENT, FORFEITURE-- RIGHT TO RECOVER COSTS.



   (A)   The city may enter any property on which an outdoor pay phone
is located for the purposes of inspecting pay phones, removing pay phones and
otherwise enforcing the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The city may remove any illegally installed pay phone upon 24
hours notice to the owner or service provider of the pay phone.



   (C)   Where a permit is revoked upon the final decision by a hearing
officer, the city may remove that pay phone.



   (D)   The city may pursue all legal remedies, including the right to
lien property and to recoup its costs of removing the pay phone. In addition,
all removed pay phones not claimed after 30 days are deemed abandoned and the
city may dispose of such pay phones in the manner set forth in this code for
surplus property.



   (E)   Monies found in abandoned pay phones may be escheated to the
city in accordance with applicable law.



   (F)   The applicant may only reclaim a removed pay phone upon
payment of the actual removal costs incurred by the city, storage charges,
and any outstanding fees associated with the pay phone.




(Ord. 1099, passed 4-19-04)




TITLE XVI:  DEVELOPMENT CODE



   Chapter



      160.      DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES



   PURPOSE AND EFFECT



      16.01.      ENACTMENT AND APPLICABILITY



      16.03.      ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



   DEFINITIONS



      16.05.      DEFINITIONS



   ZONING DISTRICTS, LAND USE REGULATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



      16.07.      ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES



      16.09.      OPEN SPACE ZONES



      16.11.      AGRICULTURAL ZONE



      16.13.      RESIDENTIAL ZONES



      16.15.      COMMERCIAL ZONES



      16.21.      INDUSTRIAL ZONES



      16.23.      INSTITUTIONAL/CIVIC ZONE



      16.25.      SPECIFIC PLAN ZONE



      16.27.      AIRPORT ZONES



      16.29.      RAILROAD OVERLAY ZONE



      16.31.      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE



      16.33.      HISTORIC LANDMARK OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS



      16.34.      HISTORICAL PROPERTY AGREEMENTS



      16.35.      HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES OVERLAY ZONE



   STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONING DISTRICTS



      16.40.      GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



      16.42.      PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



      16.44.      FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES



      16.46.      OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



      16.48.      SIGN REGULATIONS



      16.50.      ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES



      16.52.      SWIMMING POOLS



   STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES



      16.56.      AMUSEMENT ARCADES



      16.58.      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES



      16.60.      CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES



      16.62.      ASSEMBLY HALLS



      16.64.      COMMUNITY CARE FACILITIES



      16.66.      DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES



      16.68.      NEWSRACKS



      16.70.      RECYCLING FACILITIES



      16.72.      SERVICE STATIONS



      16.74.      VENDING MACHINES



      16.76.      YARD AND GARAGE SALES



      16.77      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS



      16.78.      EMERGENCY SHELTERS



      16.79.      REGULATION OF CANNABIS ACTIVITIES



   SUBDIVISIONS



      16.80.      SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



   CONDOMINIUMS AND CONVERSIONS



      16.85.      CONDOMINIUMS AND CONVERSIONS



   GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL



      16.96.      GRADING PERMITS



      16.97.      GRADING REGULATION



      16.98.      HILLSIDE GRADING PRACTICES



      16.99.      DRAINAGE, EROSION, AND DUST CONTROL



   SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION



      16.100.      GENERAL PROVISIONS



      16.102.      PERMIT AND RECLAMATION PLAN



      16.104.      REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION OF SURFACE MINE



   GROWTH MANAGEMENT



      16.106.      GROWTH MANAGEMENT



      16.108.      TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT



   NONCONFORMITIES



      16.110.      NONCONFORMITIES



   ADMINISTRATION OF THE DEVELOPMENT CODE



      16.200.      ADMINISTRATION - GENERAL PROVISIONS



      16.202.      APPLICATIONS, PROCESSING, FILING, AND FEES



      16.204.      PUBLIC HEARINGS



      16.206.      APPEALS AND REVOCATIONS



      16.208.      DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS



      16.210.      ZONE CHANGE



      16.212.      GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS



      16.214.      AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE AND LAND CONSERVATION
CONTRACTS



      16.216.      SPECIFIC PLANS



      16.218.      CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS



      16.220.      VARIANCES



      16.222.      MINOR MODIFICATIONS



      16.224.      ZONING CLEARANCE



      16.226.      DESIGN REVIEW



      16.227.      SECOND UNIT PERMIT



      16.228.      TEMPORARY USE PERMIT



      16.230.      HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT



      16.234.      DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS



      16.236.      ANNEXATIONS



      16.237.      81 ACRE INITIATIVE IMPLEMENTATION



      16.238.      SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT



CHAPTER 160:  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES



Section



   160.10   Purpose



   160.20   Applicability



   160.30   Exemptions



   160.40   Definitions



   160.50   Notice and hearing requirements



   160.60   Imposition of fees/automatic adjustment



   160.70   Impact fee accounts



   160.80   Use of impact fee proceeds



   160.90   Refunds



   160.100   Protests, appeals, and audits



   160.110   Amendment procedures



   160.120   Credits



   160.130   Conflicts



Editor’s Note:



   Ch. 160 was previously based on Ord. 1064, passed 4-7-03, Ord. 1065,
passed 4-21-03, Ord. 1066, passed 4-21-03.



§ 160.10  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s police powers and the
Mitigation Fee Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66000 et seq.) for the purpose of
imposing fees on applicants seeking to construct development projects.  The
purpose of the fees is to minimize, to the greatest extent practicable, the
impact that new development has on the city’s public services and public
facilities.  Toward that end, the city intends that applicants for such
development projects pay their fair share of the costs of providing such
public services and public facilities.  Accordingly, the amount of each
impact fee is calculated based upon the gross square footage of
nonresidential development, number of residential dwelling units, type or
density or intensity of use, vehicle trip generation, or other appropriate
methodology which ensures that the fee is roughly proportional to the impacts
of new development on public facilities.  The city assumes responsibility
for and will pay for with general city revenues all public facility needs for
existing development.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.20  APPLICABILITY.



   Unless expressly excepted or exempted, this chapter applies to all fees
imposed by the city to finance public facilities attributable to new
development, including without limitation:



   (A)   Law enforcement facilities, vehicles, and equipment;



   (B)   Fire suppression facilities, vehicles, and equipment;



   (C)   General facilities, vehicles, and equipment;



   (D)   Community library facilities and collections;



   (E)   Public use (community centers) facilities;



   (F)   Parks/open space and recreation facilities;



   (G)   Road project construction, right-of-way acquisition, and
engineering;



   (H)   Storm drainage facilities construction;



   (I)   Water acquisition/storage/distribution facility construction;
and



   (J)   Sanitary sewer collection infrastructure construction.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 1148, passed 12-5-05)



§ 160.30  EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to:



   (A)   Taxes and special assessments;



   (B)   Fees for processing development applications;



   (C)   Fees for enforcing regulations;



   (D)   Fees collected under development agreements;



   (E)   Fees imposed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement between the
city and a property owner for that portion of the cost of a public facility
paid for by the property owner which exceeds the need for the public facility
attributable to, reasonably related to, and roughly proportional to the
development;



   (F)   Fees to mitigate impacts on the environment; or



   (G)   Fees imposed, levied or collected by other governmental
agencies including subdivisions of the state and federal government.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.40  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:



   BENEFIT AREA means the geographic area within which impact fees are
collected and expended for a particular type of capital improvement serving
development projects within such area.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT means land or facilities for the storage, treatment
or distribution of water; for the collection, treatment, reclamation or
disposal of sewage; for the collection and disposal of stormwaters and for
watershed preservation purposes; for purposes of transportation and transit,
including without limitation, streets, street lighting and traffic-control
devices and supporting improvements, roads, overpasses, bridges, airports,
and related facilities; for parks and recreational improvements; for public
safety, including police and fire facilities; for schools and child care
facilities; for libraries and public art; for public buildings of all kinds;
and for any other capital project identified in the city’s Capital
Improvements Plan.  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT also includes design, engineering,
inspection, testing, planning, legal land acquisition and all other costs
associated with construction of a public facility.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN  means the long term plan for capital
improvements, adopted by the City Council, describing the approximate
location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of capital
improvement projects and identifies sources of funding for capital
improvement projects.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROJECT LIST  means the list attached to a
Council resolution setting the base fee amount for each specific impact
fee.  The list must describe the approximate location, size, time of
availability and estimated cost of each capital improvement to be funded from
a particular impact fee account.



   COLLECTION  means the point in time at which the impact fee is
actually paid over to the city.



   COMMITMENT  means earmarking impact fees to fund or partially fund
capital improvements serving new development projects.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOPMENT PROJECT  means and includes any project
undertaken for the purpose of development, including without limitation a
project involving the permit issuance for construction, reconstruction, or
change of use, but not a project involving permit issuance for operating,
remodeling, rehabilitating, or improving an existing structure, nor the
rebuilding of a structure destroyed or damaged through natural disaster, nor
the replacement of one mobile home with another on the same pad if no
dwelling unit is added.



   DWELLING UNIT  means one or more rooms in a building or a portion of a
room, designed, intended to be used, or actually used for occupancy by one
family for living and sleeping quarters, and containing one kitchen only, and
includes a mobile home, but not hotel or motel units.



   IMPACT FEE  means any monetary exaction imposed by the city as a
condition of or in connection with approval of a development project for the
purpose of defraying all or some of the cost of or repayment of costs
previously expended from other city funds for capital improvements relating
to the project.



   IMPOSE  means to determine that a particular development project is
subject to the collection of impact fees as a condition of development
approval.



   NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT  means all development other than
residential development projects.



   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT  means any development undertaken to
create a new dwelling unit or units.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.50  NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any legislative action adopting an ordinance, resolution, or
other legislative enactment adopting a new impact fee or approving an
increase in an existing fee must be accomplished in accordance with Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66018.



   (B)   Any costs incurred by the city in conducting public hearings
required by this section may be recovered as a part of the impact fees which
are the subject of the hearing.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.60  IMPOSITION OF FEES/AUTOMATIC ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, persons submitting applications
seeking approval for new development projects must pay the city impact fees,
in an amount set by City Council resolution, as a condition for the city to
approve such development projects.



   (B)   No tentative or final subdivision map, parcel map, grading
permit, building permit, final inspection, or certificate of occupancy, or
other development permit, may be approved unless the provisions of this
section are fulfilled.



   (C)   Impact fees will be imposed by including the following
language in any document of development approval:  “All fees imposed
pursuant to Chapter 160 of the Santa Paula Municipal Code must be paid to the
city before this project is approved.”



   (D)   The Fire Chief will collect impact fees before the city issues
a building permit, except that the connection fees are collected at the time
an applicant seeks to connect to the city’s utility system.



   (E)   Unless otherwise revised, the impact fees established by this
chapter will be automatically adjusted on an annual basis at the beginning of
each fiscal year based on the average percentage change over the previous
calendar year set forth in the Construction Price Index for the Los Angeles
metropolitan area.  The first impact fee adjustment cannot be made before a
minimum of ten months after the effective date of the ordinance adding this
chapter to the code.



   (F)   On or before May 1 of each year the Fire Chief must provide to
the City Manager, or designee, a revised schedule for impact fees previously
approved by the City Council and subject to the annual automatic adjustment
authorized by this section.



   (G)   On or before June 1 of each year the City Manager, or
designee, must publish the revised fee schedule by any reasonable means
including, without limitation, posting such schedule on the city’s website.



   (H)   Beginning on January 2, 2015 and again every three years
afterwards, the City Manager, or designee, must cause a study to be completed
for reviewing all impact fees imposed by the city and proposing new or
increased impact fees. The cost study must be presented to the city council
for consideration on or before the city council’s regular second meeting in
May.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 1196, passed 10- 20-08; Am. Ord. 1237,
passed 8-15-11)



§ 160.70  IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The city must establish an impact fee account for each benefit
area and for each type of capital improvement for which an impact fee is
imposed.  Impact fees collected must be deposited in each such account
according to type of improvement and benefit area.  The funds of the account
cannot be commingled with the city’s other funds.  Any account previously
established for the deposit of funds which would have been developer impact
fees under this chapter are deemed an impact fee account for the purposes of
this chapter.



   (B)   Each impact fee account must be interest- bearing and the
accumulated interest will become a part of the account.



   (C)   The funds of each account will be expended within the benefit
area exclusively for the capital improvements for which the impact fees were
collected.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.80  USE OF IMPACT FEE PROCEEDS.



   Impact fees may be expended only for the type of capital improvements
for which they were imposed, calculated, and collected and according to the
time limits and procedures established in this chapter. Impact fees may be
used to pay the principal, interest and other costs of bonds, notes and other
obligations issued or undertaken by or on behalf of the city to finance such
improvements.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.90  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Except as described in this section, upon application of the
property owner, the city must refund that portion of any impact fee which has
been on deposit over five years and which is unexpended and uncommitted. 
The refund will be made to the then current owner or owners of lots or units
of the development project or projects, provided that the then current owner
submits an application for a refund to the city within 180 days before the
five year period expires.



   (B)   If fees in any impact fee account are unexpended or
uncommitted, starting with the fifth fiscal year after the first deposit into
the account or fund, and every subsequent five years, the City Council must
make the findings required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 66001(d) for maintaining
funds on deposit.  If the Council makes such findings, the fees are exempt
from the refund requirement.



   (C)   The city may issue refunds through direct payment; offsetting
the refund against other impact fees due for development projects by the
owner on the same or other property; or otherwise by agreement with the
owner.  If the costs of refunding the impact fees would exceed the amount
refunded, the city may instead comply with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66001(f).



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.100  PROTESTS, APPEALS, AND AUDITS.



   All protests, appeals, and audits must be conducted in accordance with
the procedures contained in the Mitigation Fee Act (commencing at Cal.
Gov’t Code §§ 66020 et seq.).



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.110  AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.



   At least once each year, before the City Council’s adoption of the
budget and revisions to the Capital Improvements Project List, the City
Manager, or designee, must report to the City Council with:



   (A)   Recommendations for amendments to this chapter and to other
parts of this code and to resolutions establishing impact fees;



   (B)   Proposals for changes to the Capital Improvements Project
List, identifying capital improvements to be funded, in whole or in part, by
impact fees;



   (C)   Proposals for changes in the boundaries of benefit areas; and



   (D)   Proposals for changes to impact fee rates and schedules.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.120  CREDITS.



   (A)   A property owner who dedicates land or agrees to participate
in an assessment district or otherwise contributes funds for capital
improvements, as defined in this chapter, may be eligible for a credit for
such contribution against the impact fee otherwise due.



   (B)   (1)   The City Engineer must determine whether:



         (a)   The contribution meets capital improvement needs
for which the particular impact fee has been imposed;



         (b)   The contribution will substitute for or otherwise
reduce the need for capital improvements anticipated to be provided with
impact fee funds; and



         (c)   The value of the developer contribution.



      (2)   In no event, however, will the credit exceed the amount
of the otherwise applicable impact fee.



   (C)   Any application for credit must be submitted at or before the
time of development project approval on forms provided by the city.  The
application must contain a declaration of those facts, under oath, along with
the relevant documentary evidence which qualifies the property owner for the
credit.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



§ 160.130  CONFLICTS.



   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any other ordinance or resolution establishing or amending
impact fees, the provisions of this chapter govern.



(Ord. 1076, passed 11-3-03)



CHAPTER 16.01:  ENACTMENT AND APPLICABILITY



Section



   16.01.010   Authority



   16.01.020   Short title



   16.01.030   Purpose



   16.01.040   Terminology



   16.01.050   Relationship to General Plan



   16.01.060   Relationship to other regulations



   16.01.070   Relationship to California Environmental Quality Act



   16.01.080   Effect of this Development Code



   16.01.090   Interpretation



   16.01.100   Severability of any portion of this Development Code



§ 16.01.010  AUTHORITY.



   This Development Code is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of
the Constitution of the State of California and in compliance with the
requirements of Title 7 of the Cal. Gov’t Code, Division 1, Planning and
Zoning Law, and Division 2, Subdivision Map Act, for the purpose of promoting
health, safety, and general public welfare.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.020  SHORT TITLE.



   This Development Code will be known as “The City of Santa Paula
Development Code.”



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.030  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purposes of this Development Code include:



      (1)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and
welfare of the people of the City of Santa Paula;



      (2)   To safeguard and enhance the appearance and quality of
development of the City of Santa Paula;



      (3)   To provide for the social, physical, and economic
advantages resulting from comprehensive and orderly planned use of land
resources;



      (4)   To conserve, stabilize, and protect the value of
property in the City of Santa Paula;



      (5)   To provide adequate improvements and utilities in the
City of Santa Paula; and



      (6)   To divide the City of Santa Paula into zones of such
number, shape, and area as may be deemed appropriate and necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Development Code and provide for its enforcement.



   (B)   The provisions contained in this Development Code will apply
to all real properties contained within the corporate limits of the City of
Santa Paula.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.040  TERMINOLOGY.



   Words, terms, and phrases used in this ordinance will have the meanings
usually ascribed to them, or as defined or used in state planning, zoning,
and subdivision laws, or as defined in Chapter 16.05, Definitions, of this
ordinance.  For the purposes of this Development Code, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, certain terms used in this Development Code are
defined as follows:



   (A)   Words in the present tense include the future;



   (B)   Words in the singular number include the plural;



   (C)   Words in the plural number include the singular;



   (D)   The terms "shall" and "will" and "must" are mandatory;



   (E)   The term "City Council" means the City Council of the City of
Santa Paula;



   (F)   The term “Planning Commission” means the Planning
Commission of the City of Santa Paula;



   (G)   The term "his" is gender neutral and means his or her;



   (H)   The term "City" means the City of Santa Paula; and



   (I)   The term "General Plan" means the City of Santa Paula General
Plan.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.050  RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN.



   This Development Code is intended to provide the legislative framework
to implement the goals, policies, plans, principles, and standards of the
City of Santa Paula General Plan. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.060  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this Development must not be interpreted to
repeal, amend, modify, alter, or change any other code that is not
specifically repealed, amended, modified, altered, or changed.



   (B)    Nothing in this Development Code will be interpreted to
authorize the use of a lot or parcel in any way that is in violation of any
other applicable statute, code, or regulation.



   (C)   Whenever the provisions of this Development Code are different
from the provision of any other ordinance or adopted code, the more
restrictive provisions will apply, except as the same may be superseded by
resolution or ordinance.



   (D)   The rights granted by any permit, license, or other approval
under any ordinance repealed by this Development Code will be continued, but
in the future, to the extent permitted by law, such rights will be exercised
in accordance with the provisions of this Development Code.



   (E)   The provisions of this Development Code are not intended to
abrogate any easements, covenants, or other existing agreements which are
more restrictive than the provisions of this Development Code.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.070  RELATIONSHIP TO CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT.



   When a project is determined to be subject to the provisions of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the application will be reviewed
in accordance with the provisions of this Development Code, the California
Environmental Quality Act (Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.), the CEQA
Guidelines (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 15000 et seq.), and any environmental
guidelines adopted by the City of Santa Paula.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.080  EFFECT OF THIS DEVELOPMENT CODE.



   (A)   General application.  No person is permitted to use any
premises except as specifically permitted by and subject to the regulations
and conditions of this Development Code.  Except as otherwise provided
herein, wherever this Development Code prohibits the use of premises for a
particular purpose, those premises and any improvements on those premises
must not be used for that purpose, and no structure or improvement may be
constructed, altered, or moved onto the premises which is designed, arranged,
or intended to be occupied or used for that purpose.



   (B)   City of Santa Paula exempt.  Agencies of the City of Santa
Paula will be exempt from the provisions of this Development Code when the
City Council makes the following findings:



      (1)   That reasonable attempts have been made to comply with
the regulations contained in this Development Code; and



      (2)   That the strict and literal interpretation and
enforcement of the Development Code would inhibit the city’s ability to
maintain public health, safety, and general welfare in a particular instance;
and



      (3)   That the granting of the exemption will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare or materially
injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.



   (C)   Buildings under construction.  Any building for which a
building permit has been issued under the provisions of an earlier ordinance
of the city which is in conflict with this Development Code, and on which
substantial construction has been performed by integration of materials on
the site before the effective date of this Development Code,  nevertheless
may be continued and completed in accordance with the plans and
specifications upon which the permit was issued.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.090  INTERPRETATION.



   The provisions of this Development Code will be interpreted and applied
as the minimum requirements and the maximum potential limits for the
protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general
welfare. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.01.100  SEVERABILITY OF ANY PORTION OF THIS DEVELOPMENT CODE.



   If any chapter, section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause,
phrase, or portion of this Development Code is for any reason held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision will not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Development Code.  The City Council hereby declares that it
would have adopted this Development Code and each chapter, section,
subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more chapter, sections, subsections,
subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions thereof be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.03:  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



Section



   16.03.010   Planning Commission administers and interprets
regulations



   16.03.020   Planning Director responsibilities



   16.03.030   Building Official responsibilities



   16.03.040   City Engineer responsibilities



   16.03.050   Clarification of ambiguity



§ 16.03.010  PLANNING COMMISSION ADMINISTERS AND INTERPRETS REGULATIONS.



   In accordance with state planning and zoning law, Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 65000 et seq., the Planning Commission of the City of Santa Paula will
administer this Title 16 and amendments thereto.  The Planning Commission
will have the authority and responsibility to hear and act upon all matters
as specified in Chapters 16.200 through 16.234 (Administration of the
Development Code) of this Title 16 and any other responsibilities authorized
by Chapter 32 (Departments, Boards, Commissions and Agencies) of the Santa
Paula Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.03.020  PLANNING DIRECTOR RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Planning Director or the designee will have the authority
and responsibility to hear and act upon all matters as specified in Chapters
6.200 through 16.234 (Administration of the Development Code) of this Title
16.



   (B)   The Planning Director will have the authority to interpret the
use provisions applicable to each zone district, using the zone district
descriptions contained in Chapters 16.07 through 16.33 (Zoning Districts,
Land Use Regulations and Development Standards) of this Title 16.  In the
event that a specific use or type of use is not listed, the Director will
have the authority to determine which listed use is most similar to the
proposed use and thereby determine whether the use is permitted, permitted
subject to Conditional Use Permit review and approval, permitted as a
temporary use, or prohibited.  In determining "similarity," the Director
will make all of the following findings:



      (1)   The proposed use must meet the intent of, and be
consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan;



      (2)   The proposed use must meet the stated purpose and
general intent of the district in which the use is proposed to be located;



      (3)   The proposed use must not adversely impact the public
health, safety and general welfare of the city's resident; and



      (4)   The proposed use must share characteristics common with,
and not be of greater intensity, density or generate more environmental
impact, than those uses listed in the permitted uses section.



   (C)   Any applicant, interested person, or public official may
appeal any decision of the Planning Director to the Planning Commission in
accord with the procedures set forth in Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and
Revocations) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.03.030  BUILDING OFFICIAL RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Building Official or the duly authorized representative will be
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this Title 16 which
pertain to the construction, moving, conversion, alteration, or addition of
and to structures and associated improvements to the lots on which they are
located.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.03.040  CITY ENGINEER RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The City Engineer or the duly authorized representative will be
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this Title 16 which
pertain to the subdivision of land or other action authorized by the
Subdivision Map Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66410 et seq.).



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.03.050  CLARIFICATION OF AMBIGUITY.



   If ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a
particular use within the meaning and intent of this Title 16, or if
ambiguity exists with respect to matters of height, yard requirements, area
requirements, or zone boundaries as set forth herein, it will be the duty of
the Planning Director to ascertain all pertinent facts, and to set forth in
writing the findings and the interpretations.  The Director can refer the
matter to the Planning Commission as a scheduled matter not requiring public
hearing, and the findings and interpretations of the Planning Commission will
be set forth in the recorded minutes.  Thereafter, such interpretations will
govern.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.05:  DEFINITIONS



Section



   16.05.010   General



   16.05.020   "A" definitions



   16.05.030   "B" definitions



   16.05.040   "C" definitions



   16.05.050   "D" definitions



   16.05.060   "E" definitions



   16.05.070   "F" definitions



   16.05.080   "G" definitions



   16.05.090   "H" definitions



   16.05.100   "I" definitions



   16.05.110   "J" definitions



   16.05.120   "K" definitions



   16.05.130   "L" definitions



   16.05.140   "M" definitions



   16.05.150   "N" definitions



   16.05.160   "O" definitions



   16.05.170   "P" definitions



   16.05.180   "Q" definitions



   16.05.190   "R" definitions



   16.05.200   "S" definitions



   16.05.210   "T" definitions



   16.05.220   "U" definitions



   16.05.230   "V" definitions



   16.05.240   "W" definitions



   16.05.250   "X" definitions



   16.05.260   "Y" definitions



   16.05.270   "Z" definitions



§ 16.05.010  GENERAL.



   (A)   For the purposes of this Development Code, certain words,
phrases, and terms used herein will have the meaning assigned to them by this
chapter.



   (B)   For general terminology used throughout this Development Code,
refer to § 16.01.040 (Terminology).  For terminology used in this
Development Code but not defined in this chapter or in § 16.01.040, the
definitions used in the California Building Code or accepted dictionaries of
the English language will govern (Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, Tenth
Edition).



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.020  "A" DEFINITIONS.



   ABOVE GROUND/ON GROUND SWIMMING POOL - See "Swimming Pool."



   ABUT or ABUTTING LAND - A parcel of land having a common boundary with
another parcel of land, including parcels which have no common boundary other
than a common corner.



   ACCESS - The place or way by which pedestrians and vehicles will have
safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property or use required
by the provisions of this Development Code.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING - Attached or detached subordinate building, the use
of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the
main use of the land and which is located on the same lot with the main
building or use.



   ACCESSORY USE - A use customarily incidental and accessory to the
principal use of a lot or a building or other structure located upon the same
lot as the accessory use.



   ACREAGE, GROSS - The total land area within a defined boundary before
the exclusion of public rights-of-way, public parks, and public school sites.



   ACREAGE, NET - That portion of gross acreage exclusive of public
streets and all public lands and rights-of-way.  The area within the lot
lines of a lot exclusive of any dedications for public rights-of-way, public
parks, and public school sites.



   ADDITION - Any construction that is attached to an existing building or
facility and which increases the size or capacity of a building or facility
in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area.



   ADJOINING - Refers to a lot or parcel of land which shares all or part
of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land.



   ADULT BUSINESSES AND ENTERTAINMENT ENTERPRISES - Definitions relating
to adult businesses and entertainment enterprises are contained in §
16.54.010.



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING COSTS - The housing cost (including principal,
interest, taxes and homeowner association assessments, if applicable) of
those ownership units targeted for very low-, low- or moderate income
households which cost will not exceed 30% times 50% of the county median
household income adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit for very
low-income households, 30% times 70% of the county median household income
adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit for low- income households,
and 35% times 110% of the county median household income adjusted for family
size appropriate for the unit for moderate  income households as specified
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50052.5.



   AFFORDABLE RENTS - The rent for those units targeted for very low-, low
and moderate income households, which will not exceed 30% times 50% of county
median household income, adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit
for very low-income households, 30% times 60% of county median household
income, adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit for low-income
households, and 30% times 110% of county median household income, adjusted
for family size appropriate for the unit for moderate-income households as
specified in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50053.



   AFFORDABLE SALE PRICE - The price that can be financed by a fixed rate
mortgage where the monthly payment meets the definition of affordable housing
costs in this subchapter.  The monthly payment will include the principal
plus interest plus taxes plus homeowner's association fees (if applicable).



   AFFORDABLE UNITS - Those dwelling units which will be guaranteed by the
developer to be rented or sold for a period of time, agreed to by the city
and developer, to moderate-, low- or very low-income households.  However,
if a rental unit was an affordable unit at the last annual review by the
housing authority, but the household no longer qualifies as either a
moderate-, low- or very low-income household, whichever is applicable to the
particular household, the unit will be treated as a market rate unit.  In
order to maintain the required number and mix of affordable units in the
project, the next available unit of comparable size must then be rented to a
moderate-, low- or very low-income household, as is applicable, and will then
be considered an affordable unit as a replacement for the original unit.  If
such rental does not return the total number of affordable units to the
minimum amount required under the density bonus approval, then the next
available unit of comparable size must be rented to a moderate-, low- or very
low-income household, and so forth.



   AGRICULTURE - The science and art of farming, producing crops,
floriculture, horticulture, and the work of cultivating the soil.



   ALLEY - Any public thoroughfare for the use of pedestrians or vehicles,
not less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet wide, which has been deeded or
dedicated to the city as a secondary means of access to abutting property.



   AMUSEMENT ARCADE or CENTER - Any business, store, or location, with the
exception of bowling alleys and pool halls, in which more than three
amusement devices are placed, whether or not the operation of the devices is
primary or accessory to the business, store, or location.  A bowling alley
or pool hall will be considered an AMUSEMENT CENTER or ARCADE if more than
ten amusement devices are in the location, or more than three amusement
devices if more than 50% of the public floor area is devoted to amusement
devices.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE - Any electrically or mechanically operated
instrument, machine, device, computer or equipment which is activated,
operated, or used by means of payment, or by means of inserting a coin,
token, slug, or other device into a slot or receptacle, or are rented for
periods of time, and which may be operated by the public for use as a game,
entertainment, or amusement whether or not skill is involved.  AMUSEMENT
DEVICES will not include jukeboxes, vending machines, coin-operated pool
tables, or riding machines for small children. 



   ANIMAL, PET - An animal that is not inherently dangerous, but is kept
for pleasure, companionship or security purposes rather than for husbandry.



   ANIMAL SHELTER - Any public or private facility in which five or more
dogs or domesticated animals over the age of four months are kept, maintained
or rehabilitated for the primary purpose of facilitating transfer of
ownership of such animals to off-premise individuals.



   ANTENNA, SATELLITE OR DISH - Any exterior or external receiving device
whose purpose is to receive communications or other signals from a
transmitter relay, whether from land based transmitters or from satellites in
planetary orbit in space, including cell phone towers and other apparatus
such as bands and all structures to hold such apparatus.



   ANTIQUE STORE or SHOP - A commercial business that sells only bonafide
antiques, which are defined as items over 40 years old, or collectable items
manufactured within the last 40 years.  Final determination of materials
suitable for sale will be made by the Planning Director.



   APARTMENT - One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities
comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a building
containing two or more dwelling units for rent.



   ASSEMBLY (LARGE SCALE) - Means putting together parts for a finished
large-scale product including, without limitation, aircraft, and agricultural
equipment assembly.



   ASSEMBLY (SMALL SCALE) - Means putting together parts for a finished
small-scale product including, without limitation, electronic instruments,
small appliances, cabinet and carpenter shops, electric welding and
electroplating.



   ASSEMBLY HALL - A building, or portion of a building, used for large
scale public or private gatherings of people. For example and without
limitation, assembly halls including private educational facilities;
religious institutions; clubs; lodges; and similar kinds of facilities
whether available for public or private use.



   AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE - An automated device that performs banking or
financial functions at a location within, auxiliary to, or remote from the
controlling financial institution or branch office.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE - Any facility that provides general repair
services to automobiles, including body repairs, engine overhaul, upholstery
work, parts rebuilding and like activities.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION - A retail place of business where fuel for
motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public, and that may or may not
include the incidental provision of services such as minor automobile repair,
lubricating service or car wash, or the incidental sale of other petroleum
products, tires, batteries, and other automotive accessories.  AUTOMOBILE
SERVICE STATIONS may also include the incidental sale of items commonly
associated with the operation of a mini-mart, such as snacks and beverages,
with the exception of alcoholic beverages unless permitted under a
conditional use permit.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING - The dismantling or destruction of one or more
automobiles, motorcycles or any other motor vehicles.



   AVIARY - A collection of more than five ornamental or song birds on a
parcel, not including birds kept or maintained for commercial purposes or
poultry.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1167,
passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.05.030  "B" DEFINITIONS.



   BANK - See “financial institutions”.



   BAR - Any facility licensed by the State of California which restricts
entry to persons of legal drinking age, as established by state law, at which
the sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine, and mixed drinks, is
provided for consumption on the premises.



   BASEMENT - That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling
which is partly or wholly underground.  A basement will be counted as a
story for the purpose of height measurement where more than one-half of its
height is above grade.



   BED AND BREAKFAST INN - a single-family, owner-occupied detached
dwelling which provides only transient lodging in not more than five rooms
with a maximum stay of 14 consecutive nights. A BED AND BREAKFAST INN may
provide no food or beverage service for the transient guests other than
breakfast provided in the areas of the dwelling commonly used by the resident
family for the consumption of food.



   BEDROOM - Any habitable room used, or intended or designed to be used
for sleeping purposes, provided such room has a minimum size of 70 square
feet.



   BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMINGHOUSE - A building or portion thereof which is
used to accommodate, for compensation, three or more boarders or roomers, not
including members of the occupant's immediate family, who might be occupying
such building.



   BODY OF WATER - A swimming pool, spa, hot tub, human-made lake, fish
pond, or any similar feature capable of containing water 18 inches deep or
deeper, but not including plumbing fixtures (such as bathtubs), natural
lakes, streams, or human-made irrigation or flood-control channels.



   BUILDING - Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattel, or property of any kind.



   BUILDING CODE - The current edition of the California state adopted
building regulations, and city amendments to such regulations.



   BUILDING or LOT COVERAGE - The percentage of the net lot area that is
covered by all the buildings and structures on a lot, including garages and
covered patios, balconies, decks that are elevated more than five feet above
the natural grade, staircases that lead to a second story, parking areas and
driveways.  LOT COVERAGE will not include uncovered porches and steps,
walkways, and grade level patios completely separated from driving and
parking areas by a 5-foot wide landscape area.



   BUILDING FRONTAGE - That side of a building containing the main
entrance for pedestrian entrance and exit.  If more than one main entrance
exists, the one that more nearly faces or is oriented to the street of
highest classification as portrayed in the Circulation Element of the General
Plan, will be considered the BUILDING FRONTAGE.  If all streets are of the
same classification, the side of the building with the smallest lineal
dimension containing a main entrance will be considered the BUILDING FRONTAGE.



   BUILDING HEIGHT - The vertical distance from the average finished
ground level of the site to the highest point of the structure, but exclusive
of vents, air conditioners, chimneys, or other such incidental appurtenances.



   BUILDING MATERIALS YARD - A use providing for the sales and/or
distribution of supplies or construction materials ordinarily associated with
building or construction activity, either private or commercial.



   BUILDING SITE - Any parcel or portion of a parcel that supports an
approved structure, structures, or use, and including all required yards,
open space and parking, or any site that is proposed for such development.



   BUNGALOW COURT - A group of three or more detached one-story,
one-family or two-family dwellings located upon a single lot, together with
all open spaces as required by this Development Code, but not including
tourist courts or motels.



   BUSINESS - A use or activity involving the sale or rental of goods or
the sale or furnishing of services of any kind.



   BUS SHELTER - Any structure located in the public right-of-way that
covers or contains bus benches.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.040  "C" DEFINITIONS.



   CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) - Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§
21000 et seq. that requires state, regional, county, and local agencies to
conduct environmental review for any discretionary activity proposed to be
carried out or approved by those agencies.



   CAMPGROUND, PUBLIC - A public area wherein major recreational equipment
may be placed as temporary dwellings.



   CARPORT - A permanent roofed structure with not more than three
enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.



   CAR WASH, FULL SERVICE - A structure containing employees and
facilities for washing automobiles using a chain conveyor or other method of
moving the cars along, or manual, automatic or semiautomatic application of
cleaner, brushes, rinse water, and heat for drying.  Car-washing employees
are located at a full-service car wash.



   CAR WASH, SELF-SERVICE - A structure containing facilities for washing
stationary automobiles, including the semiautomatic application of cleaner,
rinse water, and possibly heat for drying.  No car-washing employees are
located at a self-service car wash.



   CATERING SERVICE - An establishment that prepares and delivers food for
consumption off the premises (e.g. banquets or luncheons).  A CATERING
SERVICE may contain kitchen facilities and may also provide dining supplies
such as place settings, tablecloths, and beverage dispensers.



   CHECK CASHING SERVICE - Any business where checks are cashed for
additional fee or surcharge, excluding banks, savings-and-loans and credit
unions that are licensed or chartered by the state or federal government.



   CHILDREN - Persons under the age of 18.



   CHURCH - Any building utilized primarily as a place of worship or for
conducting religious services, and including accessory uses such as
fellowship halls, offices, and permitted classrooms. Such building must be
fully enclosed with walls, including windows and doors, and must conform to
applicable legal requirements affecting design and construction.



   CLINIC - An organized outpatient health facility for human patients who
remain therein less than 24 hours.



   CLUB - Any building or premises used by an association of persons,
whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose,
but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service
customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.



   COMMERCIAL USE - See "Use, Commercial Retail" and "Use, Commercial
Service."



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE - Any vehicle classified by the State of California
as a commercial vehicle pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code §§ 260 and 35701 et seq.



   COMMISSION - The Planning Commission of the City of Santa Paula.



   COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECT - Has the same meaning as Cal. Civil Code
§ 1351(d).



   COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY - Any facility, place, or building where six or
more persons live together which is maintained and operated to provide
nonmedical residential care, day treatment, or foster family agency services
for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to,
physically handicapped, mentally impaired, mentally incompetent persons,
abused or neglected people, and substance abusers; which includes residential
facilities, day treatment facilities, foster family homes, small family
homes, social rehabilitation facilities, community treatment facilities,
shelters for battered women, substance abuse treatment facilities and social
day care facilities.



   COMPENSATION - Compensation in money, services or other things of value.



   CONDITIONAL USE - A use permitted on a particular site and within a
zone only upon a finding by a discretionary body that such use in a specified
location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location
or operation of such use as specified in this ordinance and authorized by the
City Council.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT - An approval that is required for a use to be
carried out in a particular zone that is not a use permitted by right.  Each
application is considered on its individual merits.



   CONDOMINIUM - The interior airspace of two or more dwelling units that
are individually owned and where the balance of the property is owned in
common by the owners of the units.



   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION - The development of land and existing
structures as a condominium, regardless of the present or prior use of such
land or structures, and regardless of whether substantial improvements have
been made to such structures.



   CONGREGATE CARE HOUSING - A multi-family residential facility with
shared kitchen facilities, deed-restricted or restricted by an agreement
approved by the city for occupancy by low or moderate income households,
designed for occupancy for periods of six months or longer, providing
services which may include meals, housekeeping and personal care assistance
as well as common areas for residents of the facility.



   CONTAINER - A bin, used either for commercial or private residential
purposes, provided by an approved solid waste collector for the accumulation
and collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, and green waste from any
premises in the city.



   CONVALESCENT HOME or HOSPITAL - A state-licensed facility that provides
long-term nursing, dietary, and other medical services, except surgery or
primary treatments customarily provided in a hospital, to convalescents or
invalids.



   CONVENIENCE STORE - See "Mini-market."



   COUNCIL - The City Council of the City of Santa Paula



   COUNTY MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME - The annual income figure, adjusted for
household size, as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) or the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD), or any successor agency, which represents the "middle" of
the income range in the County of Ventura.  The median income figure
indicates that half of all households have incomes larger than that value,
and half have less.



   COUNTY MEDIAN MONTHLY INCOME - The county median household income
divided by 12.



   COVERAGE - See "Building or Lot Coverage"



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1169,
passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.05.050  "D" DEFINITIONS.



   DANCE STUDIO - Any facility in which classes are offered and held on a
regular basis that teach the techniques of any dance, aerobic routine,
martial art, or other similar activity for compensation.  Such use may
include facilities for the occasional recital performance of such classes for
persons enrolled in the class.



   DAY CARE CENTER, CHILD - Any child day care facility other than a
family day care home.  DAY CARE CENTERS include infant centers, nursery
schools, day nurseries, preschools, extended day care facilities, schoolage
child care centers and employer-sponsored child day care centers. 



(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1596.76)



   DAY CARE CENTER, EMPLOYER- SPONSORED CHILD - Any child day care
facility at the employer's site of business operated directly or through a
provider contract by any person or entity having one or more employees, and
available exclusively for the care of children of that employer, and of the
officers, managers, and employees of that employer. 



(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1596.771)



   DAY CARE FACILITY, CHILD - A facility that provides non-medical care to
children under 18 years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or
assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis.  CHILD DAY CARE
FACILITY includes day care centers, employer-sponsored child day care
centers, and family day care homes. 



(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1596.750)



   DAY CARE HOME, LARGE FAMILY - A private home that is licensed by the
State of California as a large family day care home to provide family day
care, in the provider's own home, of up to 14 children, including children
under the age of 10 years who reside at the home. 



(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1597.46)



   DAY CARE HOME, SMALL FAMILY - A private home that is licensed by the
State of California to provide family day care, in the provider's home, of up
to eight children, including children under the age of ten years who reside
at the home.  See Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1597.45 .



   DECK - A flat floored platform, can be at different levels, covered by
building code if 30 inches above adjacent grade.



   DEFENSIBLE SPACE - DEFENSIBLE SPACE is a design concept that promotes
site planning and building design features aimed toward preventing safety and
security problems.



   DENSITY - The total number of permanent residential dwelling units per
acre of land, exclusive of all existing public streets and rights-of-way.



   DENSITY BONUS - Definitions relating to density bonus provisions are
contained in Chapter 16.13.



   DEPARTMENT STORE - A retail facility that sells clothing, jewelry,
accessories, furniture, or other household items through a variety of
separate departments, owned by a single corporate entity and operated
entirely within one building or structure as one commercial use.



   DEPENDENT HOUSING - See "Second Dwelling Unit."



   DESIGN ASSISTANCE COMMITTEE - A five-person committee that is advisory
to the Historic Preservation Commission.



   DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE - The committee comprised of the Planning
Director, the Building and Safety Director, the City Engineer, the Public
Works Director, the Police Chief, and the Fire Chief, or their designees,
established for the purpose of reviewing development applications for
compliance with the provisions of this Development Code, as set forth in
Chapter 16.226 (Design Review).



   DETACHED BUILDING - Any building that is not physically joined to
another building by a common wall.



   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT - A DEVELOPMENT PROJECT consists of one or more of
the following:



      (1)   A project for which a building permit is required for a
commercial, industrial, or institutional structure. 



      (2)   A project for which a building permit is required for
residential structures.  For the purposes of requiring common areas for
solid waste collection, a residential development project will be a structure
containing four or more dwelling units.



   DEVELOPMENT SITE - See "Building Site."



   DIRECTOR - The Planning Director of the City of Santa Paula.



   DORMITORY - A building used partially for sleeping and eating
accommodations and where such facilities are related to educational or public
institution including religious institutions, fraternities or sororities.



   DRIVEWAY - A private roadway or access way providing vehicular access
to a parking space, parking lot, garage, dwelling, or other structure.



   DROUGHT-TOLERANT PLANT MATERIAL - Those plants that tolerate heavy clay
to sandy soil with the use of limited supplemental water.  Said plants are
able to thrive with deep, infrequent watering once their root systems are
established (3 to 12 month average time period).  Plants include those that
naturally grow in areas of limited natural water supply (native and
non-native plant species) and are adaptable to weather and soil conditions
prevalent in the City of Santa Paula.



   DRUG STORE - A store where the primary business is the filling of
medical prescriptions and the sale of drugs, medical devices and supplies,
and non- prescription medicines, but where non-medical products such as
cards, candy, and cosmetics are also sold.



   DRY CLEANING PLANT - A facility where dry cleaning is performed on the
premises.  A DRY CLEANING PLANT may also contain retail laundry service.



   DRY CLEANING SERVICE - A business which offers retail laundry service,
but at which no dry cleaning services are performed on the premises.



   DWELLING GROUP - Two or more dwellings, boarding or rooming houses, or
any combination thereof, located on one lot.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY - A building containing two or more dwelling
units. More than one dwelling on a parcel will be considered a multi-family
use.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED - A dwelling unit occupied or intended
for occupancy by only one family that is structurally connected with at least
one other such dwelling unit.  See definition of townhouse.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED - A detached building containing no
more than one dwelling unit occupied or intended for occupancy by only one
family, provided only one such dwelling unit is located on a lot.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY OR DUPLEX - A building containing no more than two
dwelling units.



   



   DWELLING UNIT or DWELLING - Any building or mobile home or portion
thereof, including a manufactured home or portion thereof, which contains the
following: sleeping and eating areas, sanitation as required by City Code,
and one kitchen area.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.05.060  "E" DEFINITIONS.



   EASEMENT- A legal right given by the owner of land to another party for
specific limited use of that land.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION - An institution offering academic instruction
or training leading to a degree, or accreditation by the state, including
private colleges or trade schools but not including dance schools, business
schools and similar commercial establishments.



   EMERGENCY SHELTER - A facility that provides immediate and short-term
housing and supplemental services to homeless persons or families. 
Supplemental services may include food, counseling, and access to social
programs.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.070  “F” DEFINITIONS.



   FAMILY - One or more persons, related or unrelated, living together as
a single housekeeping unit.



   FARM ANIMAL - Any horse, cow, llama, sheep, goat, rabbit, hen, rooster,
or other poultry.



   FARMWORKER HOUSING - Housing specifically for persons employed in the
agricultural industry, to include group quarters, single room occupancy, and
multifamily housing.  Such housing must be restricted by deed for occupancy
by farmworkers.  See also Migrant Farmworker Housing.



   FENCE - A solid or open barrier other than a wall above ground intended
to enclose or mark a boundary, usually made of posts and wire or wood.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION - An establishment or facility for the custody,
loan, exchange, or issue of money; for the extension of credit; and for
facilitating the transmission of funds.  This definition specifically
excludes check cashing business and pawnshop.



   FIRE CODE – The current edition of the California state adopted fire
code regulations, and city amendments to such regulations.



   FLAGPOLE - A freestanding structure or a structure attached to a
building or to the roof of a building on a parcel of record and used for the
sole purpose of displaying flags of political entities.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO - The total gross area of all buildings on a lot
divided by the lot area (FAR).  For the purpose of calculating floor area,
floor area will (1) not include exterior courts, garages, carports, elevator
shafts, and stairwells; and (2) be calculated based on the exterior faces of
walls.



   FOOD PROCESSING - Means all the activities of manufacturing food and
beverages for human consumption, and prepared animal feeds, including,
without limitation, creameries, flour mills, frozen food lockers, fruit and
vegetable canning, freezing, packing and preserving plants, ice and cold
storage plants and agricultural packing, and canning and processing plants.



   FRONTAGE - That portion of a lot, parcel or site that abuts a dedicated
public street.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1167,
passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.05.080  "G" DEFINITIONS.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE - An accessory building, or an accessory portion of the
main building, designed and used primarily for the shelter or storage of
operable vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building and
having a minimum of four walls.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC - A building, other than a private garage, used for the
storage, care, repair or servicing of automobiles.



   GARBAGE - All waste food or discarded food of all kinds, including, but
not restricted to, meat, fish, fruit, bakery goods, and vegetable refuse, or
any putrid or offensive organic matter, except manure or fertilizer used for
agricultural purposes.



   GENERAL PLAN - The General Plan of the City of Santa Paula, adopted
pursuant to the State of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65301 et seq. and adopted by
the City Council.



   GRADE - The average of the finished ground level at the center of all
walls of a building.  In the event walls are parallel to and within five
feet of a sidewalk, the ground level will be measured at the sidewalk.



   GRANNY FLAT - See "Second Dwelling Unit."



   GROSS FLOOR AREA - The total dimensions on each floor as measured from
the outside wall.



   GROSS LOT (OR LAND) AREA - The total dimensions on the lot as measured
along property lines.



   GROUP HOME - Any facility of any capacity which provides 24-hour care
and supervision to children in a structured environment with such services
provided at least in part by staff employed by the licensee. The care and
supervision provided by a group home must be nonmedical except as permitted
by Cal. Welfare & Institutions Code § 17736(b).



   GROUP QUARTERS - A facility that houses groups of unrelated persons not
living in households (U.S. Census definition).  Examples of GROUP QUARTERS
includes institutions, dormitories, shelters, military quarters, assisted
living facilities and other quarters, including single-room occupancy (SRO)
housing, where five or more unrelated individuals are housed.



   GUESTHOUSE - An accessory building, attached or detached from the
primary building, which is destined to be occupied by one or more guests for
temporary lodging. A guesthouse contains no kitchen facilities.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.05.090  "H" DEFINITIONS.



   HARDSCAPE - Decorative elements that may be combined with landscaping
to satisfy the landscaping requirements of this Development Code.  Hardscape
elements include, but are not necessarily limited to, natural features such
as rock and stone; and structural features such as walkways, fountains,
reflecting pools, swimming pools, art works, screens, walls, fences, benches,
and crushed granite.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS - Any material defined as a "hazardous waste"
pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25117.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS FACILITY - Defined pursuant to the Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 25117.1.



   HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION - A five-person commission appointed
by the City Council to carry out the Historic Preservation Chapter (16.33) of
this Development Code.



   HOME OCCUPATION - Any commercial activity conducted entirely within a
particular dwelling or in an approved habitable accessory building by one or
more of the inhabitants of the property and up to one non-resident
employee.  HOME OCCUPATIONS are uses that do not interrupt or interfere with
the general nature or character of the residential neighborhood.



   HOSPITAL - A health facility having a duly-constituted governing body
with overall administrative and professional responsibility and an organized
medical staff which provides 24-hour inpatient care, including the following
basic services: medical, nursing, surgical, anesthesia, laboratory,
radiology, pharmacy, and dietary services.



   HOT TUB - See "Spa."



   HOTEL - An establishment which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a roominghouse, and which provides customary hotel
services including maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linen,
telephone and secretarial or desk service, and where no individual kitchen
facilities are provided, whether known as a hotel or motel.



   HOUSEHOLDS - All persons living in a housing unit whether or not they
are related (U.S. Census Definition).  A single person living in an
apartment as well as a family living in a house is considered a HOUSEHOLD. 
HOUSEHOLD does not include individuals living in dormitories, prisons,
convalescent homes, or other group quarters.



   HOUSEHOLDS, LOW-INCOME - Those households whose gross annual income
does not exceed 80% of the county median household income, as defined in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 50079.5.



   HOUSEHOLDS, MODERATE-INCOME - Those households whose gross annual
income does not exceed 120% of the county median household income, as defined
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50093.



   HOUSEHOLDS, VERY LOW-INCOME - Those households whose gross annual
income does not exceed 50% of the county median household income, as defined
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50105.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1192, passed 6-16-08)



§ 16.05.100  "I" DEFINITIONS.



   IMPROVEMENT - Any construction, building, paving, or landscaping
activity that materially adds to the value of a facility, substantially
extends its useful life, or adapts it to new uses.  Repairs performed for
the purpose of maintaining a facility in good operating condition but which
do not materially add to the value of a facility or substantially extend its
useful life are not considered IMPROVEMENTS.



   INDUSTRIAL USE -  See "Use, Industrial".



   INSTITUTIONAL USE - See "Use, Institutional".



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.110  "J" DEFINITIONS.



   JUNK or SALVAGE YARD - Any area, lot, parcel, building, or structure,
or part thereof, used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase,
sale, or abandonment of junk.  Junk and salvage yard uses also include the
baling of cardboard, cardboard boxes, paper, and paper cartons.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.120  "K" DEFINITIONS.



   KENNEL - Any lot or premises on which five or more dogs or domesticated
animals at least four months of age are kept, boarded, or trained for the
off-premise owners of such animals, except veterinary clinics, hospitals, and
animal shelters.



   KITCHEN - Any room used or intended or designed to be used for cooking
or the preparation of food, including any room having a sink and either a
three-fourths-inch gas opening or provision for an electric stove.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.130  "L" DEFINITIONS.



   LABOR CAMP - Any place, area, or building where living accommodations
are maintained or intended for persons performing agricultural or other types
of labor on property other than property owned or leased by the owner of such
accommodations.



   LANDSCAPING - Unless otherwise defined elsewhere in this Development
Code, the planting, including replanting in case of death, disease,
disfigurement or dismemberment, of live trees, shrubs and ground cover which,
at the time of planting, are healthy, vigorous, and free of diseases, and of
a species that is able to thrive in the environment and soil type in which it
is planted, and maintenance thereof sufficient to sustain plant life,
including an underground irrigation system with a useful life of not less
than 10 years.  LANDSCAPING also includes hardscape and artificial surfaces
when interspersed with shrubs and/or trees.



   LAUNDROMAT - An establishment providing washing and drying machines on
the premises for rental use to the general public for laundering of clothes.



   LAUNDRY SERVICE - An establishment that cleans, washes, and dries
clothes or other cloth materials, either brought in and carried away by the
customer or collected and delivered primarily by the laundry service
employees.  A LAUNDRY SERVICE does not contain dry cleaning facilities.



   LOADING SPACE - An off-street space or berth that is on the same lot as
the building(s) it services; abuts a street, alley, or other appropriate
means of access; and is used for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle that is being loaded or unloaded with merchandise, materials, or
people.



   LODGE - See "Club."



   LOT - Land which is:



      (1)   A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel
of land with a number or other designation on a final map of subdivision
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Ventura County; or



      (2)   A parcel of land which was a recorded parcel separate
from any adjacent parcel of land and was indicated as a separate parcel on
the records of the Ventura County Assessor on November 3, 1960, provided such
parcel has legally recorded access to a public street, either directly or by
way of an access strip at least 20 feet in width, which is topographically
traversable by vehicular traffic; or



      (3)   A parcel of land created subsequent to November 3, 1960,
pursuant to a lot split or parcel map approved by the Planning Commission of
the city and, in the case of a parcel map, duly recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Ventura County.



   LOT AREA - The area enclosed within the lot lines of a lot.  For the
purposes of computing the permitted number of units in residential zones,
however, LOT AREA will mean the net area remaining in the lot after required
dedications for public streets are made and the area necessary for private
streets and main access driveways are deducted.



   LOT, CORNER - A lot or parcel of land situated at the intersection of
two or more streets or highways, which streets or highways have an angle of
intersection, measured within such lot or parcel of land, of not more than
135° (see Figure 5-1 of this section).







Figure 5-1



Lot Types



   LOT, CUL-DE-SAC - A lot located at any position on the circular portion
of a cul-de-sac street (see Figure 5-1 of this section).



   LOT DEPTH - The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.



   LOT, FLAG - A lot having access to a public or private roadway by a
narrow, private right-of-way or easement and where the buildable portion of
the lot is located to the rear of another lot or lots (see Figure 5-1 of this
section).



   LOT, INTERIOR - A lot having lots adjoining on two sides (see Figure
5-1 of this section).



   LOT, KEY - The first interior lot to the rear of a reverse corner lot,
whether or not separated by an alley.



   LOT LINE, FRONT - The property line dividing a lot from a street.  On
a corner lot only one street line will be considered as a front line.  The
shorter street frontage will be considered the front lot line.  On a flag
lot, the front lot line will also include the line dividing the lot from the
street fronting parcel(s).  In the case of lots without street frontage, the
Planning Director will designate the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, REAR - The lot line most nearly parallel to the front lot
line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE - Any lot lines other than front lot lines or rear lot
lines.



   LOT, REVERSE CORNER - A corner lot in which the rear lot line abuts the
side lot line of at least one adjacent lot.



   LOT, SUBSTANDARD - Any lot that does not meet the minimum dimensions
required by this Development Code.



   LOT, THROUGH - A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two
parallel streets (see Figure 5-1 of this section).



   LOT WIDTH - The horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and
rear lot lines.



   LOW-WATER-FLOW IRRIGATION - A system of watering plant material using
drip/trickle, reduced water emitting devices, low precipitation heads, soaker
lines, or other similar mechanisms that restricts the amount of water in
gallons per minute to allow for deep percolation into the soil.  The low
water flow irrigation system, combined with watering practices outlined in
this zoning ordinance, will reduce water loss through evaporation, wind
drift, and overwatering.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.140  "M" DEFINITIONS.



   MANUFACTURING, GENERAL - A use engaged in the manufacture,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or
parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging
of such products, and incidental processing of extracted or raw materials.



   MANUFACTURING (LARGE SCALE) - Means establishments engaged in the
mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new
products, including the assembling of component parts and the blending of
materials.  Examples of manufacturing uses include, without limitation, the
following: aircraft, heavy equipment, boat buildings, bottling plants, paint
mixing plants (not employing a boiling process), machine shops (except punch
presses of over 20 tons rated capacity, drop hammers and automatic screw
machines), the manufacture of the following: billboards and advertising
structures; electric or neon signs; ceramic products; clothing or garments;
cosmetics; perfumes and toiletries; drugs and pharmaceuticals; electronic
instruments and devices; radios; televisions and phonographs; food products
(except the rendering or refining of fats and oils); furniture; musical
instruments; toys; prefabricated buildings; shoes; soap (cold mix only); and
textiles.  In addition, establishments engaged in electronic, automotive,
aerospace, underwater, missile, airframe or related manufacturing and
assembly activities including precision machine shops producing parts,
accessories, assemblies, systems, engines, major components and whole
electronic or electrical devices, automobiles, aircraft, missiles, aerospace
or underwater vehicles, or similar products but specifically excluding
explosive fuels and propellants.



   MANUFACTURING (SMALL SCALE) - Means establishments that involve only
assemblage of materials created or produced elsewhere; that do not require
chemical transformation or blending of chemical or liquid materials
including, without limitation, electronic instruments, small appliances,
blacksmith shop, sheet metal shops, and stone monument works.



   MIGRANT FARMWORKER HOUSING - Housing specifically for migrant persons
employed in the agricultural industry, to include group quarters and
multifamily housing.  Such housing must be restricted by deed for occupancy
by migrant farmworkers.



   MINI-MARKET - A high-volume retail facility that sells a variety of
products for consumption off-premises, including but not limited to food and
beverages, snacks, alcoholic beverages, household goods, magazines, and
accessory automobile supplies.



   MINI-WAREHOUSE - A structure containing separate storage spaces of 80
square feet or larger that are designed to be leased or rented individually.



   MOBILE HOME - A structure that conforms with the definition set forth
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18008.



   MOBILE HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION - A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more mobile home lots for sale or rent.



   MOBILE HOME PARK CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION - Includes, without limitation,
a change of any existing mobile home park or any portion thereof to
condominium, stock cooperative, or any form of ownership wherein spaces
within the mobile home park are to be sold, and the cessation of use of all
or a portion of the park as a mobile home park, whether immediately or on a
gradual basis, or the closure of the park. CONVERSION does not include the
purchase of the park by its existing residents.



   MOBILE HOME SPACE - A plot of ground within a mobilehome park or
subdivision designed to accommodate one mobile home.



   MOBILE RECYCLING UNIT - An automobile, truck, trailer, or van licensed
by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of
recyclable materials, or the bins, boxes, or containers transported by such
vehicles for the collection of recyclable materials.



   MOTEL - See "Hotel."



   MULCH - Shredded or chipped wood from tree branches, tree trunks,
uncontaminated wood products, or lumber.  This material is often mixed with
leaves and grass clippings for optimal effect.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06; Am. Ord. 1169,
passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.05.150  "N" DEFINITIONS.



   NEWSRACK - Any self-service coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser designed, used or maintained for the display or sale of
any written or printed material, including, without limitation, newspapers,
news periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and records.



   NONCONFORMING LOT - Any subdivision of land that was lawfully
established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the
time the property was subdivided or developed, but which, due to a
subsequently enacted ordinance or law, no longer complies with all the
applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the property is
located.



   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE - Any structure, building or improvement that
was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and
laws at the time it was erected, but which, due to a subsequently enacted
ordinance or law, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and
standards of the zone in which it is located.



   NONCONFORMING USE - A use or activity of land that was lawfully
established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the
time it was undertaken, but which, due to a subsequently enacted ordinance or
law, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of
the zone in which the use is located.



   NURSERIES AND HORTICULTURE, RETAIL - Land, gardens, orchards, or
greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, and plants, including the sale of
those items on the premises.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.160  "O" DEFINITIONS.



   OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF - A discontinuance of an existing use and
substitution therefor of a use of a different kind or class.



   OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL - An office in which professional or consulting
services are provided, such as in the fields of law, architecture, design,
engineering, accounting, and similar professions.



   OPEN SPACE - Any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment.



   OPEN SPACE, COMMON USABLE - Land areas within a multiple-dwelling
project not occupied or intruded upon by any structure, staircase or
overhang, which may be used for scenic or recreational purposes by all the
residents of the project.  COMMON USABLE OPEN SPACE does not include land
areas occupied by streets, driveways, parking areas, service areas, required
front yards or required side yards abutting a street.



   OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE USABLE - Areas within a multiple-dwelling project
not occupied or intruded upon by any structure, which are devoted exclusively
to the private recreation and leisure use of the residents of one dwelling
unit and does not include any space within a dwelling unit.



   OVERLAY ZONE - A zone established by ordinance that may be applied to
properties only when combined with an underlying zone.  Developments within
the overlay zone must conform to the requirements of both zones or the more
restrictive of the two.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.170  "P" DEFINITIONS.



   PARCEL - An area of land, the boundaries of which have been legally
established in conformance with the State Subdivision Map Act.



   PARCEL MAP - PARCEL MAP will be defined as set forth in the subdivision
ordinance, Chapter 16.80 of the Code of the City of Santa Paula.



   PARKS - A public park or recreational area, owned or operated by the
city, the county, the state, the federal government, nonprofit or public
agency.



   PARKING LOT, PUBLIC - A parking lot for motor vehicles created to serve
the public either as a separate business or as an accessory use to a
business, whether owned by a governmental agency or by a private person or
business.



   PARKING SPACE - A space, clearly delineated on the ground or pavement,
of dimensions required elsewhere in this Development Code, to be used for the
parking or stopping of motor vehicles.



   PARKING SPACE, COVERED - A parking space located within a garage,
carport, parking structure, or similar structure that provides protection
from the elements in the form of a roof.



   PARKING SPACE, GARAGE - A covered parking space provided within an
enclosed structure, with a closing and locking door, whose primary use is the
storage of vehicles.



   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET - A permanent parking space for a vehicle
which is designed to city standards and not located on a dedicated street
right-of-way.



   PARKING SPACE, ON-STREET - A parking space for a vehicle which is
designed to city standards and located on a dedicated street right-of-way.



   PARKING SPACE, OPEN - A parking space located in a designated area
which meets the dimension requirements of this ordinance but does not provide
any protection from the elements in the form of a carport, parking structure,
garage, or other structure.



   PATIO - A deck or paved area not extending above the first floor level
of a building and open to the sky.



   PATIO COVER - A covered shelter for outdoor recreational activities,
which meets the standards set forth in the Building Code.



   PAWN SHOP - A business that lends money at interest in exchange for
valuable personal property as security.



   PERMANENT STRUCTURE - Any object having a solid foundation or fixed
location on the ground.



   PERMIT - Written governmental permission issued by an authorized
official, empowering the holder thereof to engage in some activity not
forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization.



   PERMITTED USE - Any use allowed in a zone by right and subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zone.



   PERSON - Any individual, firm, association, partnership, political
subdivision, government agency, municipality, public or private corporation
or any other entity whatsoever.



   PET SHOP - Any premises primarily used for the sale of household pets
and supplies.



   PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT - Two or more dwelling units, including
dwelling units in developments commonly known as town or row-housing,
condominiums and cluster housing, together with related land, buildings, and
structures, planned and developed as a whole single development operation or
a programmed series of operations in accordance with detailed, comprehensive
plans encompassing such elements as the circulation pattern and parking
facilities, open space, recreational areas, utilities, and lots or building
sites, together with a program for provisions, operation, and maintenance of
all areas, improvements, facilities, and services provided for common use of
the residents thereof.



   PLANNING DIRECTOR - The chief administrator of the Planning
Department.  The PLANNING DIRECTOR also serves as the secretary to the
Planning Commission.



   POULTRY - Domestic fowl, chickens, ducks, geese and turkeys, but
specifically excluding guinea fowl.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE - The primary or predominant building or
structure on a lot.



   PRINCIPAL USE - See "Use, Principal."



   PROCESSING (LARGE SCALE) - Means a series of operations performed in
the making or treatment of a large-scale product including, without
limitation, concrete, planning mills, tire rebuilding, recapping and
retreading plants, and feed and fuel yards.



   PROCESSING (SMALL SCALE) - Means a series of operations performed in
the making or treatment of a small-scale product including, without
limitation, dry-cleaning; laundries; cleaning and dyeing plants;
taxidermists; carpet; awning; and blinds or mattress upholstery shops which
includes, cleaning, repair, and upholstery.



   PROJECT - An activity involving the issuance to a person of a permit,
license, certificate, or other entitlement.



   PUBLIC HEARING - A properly noticed meeting of an official or official
body where the public is allowed to give opinions concerning the issue being
considered.



   PUBLIC STORAGE FACILITY - See "Mini-warehouse."



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.05.180  "Q" DEFINITIONS.



   None.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.190  "R" DEFINITIONS.



   REBUILD - The replacement/reconstruction of less than 50% of a
building.  If 50% or more of a building is being replaced/reconstructed,
then this is considered new construction, not rebuilding.



   RECREATIONAL ENTERPRISES AND FACILITIES - Means facilities that provide
recreational uses including, without limitation, sports centers, open-air
theaters, amusement parks, circuses, carnivals, fairgrounds, race tracks,
swimming, golf, tennis clubs and similar facilities.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - Any vehicle that can be towed, hauled, or
driven, including a vehicle that is primarily designed as a temporary living
accommodation, and that is used for recreational, camping, and travel use. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, truck
campers, camping trailers, boats, self-propelled motor homes, and any vehicle
conforming to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18010.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS - Paper, newsprint, printed matter, pasteboard,
paper containers, cardboard, glass, aluminum, polyethylene terephthalate and
other plastics, beverage containers, compostable materials, and other
products designated by the City Manager or the California Integrated Waste
Management Board as recyclable.  RECYCLABLE MATERIALS does not include
refuse or hazardous materials.



   RECYCLING - The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating,
and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and
returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for
new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards
necessary to be used in the marketplace.  RECYCLING does not include
transformation, as defined in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 40201



   RECYCLING AREA - A space allocated for collecting and loading
recyclable materials.



   RECYCLING FACILITY - Any center for the collection of recyclable
materials.  A RECYCLING FACILITY does not include storage containers on
commercial property that are used solely for the recycling of material
generated by that business.  RECYCLING FACILITIES include reverse vending
machines, small collection recycling facilities, mobile recycling units, and
large collection recycling facilities.  A RECYCLING FACILITY may include a
collection or processing facility as follows:



      (1)   COLLECTION FACILITY - A center used for the acceptance
of recyclable materials by donation, redemption, or purchase from the
public.  COLLECTION FACILITY may include the following:



         (a)   Reverse vending machine(s).



         (b)   Small collection facilities that do not occupy
more than 500 square feet and which contain no permanent structures.



         (c)   Large collection facilities that occupy an area of
more than 500 square feet and which may contain permanent structures.



      (2)   PROCESSING FACILITY - A building or enclosed space used
for the collection and processing of recyclable materials, whereby processing
means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end user's
specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening,
grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and
remanufacturing.  PROCESS FACILITIES include the following:



         (a)   A LIGHT PROCESSING FACILITY occupies an area of
less than 45,000 square feet gross of collection, processing, and storage
area; has an average of up to two outbound truck shipments per day; and does
not involve any shredding, compacting, or baling of ferrous metals, other
than food and beverage containers.



         (b)   A HEAVY PROCESSING FACILITY is any processing
facility other than a light processing facility.



         (c)   A MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY is any facility where
mixed municipal solid waste is sorted and separated, by hand or through the
use of machinery, for the purpose of recovering recyclable materials.



   REPLACEMENT COST - The actual cost to replace or reconstruct a damaged
structure, facility, or feature, as determined by the appraisal of a
qualified and approved appraiser.



   RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM - Includes stock cooperatives and community
apartment projects.



   RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS - Includes stock cooperative and
community apartment project conversions. The terms COOPERATIVE, COMMUNITY
APARTMENT and CONDOMINIUM are considered synonymous.



   RESIDENTIAL USE - See "Use, Residential."



   REST HOME - Any place or institution which makes provision for bed care
or for chronic or convalescent care for one or more persons exclusive of
relatives, who by reason of illness or physical infirmity are unable to care
for themselves; but in which no alcoholics, drug addicts, persons suffering
from mental sickness, disease, disorder or ailment or from contagious or
communicable diseases are kept and in which no surgical or other primary
treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums or hospitals are
performed.  REST HOME includes all nursing facilities, skilled nursing
facilities, intermediate care facilities, intermediate care
facilities/developmentally disabled, and congregate living health facilities
as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1250.



   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH - A restaurant where the customers order and
receive their food by driving to one or more windows.  Such restaurants may
also have dining areas for on-premises food consumption.



   RESTAURANT, ENTERTAINMENT - A restaurant than includes, as an integral
component, electronic or mechanical games, plays areas, billiards, or other
forms of amusement.



   RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD - A restaurant that supplies food and beverages
primarily in disposable containers, and that is characterized by high
automobile accessibility, self-service, and short stays by customers.



   RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN - An establishment where food and drink are
prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building.



   RETAIL, GENERAL -The selling of goods, wares, or merchandise directly
to the ultimate consumer.



   RETIREMENT COMMUNITY - A residential development designed exclusively
for occupancy by retired or aged persons.



   REVERSE VENDING MACHINE - A mechanical device that accepts one or more
types of empty beverage containers, including aluminum cans, glass, and
plastic bottles and cartons, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit
slip with a value not less than the redemption value of the container. 
REVERSE VENDING MACHINES occupying an area larger than 500 square feet, or
any combination of facilities occupying an area larger than 500 square feet,
are considered recycling facilities.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY - A defined area of land, either public or private, on
which a right of passage has been recorded.



   ROOM, HABITABLE - Any room used, or intended or designed to be used,
for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes excluding such enclosed
spaces as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting
corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars,
utility rooms and similar spaces.



   ROOMING HOUSE - See Boarding House.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06; Am. Ord. 1169,
passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.05.200  "S" DEFINITIONS.



   SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL - A school providing training or personal
improvement (beauty college, dance school, business school, gymnasium, and
the like).



   SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY or HIGH - An institution of learning which offers
instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be
taught in the public schools by the California Educational Code.  HIGH
SCHOOLS include junior and senior high schools.



   SCHOOL, PRIVATE - An accredited private school or college, providing
academic or trade education.



   SCREENING - A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or
nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely
planted vegetation.



   SECOND DWELLING UNIT - An attached or a detached residential dwelling
unit, accessory to the primary unit, which provides complete independent
living facilities for one or more persons.  SECOND DWELLING UNITS will
include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling.  Either a new
dwelling or an existing dwelling may be a second unit.



   SECONDHAND STORE or SALES - A store or business engaged in the sale of
previously used merchandise such as clothes, furniture, appliances, and/or
sports equipment, and which is not classified as an antique store or shop per
§ 16.05.020 of this chapter.  This definition specifically excludes the
sale of used motor vehicles, auto wrecking business or pawnshops.



   SECRETARY - The secretary of the Planning Commission.



   SENIOR or SENIOR CITIZEN - A person 62 years of age or older or 55
years of age or older in a senior citizen housing development of at least 150
senior dwelling units, or a qualified permanent resident as defined in Cal.
Civ. Code §§ 51.2 and 51.3.  All qualifying senior projects must have
significant facilities and services for seniors as defined in 42 USC
3607(b)(2).



   SENIOR DAY SUPPORT CENTER - A facility, place or building which is
maintained and operated to provide non-medical care for seniors over age 60
who are either mildly dependent and cannot be left alone for long periods of
time, or are isolated from social contacts and activities.  The center
provides respite services for caregivers for less than 24 hours.



   SERVICE STATION - See "automobile service station."



   SETBACK - The distance from a defined point or line governing the
placement of buildings, structures, parking, or uses on a lot.



   SETBACK LINE - A line within a lot, parallel to and measured from a
corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and governing
the placement of buildings, structures, parking, or uses on a lot.



   SHARED PARKING - The provision of parking spaces to meet the combined
peak parking needs of more than one use on a lot or abutting lots.



   SHOPPING CENTER - A group of businesses which comprise at least four
stores functioning as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the
property as an integral part of the unit, and having more than 10,000 square
feet of gross parcel area in the development.



   SIGN - Any writing (including letters, words or numerals), pictorial
presentation (including illustration or decoration) or emblem (including
device, symbol or trademark), visible from any public or private street or
means of access thereto, used to advertise or direct attention to an
activity, product, place, person, organization, business or enterprise.



   SIGN AREA - This is computed as including the entire area within a
regular geometric form or combination of regular geometric forms comprising
all the display area of the sign.  Frames and structural members not bearing
advertising matter are not included in the computation of area.  One face of
a double-faced sign will be considered in determining the sign area, provided
both faces are parallel or the angle between the faces does not exceed 30°.



   SIGN, OFF-SITE - A sign other than an on-site sign. See also Chapter
16.48.



   SIGN, ON-SITE - A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises
on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services or
activities sold, rendered or conducted on the premises.  See also Chapter
16.48.



   SINGLE-HOUSEKEEPING UNIT - The functional equivalent of a traditional
family; whose members are a non-transient interactive group of persons
jointly occupying a single dwelling unit, including the joint use of common
areas and sharing household activities such as meals, chores, and expenses.



   SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY - A type of group quarters generally intended or
designed to be used, rented, or occupied for sleeping or living purposes by
guests, which is also the primary residence of those guests. This type of use
commonly contains five or more guestrooms or efficiency units. Generally,
each single room occupancy (SRO) unit contains a living area, kitchen sink,
cooking appliances and refrigeration facilities and a separate bathroom.  A
SRO hotel with more than 12 units generally contains an on-site manager's
office.



   SITE - Any lot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land, used or intended for a particular use or group of uses.



   SITE PLAN - A plan drawn to scale, showing existing and proposed uses
for a property as required by the applicable regulations, including lot
lines, streets, grades, building sites, reserved open space, and other
specific development proposals.



   SOLID WASTE - Solid waste will be defined as set forth in Cal. Pub.
Res. Code § 40191.



   SPA - A structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that is
designed to contain water to a depth of 18 inches or deeper, with exterior
dimensions not exceeding 160 square feet.



   SPECIFIC PLAN - Under Article 8 of the Cal. Gov’t Code 9 §§ 65450
et seq.), a legal tool for detailed design and implementation of a defined
portion of the area covered by a General Plan.  A SPECIFIC PLAN may include
all detailed regulations, conditions, programs, and/or proposed legislation
which may be necessary or convenient for the systematic implementation of any
General Plan element(s).



   STABLE, COMMERCIAL - A building or portion of a building used to
shelter and feed horses, mules, or ponies which are rented, used, or boarded
on a commercial basis for compensation.



   STABLE, PRIVATE - A building or portion of a building used to shelter
and feed horses, mules, or ponies which are used exclusively by the occupants
of the property on which the stable is situated.



   STANDARDS, DEVELOPMENT - Requirements in this Development Code that
govern building and development, including, but not limited to, lot area,
height limits, frontage, landscaping, and floor area ratio.



   STANDARDS, PERFORMANCE - Requirements in this Development Code that
govern the operation and maintenance of uses in a particular zone.



   STOCK COOPERATIVE PROJECT - Has the same meaning as set forth in Cal.
Civil Code § 1351(m) and any subsequent amendment or regulation.



   STORY - Any portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story will be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.  If the finished
floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused underfloor space is
more than six feet above grade as defined in this section for more than 50%
of the total perimeter, or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined in
this section at any point, such basement, cellar or unused underfloor space
will be considered as a STORY.



   STREET - A county road, state highway, public road, street or alley, or
private thoroughfare not less than ten feet in width connecting with a county
road, state highway, public road, street or alley which affords primary
access to an abutting lot.



   STREET, PRIVATE - A privately-owned vehicular right-of-way used as
access by two or more lots which do not have frontages on a public street.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS - Any change to a bearing wall, column, beam,
joist, roof, rafter or other supporting member of a building or structure.



   STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected which requires a location
in or on the ground, or which is attached to something having a location on
or in the ground, such as signs, flagpoles, or similar appurtenances,
including a building or a building's architectural features and roof
appurtenances required to operate and maintain the building, but not
including fences, or walls used as fences, less than six feet in height.



   STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL - (See also "Use, principal"). 



   SUBDIVISION - A process (and the result) of dividing a parcel of raw
land into smaller buildable sites, blocks, streets, open space, and public
areas, and the designation of the location of utilities and other
improvements.



   SUPPORTIVE HOUSING - Means housing, configured as rental housing
developments, with no limit on length of stay, that is linked to onsite or
offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her
ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.  SUPPORTIVE
HOUSING is a residential use permitted subject to the same standards and
procedures as apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same
zone.



   SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS - All, or any part of, the process involved
in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining
directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally
exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work
incident to an underground mine.  SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS include, but are
not limited to:



      (1)   In-place distillation, retorting or leaching;



      (2)   The production and disposal of mining waste;



      (3)   Prospecting and exploratory activities.



   SWIMMING POOL - A tank or pool created by artificial means designed for
the purpose of containing a body of water at a depth of 18 inches or deeper,
and offering the possibility of use for swimming, bathing, and/or bodily
immersion by any person.  This includes indoor, outdoor, in-ground,
above-ground, and on-ground swimming pools; fixed-in wading pools; but
excludes spas.



   SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR - A swimming pool which is totally contained
within a structure and surrounded on all sides, including the top, by said
structure.



   SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR - Any swimming pool which is not an indoor
swimming pool.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07; Am. Ord. 1249,
passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.05.210  "T" DEFINITIONS.



   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE - A structure without any foundation or footings
that will be removed when the permit for the activity, or use for which the
temporary structure was erected, has expired.



   TEMPORARY USE - A use established for a fixed period of time with the
intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.



   THEATER/CINEMA - A venue designed for the presentation of live plays or
the showing of movies or motion pictures on one or more screens.



   THRIFT STORE and THRIFT SHOP - See “secondhand store”.



   TOWNHOUSE - A single-family dwelling unit attached to one or more other
single-family dwelling units provided only one such dwelling unit is located
on a lot.



   TRAILER PARK, TRAILER COURT, and PUBLIC TRAILER CAMP - Any area or
tract of land used or designed to accommodate two or more automobile
trailers, including trailer camps as defined by law, and used as living or
sleeping quarters.



   TRAILER, TRAVEL - A vehicular portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such
a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when
drawn by a motorized vehicle; primarily designed and constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.



   TRANSIENT - Tourists or other persons abiding in the city for a short
period of time.



   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING and TRANSITIONAL HOUSING DEVELOPMENT - Per Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 50675.2(h), means housing configured as rental
housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for
the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to
another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in
time, which shall be no less than six months.  TRANSITIONAL HOUSING is a
residential use permitted subject to the same standards and procedures as
apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.



   TREES, PROTECTED - All applicable trees listed in § 16.232.020 of this
title.



   TRUCK YARD - A lot, lot area, or parcel of land used, designed, or
maintained for the purpose of storing, parking, refueling, repairing,
dispatching, servicing, or keeping motor trucks and associated equipment
together with those facilities necessary to service, dispatch, store, or
maintain such vehicles, their cargos, and crews.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.05.220  "U" DEFINITIONS.



   USE - The purpose for which land or a building is used, arranged,
designed, or intended, or for which the land or building is or may be
occupied or maintained.



   USE, COMMERCIAL RETAIL - Any use listed in the land use element in the
retail trade group.



   USE, COMMERCIAL SERVICE - Any use listed in the land use element in the
services group.



   USE, INDUSTRIAL - Any use listed in the land use element in the
manufacturing and processing group.



   USE, INSTITUTIONAL - An organizational use of a public character
including government, educational, medical, cultural, social, charitable,
non-profit, and sometimes recreational or entertainment uses.  Such uses
include the following or similar public buildings or uses owned by a public
or nonprofit agency: offices, public works facilities, libraries,
playgrounds, parks, assembly halls, police station, fire station, schools,
and hospitals. 



   USE, NEW - A use of land (See "Use"), which is proposed to be
established or constructed after the adoption of this title.



   USE, PRINCIPAL or MAIN - The primary purpose for which a building,
structure, or lot is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which they may
be used, occupied or maintained under this title. (See also "Accessory Use,"
and "Structure, principal.")



   USE, RESIDENTIAL - Any use listed in the land use element in the
residential group.



   USE AREA - An open or yard area, uncovered by building or structures,
used as the main use or accessory use of a lot or parcel.



   UTILITY, PUBLIC or PRIVATE - Any regulated agency which, under public
franchise or ownership, or under certificate of convenience and necessity,
provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail
transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.230  "V" DEFINITIONS.



   VARIANCE - Permission to depart from the provision of this Development
Code when, due to special circumstances applicable to the property, strict
application of the requirements deprives such property of privileges enjoyed
by other property in the vicinity which is under identical zoning.  See
Chapter 16.216 of this Development Code.



   VEHICULAR STORAGE YARD - Any area, lot, parcel, building, structure, or
part thereof, used for the storage, collection, or abandonment of motor
vehicles.



   VENDING MACHINE - An electric or mechanical machine designed for the
dispensing of consumer products (such as food, water, cigarettes) or services
(such as telephone, banking or internet service) for a monetary fee, usually
collected via the insertion or use of coins, bills, credit/debit card or
other remuneration.  VENDING MACHINES do not include coin-operated amusement
devices, rides, or scales. (Please refer to the definition of "Amusement
Devices", elsewhere in this chapter).



   VETERINARY CLINIC - A place where animals are given medical or surgical
treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.  Use as a
kennel will be limited to short-term boarding and will be incidental to such
veterinary use.



   VIDEO STORE - An establishment engaged primarily in the sale or rental
of videotapes, DVDs, films, laser discs, CDs, electronic games, and similar
electronic media and amusements.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.240  "W" DEFINITIONS.



   WALL - A barrier intended to mark a boundary that presents a continuous
surface except where pierced with gates, doorways, or decorative masonry.  A
wall is usually constructed of concrete block, brick, concrete, stucco, or a
combination thereof.



   WAREHOUSE - A structure intended or adopted for the shipping,
receiving, and storage of goods and merchandise, and incidental or accessory
activities.



   WINDOW - An opening which is in a wall of a building, designed to allow
light and/or ventilation into the building, enclosed by easement or sash, and
containing glass or other similar transparent or semi-transparent material.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.250  "X" DEFINITIONS.



   Reserved.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.260  "Y" DEFINITIONS.



   YARD - An open space on a developed lot that, except as otherwise
provided for in this Development Code, is unoccupied or unobstructed from the
ground upwards, with the exception of ground-level open porches and patios.



   YARD AREA - The area of yard on a given lot expressed in numbers of
square feet.



   YARD, FRONT - A yard extending across the full width of a lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line parallel thereto on the lot, except that where there is an
official plan line or a future street line, front yards will be measured from
such official plan line or future street line and a line parallel thereto on
the lot.  On any existing flag lot, the FRONT YARD will include the area
between the front lot line and a line parallel to the line dividing the lot
from the street fronting parcel(s) (see Figure 5.2 below).  With the
exception of flag lots, any front yard requirement will be deemed to be met
when the depth of the front yard provided at least equals the average of that
established by existing buildings that occupy 50% or more of the lots within
the same block and zone (see Figure 5-2 of this section). 



   YARD, REAR - A yard extending across the full width of a lot, having at
no point a depth of less than the minimum required horizontal distance as
measured from the part of the main building nearest the rear lot line towards
the rear lot line, and such measurement will be along a line representing the
shortest distance between said part of the main building and rear lot line. 
The required rear yard will be that portion of the rear yard contiguous to
the rear lot line having at no point a depth less than that required for the
rear yard.  The area to the rear of the rear lot line of an interior
triangular or gore-shaped lot will be considered a part of the required rear
yard (see Figure 5-2 of this section).







Figure 5-2



Required Yards



   YARD, SIDE - A yard extending from the required front yard or the front
lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear lot line, the width of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and a line
parallel thereto on the lot, except that where there is an official plan line
or a future street line, side yards will be measured from such official plan
line or future street line and a line parallel thereto on the lot (see Figure
5-2 of this section). 



   YARD SPACE, INTERIOR - That area on the lot behind the front setback
line which is open from ground to sky and used as private open space except
as otherwise permitted in this Development Code.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.05.270  "Z" DEFINITIONS.



   ZONE - A specifically delineated area or district within a municipality
in which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use placement,
spacing, and size of land and buildings.



   ZONING MAP - The map or maps that are a part of this Development Code
and which delineate the boundaries of zones and designate each zone.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.07:  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES



Section



   16.07.010   Zones established



   16.07.020   Official zoning map



   16.07.030   Boundary determination



   16.07.040   Prezoning of unincorporated lands



§ 16.07.010  ZONES ESTABLISHED.



   In order to classify, regulate, restrict, and separate the use of land,
buildings, and structures; and to regulate and to limit the type, height, and
bulk of buildings and structures in the various districts; and to regulate
areas of yards and other open areas abutting and between buildings and
structures; and to regulate the density of population, the city hereby is
divided into the following zones:



 

Zone Symbol
 
Zone Designation




O
 
Open Space - Passive


OPR
 
Open Space - Parks and Recreation


A-1
 
Agricultural


R-A
 
Rural Residential


HR1-PD
 
Hillside Residential 1 - Planned Development (0-1 du/acre)


HR2-PD
 
Hillside Residential 2 - Planned Development  (0-3 du/acre)


R-1
 
Single Family Residential


R-1 (a)
 
Small Lot Single Family Residential


R-2
 
Medium Density Residential


R-3
 
Medium-High Density Residential


R-4
 
High Density Residential


MHP
 
Mobile Home Park


C-N
 
Commercial - Neighborhood


C-O
 
Commercial - Office


C-G
 
General Commercial


C-H
 
Highway Commercial


CBD
 
Central Business District


C/LI
 
Commercial/Light Industrial


LI
 
Light Industrial


I
 
Industrial


IN
 
Institutional/Civic


KO
 
Airport Operational Zone


(KS-IS)
 
Airport Safety Zone Overlay - Inner Safety Subzone


(KS-OS)
 
Airport Safety Zone Overlay - Outer Safety Subzone


(KI)
 
Airport-Influenced Area Overlay


(RR)
 
Railroad Overlay


(PD)
 
Planned Development Overlay


(SP)
 
Specific Plan Overlay


(HD)
 
Historic District Overlay


(IP)
 
Industrial Park Overlay


(M-1)
 
Manufacturing Zone




 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.07.020  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   A map, known as the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Santa Paula,
California" dated __________________, or as subsequently amended, and on file
with the City Clerk, is adopted herein by reference and will hereafter exist
pursuant to and as an integral part of this Title 16.  The map will be
maintained to reflect the current zoning of the city.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.07.030  BOUNDARY DETERMINATION.



   When uncertainty exists as to the exact boundaries of a zone, the
following apply:



   (A)   A street, alley, railroad right-of-way, watercourse channel,
or other right-of-way must be included within the zone of the adjoining
property.



   (B)   When the zone boundary is or approximately follows a street,
alley, railroad right-of-way, watercourse, or other right-of-way, the
centerline of that right-of-way will be considered as the boundary.



   (C)   When the zone boundaries approximately follow lot lines,
section lines, or city limits, these lines will be considered the boundaries.



   (D)   On unsubdivided property or where the zone boundary splits the
lot or parcel, the location of such boundary, unless indicated by dimensions,
will be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.



   (E)   The exact boundary will be determined by written decision of
the Planning Commission in any case where uncertainty exists.



   (F)   When a street, alley, public or private right-of-way, or
public or private easement that serves as a zone boundary is vacated, the new
zone boundary will be at the new property line.  Where the vacation does not
result in a new property line, the zone boundary will be determined by
written decision of the Planning Commission.



   (G)   Areas annexed to the city must be prezoned before coming into
the city. If there is no prior designation, the Planning Commission will
determine the appropriate zone for the area.  The zoning map will then be
amended to show the new city limits and zone.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.07.040  PREZONING OF UNINCORPORATED LANDS.



   (A)   The city may prezone unincorporated lands adjoining the city
for the purpose of determining the zone that will apply to such property in
the event of subsequent annexation to the city.  The method of accomplishing
such prezoning will be as provided in Chapters 16.208 and 16.210 (Development
Code Amendments and Zone Changes) of this Title 16.



   (B)   Such zoning will become effective at the time the annexation
becomes effective.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.09:  OPEN SPACE ZONES



Section



   16.09.010   Purpose and intent



   16.09.020   Land use and permit requirements



   16.09.030   Development standards



   16.09.040   Other applicable regulations



§ 16.09.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Two open space zones, Open Space Passive (O) and Open Space Parks and
Recreation (OPR), have been established to preserve, manage, and protect
natural resources, open space lands, cultural and historic resources,
geologic hazard areas, parks and recreational resources, and scenic resources
which contribute to the overall character and density of the community,
consistent with the goals of the Santa Paula General Plan.



   (A)   Open Space Passive (O) Zone .  This zone accommodates land
that is intended to remain undeveloped, such as properties in the Santa Clara
River bed (south of the Public Levee Bank Protection Line), Santa Paula
Creek, undevelopable and set-aside areas of Adams Barranca and Fagan
Barranca, and undevelopable slopes and natural landmarks.  Permitted uses
are limited to flood control channels and other waterways, bridges, and
hiking, biking, and equestrian trails.  Surface mining is conditionally
permissible in this zone, subject to the provisions of Chapters 16.100
through 16.104 (Surface Mining) and Conditional Use Permit review pursuant to
Chapter 16.218 (Conditional Use Permits) of this Title 16. 



   (B)   Open Space Parks and Recreation (OPR) Zone.  This zone
accommodates development of active parks and recreation resources.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.09.020  LAND USE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  Permitted uses in the Open Space Parks and
Recreation (OPR) Zone are as follows:



   (1)   Parks, picnic areas, and playgrounds;



   (2)   Hiking, biking, and equestrian trails;



   (3)   Preservation and use of historic landmarks;



   (4)   Flood control channels and other waterways; and



   (5)   Landscaped areas for passive use.



   (B)   Uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit.  The following uses
may be permitted in the Open Space Parks and Recreation (OPR) Zone subject to
Conditional Use Permit review pursuant to Chapter 16.218 (Conditional Use
Permits) of this Title 16.  Special conditions that may apply to these or
other civic/institutional uses are contained in Chapters 16.54 through 16.76
(Standards for Specific Land Uses) of this Title 16.



      (1)   Public or private equestrian stables;



      (2)   Public and private country clubs and golf courses,
except miniature golf;



      (3)   Public and private athletic fields and facilities;



      (4)   Commercial outdoor recreation facilities;



      (5)   Shooting ranges and gun clubs; and



      (6)   Surface mining, subject to the provisions of Chapters
16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining) of this Title 16.



   (C)   Use requiring a Temporary Use Permit.  The following use may
be permitted with a Temporary Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 16.228
(Temporary Use Permits) of this Title 16: 



      (1)   One-time or annually occurring events such as arts and
craft shows and exhibits, carnivals, circuses, fairs, seasonal outdoor sales,
and farmers' markets.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.09.030   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Table 9-2 identifies the development standards applicable to
all development in the Open Space zones.



   (B)   Those lots shown on an approved and recorded subdivision map,
or for which a deed was recorded prior to the incorporation of the City of
Santa Paula, may be used as a building site irrespective of the minimum lot
size, lot width, and lot depth standards set forth in Table 9-2.



 


TABLE 9-2
Development Standards - Open Space Zones



Development Standards
 
OPR Zone (Parks & Recreation)
 
O Zone (Passive)


1. Minimum Lot Size
 
1 acre
 
None


2. Minimum Lot Width
 
100 ft.
 
None


3. Setbacks  (Minimum)
 
20 ft. to public or private right-of-way, lot boundary, or zone line.
 
Not Applicable


4. Maximum Lot Coverage
 
All main buildings, accessory buildings and other structures must cover not
more than 5% of the site.  Total lot coverage, to include structures,
driveways and parking areas, must be limited to 10% of the site.
 
Not Applicable


5. Building Height  (Maximum)
 
2-1/2 stories or 35 ft.
 
Not Applicable



 



   Abbreviations:  sf = square feet, ft. = feet



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.09.040  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this Chapter 16.09, the
following applicable requirements in this Title 16 apply to development in
the Open Space zone:



Chapter 16.40:  General Property Development Standards



Chapters 16.54 -16.76:  Standards for Specific Land Uses



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.11:  AGRICULTURAL ZONE



Section



   16.11.010   Purpose and intent



   16.11.020   Land use and permit requirements



   16.11.030   Development standards



   16.11.040   Keeping of animals



   16.11.050   Other applicable regulations



§ 16.11.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The Agricultural (A-1) zone allows agriculture, floriculture,
horticulture, and resource production with related uses. This zone promotes
and preserves agricultural activities on lands capable of supporting such
activities, and excludes those activities which, by their development and
association, would have detrimental effects on land designated for
agricultural purposes, or creates materially adverse odor, smoke, dust,
fumes, vibration or which is dangerous to life or property. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.11.020  LAND USE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  Permitted uses in the Agriculture zone are
as follows:



      (1)   Agriculture, floriculture, and horticulture and related
uses.



      (2)   One single-family dwelling of a permanent character in a
permanent location on a lot or building site.



      (3)   Day care, small and large family. Large family day cares
will also be required to comply with Chapter 16.60.



      (4)   Accessory buildings and structures necessary to the
agricultural or residential use located on the same lot or parcel of land,
including private garages with a capacity not to exceed four automobiles,
children's playhouses, covered patios, windmills, silos, tank-houses, barns,
coops, provided all uses are of an accessory nature.  Accessory uses are not
permitted on any property where a permitted primary use does not already
exist.



      (5)   Storage incidental to permitted uses, provided such
storage is contained within an accessory building.



      (6)   Home occupations pursuant to Chapter 16.230 (Home
Occupation Permits) of this Title 16.



      (7)   Farmworker housing and migrant farmworker housing
consisting of not more than 12 units designed for use by a single household
or 36 beds in a group quarters in accordance with Cal. Health & Safety Code
§§ 17000 et seq.



   (B)   Uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit.  The following uses
may be permitted subject to Conditional Use Permit review pursuant to Chapter
16.218 (Conditional Use Permits) of this Title 16.  Special conditions that
may apply to these or other civic/institutional uses are contained in
Chapters 16.54 through 16.76 (Standards for Specific Land Uses) of this Title
16.



      (1)   Animal keeping of other than domestic dogs, cats, and
similar household pets.



      (2)   Kennels.



      (3)   Cemeteries.



      (4)   Churches and other religious institutions.



      (5)   Radio and television transmitters.



      (6)   Public utility and public services uses.



      (7)   Private educational facilities and accessory uses.



      (8)   Parks and recreational uses.



      (9)   Day care centers.



      (10)   Hospitals and sanitariums.



      (11)   One stand for the display and sale of only those
agricultural products raised on the premises, provided such stand does not
exceed 300 square feet in area and is not located nearer than 20 feet to any
public right-of-way.



      (12)   Separate workers' quarters or guest rooms on properties
where a primary dwelling unit exists.



      (13)   Community care facilities.



      (14)   Public or private stables.



      (15)   Surface mining, subject to the provisions of Chapters
16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining) of this Title 16.



      (16)   Golf, swimming, tennis, polo, hunting, and country
clubs and similar uses.



      (17)   Hatching, raising and fattening of chickens, turkeys or
other fowl or poultry and rabbits, fish, frogs or other small animals for
domestic or commercial use.  A minimum lot size of one acre is required. 
Also, the killing or dressing of such animals or poultry for commercial
purposes will not be permitted.



      (18)   Storage of petroleum products for use on the premises.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.11.030   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Table 11-1 identifies the development standards applicable to
all development in the A-1 zone. 



   (B)   Those lots shown on an approved and recorded subdivision map,
or for which a deed was recorded prior to the incorporation of the City of
Santa Paula, may be used as a building site irrespective of the minimum lot
size, lot width, and lot depth standards set forth in Table 11-1.



 




TABLE 11-1
Development Standards - Agricultural Zones



Development Standards
 

A-1 Zone



1.  Minimum Lot Size
 
20 acre


2.  Minimum Lot Width
 
100 ft.


3.  Minimum Lot Depth
 
100 ft.


4.  Front Yard Setback (Minimum)
 
25 ft.


5.  Side Yard Setback (Minimum)
 


    Interior
 
10 ft.


    Street Side
 
15 ft.


6.  Rear Yard Setback (Minimum)
 
25 ft.


7.  Lot  Coverage (Maximum)
 
40 %


8.  Building Height (Maximum)
 
2-½ stories or 35 ft.




     Abbreviations:  sf = square feet, ft. = feet



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.11.040  KEEPING OF ANIMALS .



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   These regulations for the keeping of animals are
established to ensure protection of the health, safety, and general welfare.



      (2)   No animal may be kept in any manner that constitutes a
health hazard or noise nuisance to the owner or to any neighbor.



      (3)   Any request for the keeping of animals must be
considered under a Conditional Use Permit application pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 16.218 (Conditional Use Permits) of this Title 16.



   (B)   Equine species.  Horses, mules, and other equine species are
conditionally permitted in the A-1 zone at a density of not more than 2
animals per 1 acre.



   (C)   Bovine and ovine species.  Bovine (cow like) and ovine (sheep
like) species are conditionally permitted in the A-1 zone and are subject to
the following regulations:



      (1)   Two bovine animals are permitted for each 1-½ acre of
lot area.



      (2)   Eight bovine animals are permitted for each four acres
of lot area, provided that the number of such animals will not exceed one
animal per one-half acre of area.  On any lot or parcel of land having an
area of more than four acres, eight of any one combination of said animals
may be kept.



   (D)   Poultry and small animals.  Poultry, rabbits, chinchillas,
hamsters and other small animals are conditionally permitted at a maximum
density of 25 of any one or combination thereof per one acre.  The killing
or dressing of such animals or poultry for commercial purposes will not be
permitted.



   (E)   Apiculture and honey extraction.



      (1)   No occupied hive may be located or maintained within 150
feet of any public road, street, or highway, or within 150 feet of any lot
line, unless such lot line is common with other property utilized for an
apiculture and honey extraction use; and



      (2)   No occupied hive may be located or maintained within 400
feet of any dwelling on any adjacent property or within 100 feet of any
dwelling on the same property, unless the written consent of the owner of
such dwelling is obtained.



      (3)   Available and adequate water supply must be maintained
on the property at all times to serve the bees.



   (F)   Outdoor aviaries.



      (1)   Birds in outdoor aviaries are permitted, provided the
total number of birds does not exceed ten birds for each 1,500 square feet of
lot area.



      (2)   Aviaries must be located in accordance with the minimum
distance requirements for animal-keeping areas set forth in subsection
16.13.210(E)(1)(c) of this Title 16. 



   (G)   Stables, barns and corrals.  Any stable, barn, corral, or
other animal enclosure must be located as follows:



      (1)   A minimum distance of 50 feet from any dwelling or other
building used for human habitation.



      (2)   A minimum distance of 100 feet from the front lot line
of the lot upon which it is located.



      (3)   A minimum distance of 100 feet from any public park,
school, hospital, or similar institution.



      (4)   A minimum distance of 20 feet from any interior side lot
line or rear lot line.



      (5)   A minimum distance of 75 feet from any side street, or
the distance equal to one-half the width of the lot abutting the side street,
whichever distance is lesser.



   (H)   Additional animals.  Any request for the keeping of more
animals than specified in this section will require a Conditional Use Permit
application pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.218 (Conditional Use
Permits) of this Title 16.



   (I)   Commercial animal keeping.  Any request for a commercial
operation must be considered under a Conditional Use Permit application.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.11.050  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this Chapter 16.11, the
following applicable requirements of this Title 16 apply to development in
the A-1 zone:



Chapter 16.40:  General Property Development Standards



Chapter 16.46:  Off-Street Parking and Loading



Chapter 16.48:  Signs



Chapter 16.112:  Nonconforming Uses



Chapter 16.114:  Nonconforming Structures



Chapter 16.116:  Nonconforming Lots



Chapter 16.230:  Home Occupations



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.13:  RESIDENTIAL ZONES



Section




Division 1:  Use Regulations




   16.13.010   Purpose and intent



   16.13.020   Land use and permit requirements




Division 2:  Development Standards




   16.13.030   Standards for primary dwellings



   16.13.040   Accessory buildings and structures



   16.13.050   Open space requirements in R-2, R-3, and R-4 Zones



   16.13.060   Landscaping



   16.13.070   Required features



   16.13.080   [Reserved]



   16.13.090   [Reserved]




Division 3:  Development Standards for the HR-PD Zones




   16.13.100   Applicability



   16.13.110   Maximum density



   16.13.120   Lot area, lot coverage, building height, and the like



   16.13.130   Grading regulations



   16.13.140   Building design



   16.13.150   Fire hazard mitigation



   16.13.160   Erosion control



   16.13.170   [Reserved]




Division 4:  Second Dwelling Units




   16.13.180   Second unit permit required



   16.13.190   Development standards




Division 5:  Special Regulations




   16.13.200   Restrictions on vehicle parking



   16.13.210   Keeping of animals



   16.13.220   Other applicable regulations



   16.13.230   [Reserved]



   16.13.240   [Reserved]




Division 6:  Mobile Home Park Zone




   16.13.250   Purpose and intent



   16.13.260   State regulation of mobile home parks



   16.13.270   Development standards for mobile home parks



   16.13.280   Development standards for mobile home sites or lots



   16.13.290   Other applicable regulations



   16.13.300   [Reserved]




Division 7:  Density Bonuses and Concessions




   16.13.310   Purpose and intent



   16.13.311   Definitions



   16.13.312   Density bonuses and concessions - In general



   16.13.313   Determination of bonus



   16.13.314   Construction and location of affordable units



   16.13.315   Affordability



   16.13.316   Affordable housing density bonus agreement



   16.13.317   Child care facilities



   16.13.318   Development concessions



   16.13.319   Parking standards



   16.13.320   Other development standards



   16.13.321   Inclusionary housing requirements



   16.13.322   Condominium conversions




Division 8:  Inclusionary Housing




   16.13.400   Purpose



   16.13.401   Definitions



   16.13.402   Inclusionary housing units; applicability



   16.13.403   Plan area projects



   16.13.404   Exemptions



   16.13.405   Calculations for inclusionary housing units



   16.13.406   Plan area project calculations



   16.13.407   Affordable housing plan



   16.13.408   Standards



   16.13.409   Performance security for inclusionary housing units



   16.13.410   In-lieu fees and Affordable Housing Trust Fund



   16.13.411   Eligibility requirements for residents



   16.13.412   Transfer of title



   16.13.413   Deed restrictions



   16.13.414   Refund of fees



   16.13.415   Rental units; affordable rent



   16.13.416   Growth management allocation



   16.13.417   Waivers; modifications



   16.13.418   Enforcement



Division 9:  Reasonable Accommodation for Disabled and Handicapped
Individuals



   16.13.500   Purpose



   16.13.501   Definitions



   16.13.502   Notice



   16.13.503   Requesting reasonable accommodation



   16.13.504   Proceedings



   16.13.505   Action by the Director



   16.13.506   Findings



   16.13.507   Conditions - Generally



   16.13.508   Conditions - Special



   16.13.509   Permit appeal and revocation



   16.13.510   Compliance



   16.13.511   Action in writing



   16.13.512   Final determination



   16.13.513   One stop permitting



DIVISION 1:  USE REGULATIONS



§ 16.13.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Nine residential zones are established to provide a range of housing
types and densities in sufficient supply to serve the needs of the city's
residents.  The residential zones are as follows:



   (A)   Hillside Residential - Planned Development (HR-PD) Zones.



      (1)   The HR-PD zones are established to permit residential
development in environmentally sensitive hillside areas.  The zones are
intended to limit density, preserve hillsides in a natural state to the
extent possible, encourage grading respecting the natural contour of the
hills, require the retention and planting of trees and other vegetation, and
protect natural landmarks and prominent natural features which enhance the
character of a specific area.  Development standards for the HR-PD zones are
shown in Table 13-2 and further set forth in Division 3 of this chapter.



      (2)   Because of the varied terrain, vegetation, and scenic
qualities unique to each hillside property, a Planned Development (PD)
overlay will apply to each property zoned HR1 or HR2 to provide for
flexibility in the design and development of each property. Each Hillside
Residential-Planned Development project will be assigned a number that will
be shown on the zoning map.  The following HR-PD zones have been established:



 

Zone
 
Allowable Density


HR1-PD
 
0 - 1 dwelling units/acre


HR2-PD
 
0 - 3 dwelling units/acre



 



   (B)   Rural Residential (R-A) Zone.  The R-A zone provides areas
for very low density, rural residential units.  Low-intensity, noncommercial
agricultural use that is secondary to the primary residential use is also
permitted.  The maximum permitted density in the R-A zone will be indicated
by a minimum lot size suffix shown on the zoning map, but in no case will the
maximum density exceed four units per acre.  Development standards for the
RA zone are shown in Table 13-2.



   (C)   Single Family Residential Zone (R-1).  The R-1 zone provides
areas for single-family dwellings that incorporate private outdoor open
spaces. The zone is intended to protect and stabilize desirable
characteristics of single-family residential areas, such as minimum lot sizes
and separation from incompatible land uses.  The maximum permitted density
is seven units per acre.  Development standards for the R-1 zone are shown
in Table 13-2.



   (D)   Small Lot Single Family Residential Zone (R-1(a)).  This zone
accommodates legally established lots in the R-1 zone containing less than
6,000 square feet.  Special development standards are established for such
lots.  Similar to the R-1 zone, the R-1(a) zone provides areas for
single-family dwellings that incorporate private outdoor open spaces. The
zone is intended to protect and stabilize desirable characteristics of
single-family residential areas, such as minimum lot sizes and separation
from incompatible land uses.  The maximum permitted density is seven units
per acre.  Development standards for the R-1(a) zone are shown in Table 13-2.



   (E)   Medium Density Residential Zone (R-2).  The R-2 residential
zone provides areas for low-density development consisting of duplexes,
attached single-family units, or two detached single-family units on one
lot.  The maximum permitted density is 15 units per acre.  Development
standards for the R-2 zone are shown in Table 13-2.



   (F)   Medium-High Density Residential Zone (R-3).  The R-3 zone
provides areas to accommodate apartments, condominiums, townhomes, and other
multi-family dwellings, although single-family and duplex residences are also
permitted.  Multi-family developments in this zone are characterized by
dwellings containing private open space features, as well as common open
space and recreational amenities.  The maximum permitted density is 21 units
per acre.  Development standards for the R-3 zone are shown in Table 13-2.



   (G)   High Density Residential Zone (R-4).  The R-4 zone provides
opportunities for high-density residential development and is intended
primarily to accommodate apartments, condominiums, town-homes, and other
multi-family dwellings, although single-family and duplex residences are also
permitted.  Multi-family development is characterized by 2- to 3-story
structures developed in a coordinated, cohesive manner around common open
space features.  The maximum permitted density is 29 units per acre. 
Development standards for the R-2 zone are shown in Table 13-2.



   (H)   Mobile Home Park Zone (MHP).  The MHP zone is intended to
accommodate mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions in order to
provide park residents with a safe, comfortable, healthy and pleasant living
environment.  Mobile home parks and subdivisions are characterized by
single-story mobile homes on individual lots/sites arranged in a coordinated,
cohesive manner around common open space features.  The maximum permitted
density is ten units per acre. Development standards for the MHP zone are set
forth in Division 6 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.020  LAND USE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Table 13-1 identifies the uses permitted in the HR1-PD,
HR2-PD, R-A, R-1, R-1(a), R-2, R-3, R-4 and MHP zones.  Residential uses
represent the primary permitted use, and only those additional uses that are
complementary to, and can exist in harmony with, the residential character of
each zone may be allowed as conditionally permitted, accessory, and temporary
uses, as indicated in Table 13-1.  Accessory uses are not permitted on any
property where a permitted primary use does not already exist.



   (B)   Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be
subject to special conditions regarding the location, operation, or design of
the use.  Such uses are marked in Table 13-1 with an asterisk (*), and the
special conditions that apply are contained in Chapter 16.56 (Standards for
Specific Land Uses) of this Title 16.



   (C)   When a use is not specifically listed, the Planning Director
will have the authority to determine the zone in which the use is permitted
based on its similarity to other uses in that zone, per Section 16.03.020
(Planning Director Responsibilities) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1249,
passed 5-6-13; Am. Ord. 1262, passed 2-1-16)



 




Table 13-1
Permitted and Conditional Uses - Residential Zones




Use

 

HR-PD1

 

HR-PD2

 

R-A

 

R-1

 

R-1(a)

 

R-2

 

R-3

 

R-4

 

MHP



Accessory Buildings (See Section 16.13.040)
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Agricultural Use
 

A*

 

A*

 

A

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Aviaries
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Batting Cage, Driving Range, or Similar Outdoor Sporting facility
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Cannabis Delivery
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Commercial Cannabis Activities
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Cultivation of Cannabis or Medical Marijuana
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Cemeteries
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Club or Lodge
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Community Care Facilities
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

X



Day Care, Large Family (See Chapter 16.60)
 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*



Day Care, Small Family (See Chapter 16.60)
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Day Care Center (See Chapter 16.60)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Dwelling, Duplex
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Dwelling, Multi-Family
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Dwelling, Single-Family
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Emergency Shelters (See Table 21-1, conditional uses in Industrial Zone.)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Group Quarters, Dormitories, Single-Room Occupancy
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

X



Home Occupation (see Chapter 16.230)
 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*



Hospital or Sanitarium
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

X



Kennel
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Migrant Farmworker Group Quarters (Also see Table 21-1, conditional uses in
Industrial Zone.)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

X



Mobile or Manufactured Home (see Chapter 16.13, Division 6)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Parking Lot, associated with nonresidential use
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

X



Pet  (up to 4 adult dogs/cats)
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Pets, other than dog/cat (see Section 16.05.020 for "Animal, Pet")
 

P*

 

C*

 

P*

 

C*

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Radio and Television Transmitter (See Chapter 16.50)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Assembly Halls (includes Church, Temple, or Other Religious Institutions) 
(see Chapter 16.62)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



School or Education Facility, Private
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Second Dwelling Unit ("Granny Flat")(See Chapter 16.13, Division 4)
 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X





 



Key:   P = Permitted Use



      X = Prohibited Use



      A = Accessory Use



      C = Conditional Use Permit required (Chapter 16.218)



      T = Temporary Use Permit required (Chapter 16.228)



      * = Special conditions apply; see applicable chapter noted in
this table.



DIVISION 2:  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



§ 16.13.030  STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY DWELLINGS.



   (A)   Table 13-2 identifies the development standards applicable to
primary residential dwellings in the R-A, R-1, R-1(a), R-2, R-3, and R-4
zones.  Standards applicable to primary dwellings in the HR-PD and MHP zones
are set forth respectively in Divisions 3 and 6 of this Chapter.



   (B)   The minimum lot width for a corner lot is measured at the
required front yard setback line.



   (C)   For in-fill development, any front yard requirement will be
deemed to be met when the depth of the front yard provided at least equals
the average of that established by existing buildings which occupy 50% or
more of the lots within the same block on zone.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1172,
passed 7-2-07)



 




Table 13-2
Development Standards - Residential Zones




Development Standard

 

HR-PD1

 

HR-PD2

 

R-A

 

R-1

 

R-1 (a) <6,000 sf lot

 

R-2

 

R-3

 

R-4

 

MHP



1. Density

  A.  Maximum (a)
 
0-1 du/ac, depending on slope.

 

See Section 16.13.110
 
0-3 du/ac, depending on slope.

 

See Section 16.13.110
 
R-A (10,000):

4 du/ac

 

R-A (20,000):

2 du/ac
 
7 du/ac
 
7 du/ac
 
15 du/ac
 
21 du/ac
 
29 du/ac
 
10 du/ac


  B.  Minimum (b)
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
16 du/ac
 
22 du/ac
 
N/A


2. Minimum Lot Area
 
43,560 sf

(1 acre)
 
14,500 sf
 
R-A-10: 10,000 sf

 

R-A-20: 20,000 sf
 
6,000 sf
 
N/A
 
6,000 sf, and not less than 3,000 sf/unit
 
6,000 sf, and not less than 2,000 sf/unit
 
6,000 sf, and not less than 1,500 sf/unit
 
3,500 sf (d)


3.  Maximum Lot Coverage
 
40 %
 
60 %
 
40 %
 
60%
 
70%
 
60%
 
60%
 
60%
 
75% (d)


4. Minimum Lot Width

    (Interior Lot)
 
60 ft
 
60 ft
 
60 ft
 
60 ft.
 
N/A
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
45 ft. (d)


5. Minimum Lot Width

  (Corner Lot) 

 

  See Section 16.13.030(C)
 
65 ft.
 
65 ft.
 
65 ft.
 
65 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
65 ft.
 
65 ft.
 
65 ft.
 
45 ft. (d)


6. Maximum Building Height
 
35 ft. or 2-½ stories
 
35 ft. or 2-½ stories
 
35 ft. or 2-½ stories
 
35 ft. or 2-½ stories
 
35 ft. or 2-½ stories
 
35 ft. or 2-½ stories
 
45 ft.; 3 stories maximum
 
45 ft.; 3 stories maximum
 
25 ft. or 1-½ stories (d)


7. Minimum Dwelling Unit

    Size (e)
 
750 sf
 
750 sf
 
750 sf
 
750 sf
 
650 sf
 
1-bdrm:  600 sf 2-bdrm:  750 sf 3-bdrm: 900 sf

4+ bdrm: 1,050 sf
 
1-bdrm:  600 sf 2-bdrm:  750 sf 3-bdrm: 900 sf

4+ bdrm: 1,050 sf
 
1-bdrm:  600 sf 2-bdrm:  750 sf 3-bdrm: 900 sf

4+ bdrm: 1,050 sf
 
500 sf (d)


8. Distance between dwelling

    unit buildings (Minimum)
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
6 ft (d)


9. Distance between dwelling

    unit building(s) and

    accessory building(s)

    (Minimum)
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
6 ft (d)


10. Distance between

    accessory buildings

    (Minimum)
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft (d)


11. Front Yard Setback -

    Interior Lot  (Minimum)
 
Not less than 25 ft. from the ultimate street right-of-way line
 
Not less than 20 ft. from the ultimate street right-of-way line
 
Not less than 25 ft. from the ultimate street right-of- way line
 
Not less than 20 ft. from the ultimate street right- of- way line
 
Not less than 15 ft. from the ultimate street right-of- way line (c)
 
Not less than 20 ft. from the ultimate street right-of- way line
 
Not less than 20 ft. from the ultimate street right-of- way line
 
Not less than 20 ft. from the ultimate street right-of- way line
 
Not less than 5 ft. from any private or public roadway  (d)


12. Side Yard Setback -

    Interior Lot (Minimum)
 
10 ft. on both sides
 
10 ft. on both sides
 
10 ft. on both sides
 
10 ft. on one side, 5 ft. on the other side
 
5 ft. on both sides
 
5 ft. on both sides
 
5 ft. on both sides
 
5 ft. on both sides
 
3 ft. on both sides(d)


13. Side Yard Setback -

      Corner Lot (Minimum)
 
10 ft. on both sides
 
10 ft. on both sides
 
10 ft. on both sides
 
10 ft. on street side, 5 ft. on interior side
 
10 ft. on street side, 5 ft on interior side
 
10 ft. on street side, 5 ft on interior side
 
10 ft. on street side, 5 ft on interior side
 
10 ft. on street side, 5 ft on interior side
 
5 ft. on street side, 3 ft on interior side (d)


14. Rear Yard Setback -

    Single story (Minimum)
 
25 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
3 ft. (d)


15. Rear Yard Setback -

      Second story (Minimum)
 
25 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
NA


16. Rear Yard Setback - for

    buildings of 35 ft or higher

    (Minimum)
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
25 ft.
 
NA




 



Abbreviations:   du(s) = dwelling unit(s); sf = square feet; ft. = feet;
bdrm = bedroom; N/A = not applicable



Notes:   (a)   A density bonus of at least 25% may be granted in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 16.13, Division 7 (Density
Bonuses).



      (b)   Densities below the required minimum density may be
approved through a Conditional Use Permit review and approval. 



However, in no case may the density be less than 50% of the required minimum
density for the zone.



      (c)   All garage doors must be set back at least 20 feet from
ultimate street right-of-way line.



      (d)   Standards apply to individual lots/sites in mobile home
park.  For mobile home park development standards, see Division 6 of Chapter
16.13.



      (e)   Standard does not apply to second dwelling units,
pursuant to Division 4 of this Chapter 16.13.



§ 16.13.040  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   The following standards apply to all single-story detached
non-habitable accessory buildings and structures in a residential zone.  Two
story detached non-habitable accessory buildings must comply with the setback
requirements for primary dwellings in the underlying zone.



   (A)   Non-habitable accessory building in side yard.



      (1)   An accessory building or structure is allowed along the
side property line not abutting a street if:



         (a)   The accessory building is located 50 feet or more
from the front property line of all residential zones.



         (b)   There is no door, window, or similar opening on
the wall of the accessory building to be located along the property line; and



         (c)   All roof drainage is accommodated on the property
on which the building or structure is placed.



Otherwise, the minimum side yard requirements will be the same as required
for the main building.



      (2)   The following minimum side yard setbacks are required
for any accessory building or structure located within a side yard abutting a
public street:



         (a)   An accessory building located 50 feet or more from
the front property line must have a minimum setback of 10 feet; otherwise,
the setback must be the same as required for the main building.



      (3)   An accessory building with direct alley access must be
located a minimum of 26 feet from the opposite side of the alley (see Figure
13-1) or 2 feet from the property line, whichever is greater.







Figure 13-1



Setbacks for Accessory Buildings



      (4)   A notice of land use restriction must be recorded on the
property to:  (a) limit the use of the structure to an accessory building,
and (b)  specify that the structure cannot be used or converted to a
dwelling  unit at any time in the future unless the accessory building
complies  with all applicable state and local laws including all provisions
in the Municipal Code and Development Code.



      (5)   Calculations to determine building size and setback
requirements for alterations or additions to a nonconforming structure
(Chapter 16.114 of this Title 16) may not include detached accessory
buildings.



   (B)   Non-habitable accessory building in rear yard.



      (1)   An accessory building is permitted along the rear
property line if:



         (a)   There is no opening along the property line;



         (b)   All roof drainage is accommodated on the property
on which the building or structure is placed.



Otherwise, a minimum rear yard setback of three feet is required.



      (2)   An accessory building with direct vehicle access from
the alley must be located a minimum distance of 26 feet from the opposite
side of the alley or two feet from the property line, whichever is greater.



      (3)   On a reverse corner lot, the accessory building must
have a minimum setback of five feet from the rear property line, which is
also the side property line of an adjoining property.



      (4)   A notice of land use restriction must be recorded on the
property to: (a) limit the use of the structure to an accessory building, and
(b)  specify that the structure cannot be used or converted to a dwelling
unit at any time in the future unless the accessory building complies with
all state and local laws including all provisions in the Municipal Code and
Development Code.



      (5)   Calculations to determine building size and setback
requirements for alterations or additions to a nonconforming structure
(Chapter 16.114 of this Title 16) may not include detached accessory
buildings.



   (C)   Habitable accessory buildings.  The following standards apply
to all habitable accessory buildings and structures in a residential zone. A
habitable building includes a guest house, recreational room, hobby room,
home office or workshop used in conjunction with an approved home occupancy
permit and other buildings defined by the Building and Safety Code as
habitable structures.



      (1)   Habitable accessory structures must conform to all
setback standards of the primary dwelling.



      (2)   Habitable accessory structures must conform to the
maximum height and lot coverage provisions of the zone.



      (3)   Habitable accessory structures must be designed and
constructed with materials that are comparable to and compatible with the
primary residence and other residences in the vicinity.



      (4)   No additional parking will be required for a habitable
accessory structure. However, all existing on-site parking must be maintained.



      (5)   A guest house can only be used by the occupants of the
principal dwelling or their nonpaying guests.



      (6)   A guest house is not allowed if the property contains an
existing granny flat or second unit.



      (7)   Accessory buildings used for home occupations cannot
include kitchen facilities.



      (8)   A notice of land use restriction must be recorded on the
property to: prevent structures from being rented; limiting use of structures
to an accessory building; specifying that structures cannot be used or
converted to a dwelling unit at any time in the future unless the accessory
building complies with all state and local laws including all provisions in
this Code.



      (9)   Calculations to determine building size and setback
requirements for alterations or additions to a nonconforming structure cannot
include habitable accessory buildings.



      (10)   Guest houses, recreational rooms and similar habitable
accessory structures are subject to administrative approval by the Planning
Director with Design Review.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1172,
passed 7-2-07; Am. Ord. 1192, passed 6-16-08)



§ 16.13.050  OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS IN R-2, R-3, AND R-4 ZONES.



   (A)   Applicability.  Every lot and building site in the R-2, R-3,
and R-4 zones must provide common usable open space and private usable open
space in accordance with the provisions of this section.  The Planning
Director, through the design review process or other permit review procedure,
may approve only those plans that conform to the requirements of this section.



   (B)   Common usable open space.



      (1)   A minimum of 125 square feet of common usable open space
must be provided for each bedroom in a unit or for each studio apartment
situated on the lot and building site.



      (2)   The required common usable open space must be arranged
to provide at least 50% of the space in at least one area.  The minimum
dimensions of such space must be 25 feet by 25 feet.  The remaining required
common usable open space may be distributed throughout the building site and
need not be in one such area; provided, however, no area containing less than
50 square feet will be considered common usable open space.



      (3)   All required common usable open space must be improved
in a manner appropriate to its intended purposes, and all landscaping must
comply with the requirements of § 16.13.060 below.  Natural features of the
site reasonably worthy of preservation, as determined by the Planning
Director through the design review or other permit review procedure, may be
retained in their natural state and need not be improved, but must be
maintained.  Natural areas may be improved with such items as irrigation
lines and additional plant materials to assist in assuring the lasting
retention of the natural feature being preserved.



      (4)   A minimum of 50% of the required common usable open
space must be located on those portions of the lot or building site where the
slope is no greater than 10%.



   (C)   Private usable open space.



      (1)   A minimum of 100 square feet of private usable open
space must be provided for each ground floor dwelling unit. All private
usable open space must be enclosed by an opaque fence or wall not more than 6
feet nor less than 4 feet in height.



      (2)   Dimensions of private usable open space must be a
minimum of eight feet.



      (3)   Not more than 50% of the private usable open space may
be covered by an overhang, balcony, or patio roof not less than seven feet in
height.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.13.060  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Purpose.  These landscaping standards are established to
ensure that each residential development maintains attractive planted areas
that provide complementary design components to buildings on a site.  These
standards are intended to allow for creativity and to provide latitude in the
design of landscaping and irrigation plans, and to encourage design that
conserves and recycles the resources invested in landscapes.  Landscape and
irrigation plans are encouraged to take full advantage of the wide range of
drought-tolerant landscape material and low-water-flow irrigation systems
available within the framework established by this section.  All landscaping
must comply with City Resolution 3675 establishing guidelines for the
preparation of landscape and irrigation plans.



   (B)   Landscaping required.



      (1)   Landscaping with plant materials is required in the
front yards of all residential development, including detached single-family
units. 



      (2)   Landscaping with plant materials must be provided in
common open space areas and yard setback areas of multiple-family
developments and mobile home parks.



      (3)   All required front yards must be landscaped.



      (4)   Landscaping of required off-street parking areas must be
provided as set forth in § 16.46.140 (Landscaping Required) of Chapter 16.46
(Off-Street Parking and Loading) of this Title 16.



      (5)   No more than 20% of any required landscaped area may be
covered with hardscape or other non-plant materials such as fountains, rocks,
masonry or brick work, paving, or similar feature.



   (C)   Irrigation required.  All required landscape areas must be
provided with permanent underground



irrigation systems suitable for the type of landscaping provided.



   (D)   Landscape maintenance.  All landscaping must be maintained in
a neat and healthy condition and in a manner that prevents adverse public
health, safety, and welfare effects.



   (E)   Landscape and irrigation plans required.



      (1)   Landscape and irrigation plans are required for all
residential development proposals for five or more units.



      (2)   The plan must indicate the square footage of each
landscaping area, report the total square footage devoted to landscaping with
plant materials, identify each landscaping area and the types of plants to be
provided therein, list the container size of each plant, and clearly portray
the entire landscaping layout and irrigation system.



      (3)   No building permit may be issued until landscaping and
irrigation plans have been reviewed and approved by the Planning Director or
the designee.



   (F)   Water-conserving features.  Landscape and irrigation plans
must take full advantage of available drought-tolerant landscape materials
and low-water-flow irrigation systems, except where such action conflicts
with adopted fire prevention plans, or the Fire Chief determines that such
would create a fire hazard.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.070  REQUIRED FEATURES.



   (A)   Required architectural features.  All dwelling units,
including mobile homes placed on a permanent foundation, constructed, erected
or moved onto a permanent foundation on property in any residential area must
conform to the following standards:



      (1)   The construction or installation must meet all city,
state and federal requirements.



      (2)   No sheet metal roofs are permitted; provided, however,
that metal roofs that simulate wood shake and shingle roofs are permitted, as
are metal patio roofs.



      (3)   All main buildings or structures must have eave
overhangs of a minimum of 16 inches or a minimum 1-foot-high parapet
extending above roof level.



      (4)   No metal siding is permitted, with the exception of
metal lap siding.



      (5)   All buildings must include a perimeter concrete or
masonry stem wall, whether structural or ornamental.  The stem wall must
have the appearance of extending from grade up to the base of the exterior
wall.



   (B)   Required interior features.  All dwelling units, including
multifamily dwelling units and mobile homes placed on permanent foundations,
must conform to the following standards:



      (1)   The construction or installation must meet all city,
state and federal requirements.



      (2)   All dwelling units must be insulated from exterior
noise.  Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units from each other
or from public or quasi-public spaces such as interior corridors, laundry
rooms, recreation rooms, and garages must provide airborne sound insulation
(minimum rating of 55 STC) for walls, and both airborne and impact sound
insulation (minimum rating of 65 IIC) for floor/ceiling assemblies.



      (3)   Each new dwelling unit must include utilities for future
washer and dryer installation, unless an approved laundry facility is
included within the development.  Such utilities must be constructed with
readily accessible outlets for plumbing (hot and cold water) and gas outlets
when available or electrical outlets.



      (4)   A minimum of 10% of all dwelling units in a development,
with the exception of mobile homes, must be designed to be handicap adaptable
and/or accessible, pursuant to California accessibility requirements.



   (C)   Required site features.  In addition to open space
requirements outlined in § 16.13.050, the following site features are
required on all residential properties.



      (1)   The configuration and orientation of the project should
respect reasonable design limits imposed by the natural and manmade
environment.  Structures should be situated to take advantage of view,
topography, sun and wind, while at the same time not destroying these
advantages for adjacent properties.  Structures should also be situated to
minimize or buffer any undesirable properties of the site such as street
noise and nearby obnoxious commercial or industrial uses.



      (2)   The layout of units and open space within the project
should establish, through the use of structure and manmade and landscape
materials, a perceptible spatial transition from the public street, through
the semi-privacy of the common areas, to the privacy of the unit.  Most
importantly, the environment of each dwelling unit should be private and free
from visual, auditory and other intrusions.



   (D)   Required storage area.  All multi-family dwelling units must
conform to the following standards:



      (1)   At least one private, lockable storage area must be
provided for each dwelling unit when there is more than one dwelling unit on
the same lot or building site.



      (2)   The storage area must be located either:



         (a)   Within a carport and protected from the elements;



         (b)   At some nearby, convenient location, located
outside the dwellings;



         (c)   In a garage if the garage can be locked by the
resident and the storage area does  not encroach on the required 10 foot by
20 foot parking area.



      (3)   The storage area must meet the following standards:



         (a)   A minimum capacity of 90 cubic feet;



         (b)   No dimension of less than 30 inches;



         (c)   When built as an above-ground cabinet in a carport
or garage, the cabinet must be high enough above the ground to maintain the
required parking area and designed to prevent the collapse of the cabinet
onto a vehicle.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.30.080  [RESERVED.]



§ 16.30.090  [RESERVED.]



DIVISION 3:  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR HR-PD ZONES



§ 16.13.100  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   These regulations apply to all properties zoned HR-PD. 
Separate standards for the HR-PD zone are established to ensure that
residential development in hillside areas is designed and developed to
respect and respond to environmental conditions unique to the property. 
This section establishes performance standards for the design of subdivisions
in the HR-PD zone and for development of individual lots within
subdivisions.  The grading standards set forth in Chapters 16.96 through
16.98 (Grading and Erosion Control) of this Title 16 also apply to
development in the HR-PD zone.



   (B)   All parcels recorded prior to May 1, 1978 and which are
subsequently placed in the HR-PD zone are subject to the provisions of this
section.  However, one dwelling unit is permitted on any legal parcel
established prior to May 1, 1978 which has a slope of 30% or greater.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.110  MAXIMUM DENSITY.



   (A)   Slope calculation.  Density will be based upon the average
slope percentage.  For the purpose of determining the average slope
percentage of a property in the HR- PD zone, the average slope of a parcel of
land or any portion thereof must be calculated by applying the formula



         S = 0.00229 IL



              A



to the natural slope of the land before any grading.  Such slope must be
determined from a topographic map conforming to national mapping standards
and having a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 200 feet and a contour
interval of not less than five feet.  The letters in the slope formula have
the following meanings:



   S   = average slope percentage



   I   = contour interval, in feet



   L   = summation of length of contours, in feet



   A   = area in acres of parcel being considered.



   (B)   Density restrictions.  The maximum permitted density on a lot
will be based upon the average slope percentage and will be restricted as
follows:



 

Slope
 
Maximum Density


10-14.9
 
3.0 du/ac


15-19.9
 
2.5 du/ac


20-24.9
 
2.0 du/ac


25-29.9
 
1.5 du/ac


30 and over
 
0.0 du/ac



 



   (C)   Greater density permitted.  Where the average slope
percentage is less than 10%, the City Council may allow a maximum density of
four units per gross acre for an entire subdivision or development project.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.120  LOT AREA, LOT COVERAGE, BUILDING HEIGHT, AND THE LIKE.



   All primary dwellings in the HR-PD zones must conform to the following
development standards:



 




Table 13-3
Development Standards - HR-PD Zones




Development Feature

 

HR-PD1 Standard

 

HR-PD2 Standard



Lot Area (Minimum)
 
43,560 sf (1 acre)
 
14,500 sf


Lot Coverage (Maximum)
 
40 %
 
60 %


Lot Width - Interior Lot (Minimum)
 
60 ft
 
60 ft


Lot Width - Corner Lot (Minimum)
 
65 ft.
 
65 ft.


Building Height (Maximum)
 
2-1/2 stories above finished grade
 
2-1/2 stories above finished grade


Dwelling Unit Size (Minimum)
 
750 sf
 
750 sf


Distance between Primary Residence and Accessory Building (Minimum)
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.


Distance between Accessory Buildings  (Minimum)
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.


Front Yard Setback  (Minimum)
 
Not less than 25 ft. from ultimate street right-of-way line
 
Not less than 20 ft. from ultimate street right-of-way line


Side Yard Setback - Interior Lot (Minimum)
 
10 ft. on both sides
 
10 ft. on both sides


Side Yard Setback - Corner Lot (Minimum)
 
10 ft. on both sides
 
10 ft. on both sides


Rear Yard Setback -Single story (Minimum)
 
25 ft.
 
10 ft.


Rear Yard Setback -Second story (Minimum)
 
25 ft.
 
20 ft.




 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.130  GRADING REGULATIONS.



   All grading must conform to applicable requirements set forth in
Chapters 16.96 through 16.98 (Grading and Erosion Control) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.140  BUILDING DESIGN.



   All dwelling units and accessory structures must be designed and
constructed to respect and reflect the hillside environment and the terrain
existing on individual development sites.  The following standards apply:



   (A)   The walls of the building on the down-slope side must not be
more than 20 feet high, measured from the finished grade to the building eave
line.



   (B)   Stepped foundations must be provided to allow a building to
conform to the existing natural terrain.







Figure 13-2



Stepped Foundation



   (C)   Except for solar energy apparatuses, rooftop mechanical
equipment is prohibited.



   (D)   Roof slope should be oriented in the same direction as the
natural hill slope.



   (E)   The use of large roof overhangs and cantilevers is limited.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.150  FIRE HAZARD MITIGATION.



   To reduce the risk of loss of life and property in the event of a fire
in hillside environments, the following fire hazard mitigation standards
apply to all development in the HR-PD zone:



   (A)   The placement of all buildings on a lot must be in such a
manner that adequate clearance of flammable plant and landscape materials may
be performed on the lot.



   (B)   The roofs and exteriors of buildings must be of fire retardant
materials, as provided by the Building Code.



   (C)   All brush identified by the Fire Department as hazardous must
be cleared.  This includes all flammable vegetation and other combustible
growth but does not apply to single specimen trees, ornamental shrubbery, and
cultivated groundcover such as grass, ivy, succulents, or similar plants used
as ground cover, provided such landscaping does not create a means to readily
transmit fire.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 16.232 (Tree Removal
Permit) of this Title 16, that portion of any tree that extends within ten
feet of the top of any chimney must be removed or trimmed.



   (E)   All combustible vegetative cover or other combustible growth
within 100 feet of a building site must be removed prior to the construction
of any building, as specified in the fire code.



   (F)   Grass and similar vegetation located more than 30 feet from a
structure and less than 18 inches in height above the ground may be
maintained where necessary to stabilize soil erosion.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.160  EROSION CONTROL.



   (A)   All manufactured slopes, other than those constructed in
stable bedrock, must be planted or otherwise protected from the effects of
stormwater runoff erosion within 30 days of the creation of the slope. 
Planting must be designed to blend the slope with the surrounding terrain and
development in terms of coverage, color, and type of plant material.  An
irrigation system must be provided and maintained to ensure proper
maintenance of landscaped slopes.



   (B)   Manufactured slopes in stable bedrock must be provided with
landscaped soil pockets, with the landscaping to consist of plant materials
designed to blend the slope with the surrounding terrain and development in
terms of coverage, color, and type of plant material.  An irrigation system
must be provided and maintained to ensure proper maintenance of landscaped
slopes. 



   (C)   Landscaping and irrigation plans for such slope planting must
be submitted and approved by the Planning Director and City Engineer prior to
the issuance of building permits.  All such slopes must be planted and
provided with irrigation systems prior to the issuance of occupancy permits.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.170  [RESERVED.]



DIVISION 4:  SECOND DWELLING UNITS



§ 16.13.180  SECOND UNIT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Second dwelling units, also known as dependent housing or granny flats,
require a Second Use Permit, obtained pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
16.227 of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.190  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, second units are
allowed on residentially zoned lots in the city subject to the following
standards:



   (A)   The second unit must be attached to or located within the
living area of the existing unit or must be a detached unit located on the
same lot. 



   (B)   The second unit will not be for sale separately from the main
residence and property.



   (C)   All construction must conform to the height, setback, lot
coverage, parking, and other requirements for residential construction in the
zone in which the second unit is located. 



   (D)   No more than one second unit is permitted on a lot.  No
second unit is permitted on a property where a guest house exists.



   (F)   Either the primary unit or the second unit must be occupied by
the property owner.



   (G)   Maximum size of second unit.



      (1)   On parcels of less than 6,000 square feet, the second
unit must be an attached unit.  The total floor area of an attached second
unit must not exceed 30% of the floor area of the primary unit or 640 square
feet, whichever is less, and must comply with the California Building Code
for an efficiency dwelling unit.



      (2)   On parcels of 6,000 to 11,999 square feet in area, the
second unit may be attached or detached.  If attached, the size limit
already described applies.  The total area of floor area of a detached
second unit must not exceed 640 square feet, exclusive of any garage area.



      (3)   On lots at least 12,000 square feet in area, the second
unit may be attached as described earlier or detached.  The total area of
floor area of a detached second unit must not exceed 1,200 square feet,
exclusive of any garage area.



   (H)   Second units are prohibited under this subchapter on
multi-family zoned lots 6,000 square feet or larger in area because multiple
units are allowed by multi-family zoning on lots that size.



   (I)   Parking on the property must conform to the multi-family
parking standards, with the exception of the garage requirement for the
existing single-family residence, which must conform to the single-family
parking standard. 



   (J)   The second dwelling unit must comply with all applicable
building, health and safety, and other city codes and ordinances.



   (K)   All dwellings on the property must be connected to the public
sewer system.



   (L)   The following design criteria must apply to second units:



      (1)   Any attached second unit must be attached to the primary
unit by a common wall a minimum of six feet in width, and not simply attached
by a breezeway or porch.



      (2)   The second unit must include a separate entrance,
kitchen and bathroom.



      (3)   The design of the dwellings on the property must be
coordinated; the scale, building form, height, exterior materials, color and
landscaping of the two residences will be considered.



      (4)   Creation of a second unit must not create or increase a
nonconforming use or structure.



      (5)   Second unit projects in the historic overlay zone or on
landmark properties must comply with the provisions of the historic
preservation ordinance.  Projects which are deemed by the Historic
Preservation Commission to not comply with the provisions of that ordinance
may be denied.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



DIVISION 5:  SPECIAL REGULATIONS



§ 16.13.200  RESTRICTIONS ON VEHICLE PARKING.



   (A)   Motorized vehicles or recreational equipment, either operable
or inoperable, are not permitted to be parked within any front yard area. 
Vehicles parked behind the front yard area must be screened from the public
right-of-way.



   (B)   No vehicle with a gross vehicular weight of 6,000 pounds or
greater may be parked on any portion of a lot within a residential zone. 
This restriction will not apply to delivery, service, or similar vehicles
providing temporary service.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.210  KEEPING OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   These regulations for the keeping of animals are
established to ensure protection of the health, safety, and general welfare
of persons in residential neighborhoods.



      (2)   No animal may be kept in any manner that constitutes a
health hazard or noise nuisance to the owner or to any neighbor.



   (B)   Dogs and cats.  Up to three dogs and three cats may be kept
per residence in any residential zone, provided the keeping of dogs does not
constitute the establishment or maintenance of a commercial kennel as defined
by this Title 16.



   (C)   Equine and bovine species.  Horses, mules, cows and other
equine species and bovine species are permitted only in the HR-PD and R-A
zones, subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   One equine animal is permitted for each one-half acre of
lot or building site.



      (2)   One bovine animal is permitted for each one acre of lot
area.



      (3)   Any stable, barn, corral, or other animal enclosure must
be located as follows:



         (a)   A minimum distance of 50 feet from any dwelling or
other building used for human habitation;



         (b)   A minimum distance of 100 feet from the front lot
line of the lot upon which it is located;







Figure 13-3



Setbacks for Animal Enclosure



         (c)   A minimum distance of 100 feet from any public
park, school, hospital, or similar institution;



         (d)   A minimum distance of 20 feet from any interior
side lot line or rear lot line; and



         (e)   A minimum distance of 75 feet from any side
street, or the distance equal to one-half the width of the lot abutting the
side street, whichever distance is lesser.



   (D)   Swine.  The keeping of swine is permitted only in the R-A
zone, subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   A minimum lot size of two acres is required for the
keeping of swine.



      (2)   One swine is permitted for the first two acres of lot
area, with one additional swine permitted for each additional acre.  In no
case, however, may the number of swine kept exceed ten.



      (3)   The minimum distance requirements for animal keeping
areas set forth in subsection 16.13.100(C)(3) above must be adhered to.



   (E)   Poultry, rabbits, and other small animals.



      (1)   The keeping of poultry (excluding roosters, peacocks and
peahens, geese, turkeys, guineas), rabbits, chinchillas, hamsters, reptiles,
and other small animals, except foxes and exotic animals, is permitted in the
HR-PD, R-A, R-1, and R-2 zones, subject to the following regulations.



         (a)    A minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet is
required for the outdoor keeping of small animals.



         (b)   The total number of small animals permitted and
restrictions on the number of specific types or species are as specified in
Table 13-4.



 




Table 13-4
Limitations on Number of Small Animals




Zone and Lot Size

 

Total Number of Small Animals Permitted

 

Type of Small Animal and Maximum Number Permitted




  Poultry*

 

Rabbits

 

Rodents

 

Reptiles



R-2 and R-1 lots containing less than 6,000 sf
 

4

 

2

 

2

 

2

 

2



R-1 and HR-PD: 6,000 -10,000 sf lots
 

4

 

2

 

2

 

2

 

2



R-1 and HR: 10,000 sf -1 acre lots
 

6

 

2

 

4

 

4

 

4



R-1 and HR(PD): Lots larger than 1 acre
 

10

 

4

 

4

 

4

 

4



R-A: 10,000 sf -1 acre lots
 

15

 

6

 

5

 

5

 

4



R-A: Lots larger than 1 acre
 

25

 

12

 

5

 

5

 

5





 



      Abbreviation: sf = square feet



      * Excluding roosters, peacocks and peahens, geese, turkeys,
guineas



         (c)   All such animals may be kept in a completely
enclosed pen or cage.  Any outdoor pen, cage, or other enclosure used for
the keeping of small animals must be maintained a minimum distance of 25 feet
from any dwelling or other building used for human habitation.



      (2)   The following small animals are permitted in the R-3 and
R-4 zones: hamsters, rats, mice, similar small rodents, small birds, and
small reptiles.  The  number of small animals permitted within a dwelling
unit are limited to two of a single species and four total animals.



   (F)   Outdoor aviaries.



      (1)   Birds in outdoor aviaries are permitted per Table 13-1,
provided the total number of birds



does not exceed one bird for each 1,500 square feet of lot area.



      (2)   Aviaries must be located in accordance with the minimum
distance requirements for animal keeping areas set forth in subsection
16.13.210(E)(1)(c) above. 



   (G)   Additional animals.  Any request for the keeping of more
animals than specified in this section will require a Conditional Use Permit
application pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.218 of this Title 16.



   (H)   Commercial animal keeping.  Any request for a commercial
operation must be considered under a Conditional Use Permit application, and
such application may be conditionally permitted only in the R-A zone. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.220  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this chapter, any
applicable requirements in the following chapters apply to development in
residential zones:



Chapter 16.40:  General Property Development Standards



Chapter 16.56:  Standards for Specific Land Uses



Chapter 16.46:  Off-Street Parking and Loading



Chapter 16.48:  Signs



Chapter 16.80:  Subdivisions



Chapter 16.112:  Nonconforming Uses



Chapter 16.114:  Nonconforming Structures



Chapter 16.116: Nonconforming Lots



Chapter 16.230: Home Occupations



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.13.230  [RESERVED.]



§ 16.13.240  [RESERVED.]



DIVISION 6:  MOBILE HOME PARK ZONE



§ 16.13.250  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This division sets forth specific development standards for mobile home
parks and subdivisions in order to provide park residents with a safe,
comfortable, healthy and pleasant living environment.  All mobile home parks
and subdivisions must be developed in accordance with the provisions of this
Division 6.  Also, mobile home subdivisions must meet applicable provisions
of the State Subdivision Map Act, as applied through Chapter 16.80
(Subdivisions) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.260  STATE REGULATION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   The provisions of the Mobile Home Parks Act (Cal. Health & Safety Code,
Division 13, Part 2.1) and the applicable regulations adopted by the
California Department of Housing and Community Development, as each may be
amended from time-to-time, are hereby adopted as a part of this division. The
Building Official may be authorized to enforce all of the provisions of the
Act pertaining to the construction, alteration, or modification of all
manufactured dwelling units within mobile home parks.  Construction only of
all other structures may be subject to the review and approval of the
Planning Department.  It may be the duty of the Building Official to enforce
all the provisions pertaining to permits for the operation, maintenance, use,
occupancy, sanitation, and safety of all mobile home parks and subdivisions.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.270  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   The following development standards apply to all mobile home parks
within the City of Santa Paula.



   (A)   Minimum site area.  A minimum site area of 10 acres, with a
minimum street frontage of 250 feet, are required for all new mobile home
parks and subdivisions.



   (B)   Drainage.  All mobile home parks must be located on a graded
site with no depressions in which surface water will accumulate.  The ground
must be sloped to provide storm drainage run-off by means of surface or
subsurface drainage facilities that connect to public storm drain facilities.



   (C)   Roadways.



      (1)   Public roadways are required to conform to standards
established by the City Engineer for local streets.



      (2)   Private roadways within a mobile home park must have a
minimum width of 32 feet if car parking is permitted on one side of the
roadway, and a minimum width of 40 feet if car parking is permitted on both
sides of the roadway.  Roadways designed for car parking on one side must
have signs or markings prohibiting the parking of vehicles on the traffic
flow side of the roadway.



      (3)   All roadways must have clear and unobstructed access to
a public thoroughfare.  A roadway may have security gates as may be
permitted by other city regulations.



   (D)   Required common open space and recreation areas.



      (1)   A minimum area of 200 square feet for common recreation
purposes is required for each mobile home space.  Such space must be located
to be convenient to all residents of the mobile home park.



      (2)   The required common usable open space must be arranged
to provide at least 50% of the space in at least one area.  The minimum
dimensions of such space must be 25 feet by 25 feet.  The remaining required
common usable open space may be distributed throughout the Mobile Home Park
and need not be in one such area; provided, however, no area containing less
than 50 square feet may be considered common usable open space.



      (3)   All required common usable open space must be improved
in a manner appropriate to its intended purposes, and all landscaping must
comply with the requirements of § 16.13.060.  Natural features of the site
reasonably worthy of preservation, as determined by the Planning Director
through the design review or other permit review procedure, may be retained
in their natural state and need not be improved, but must be maintained. 
Natural areas may be improved with such items as irrigation lines and
additional plant materials to assist in assuring the lasting retention of the
natural feature being preserved.



      (4)   A minimum of 50% of the required common usable open
space must be located on those portions of the lot or building site where the
slope is no greater than 10%.



   (E)   Accessory buildings and uses.  Accessory buildings and uses
that serve the entire mobile home park, including recreation facilities,
laundry areas, mobile home park offices, and maintenance or storage
buildings, must be located at least 200 feet from the boundary of any mobile
home space.  All exterior maintenance or storage areas must be enclosed by a
masonry wall of at least 6 feet in height.



   (F)   Perimeter screening.  Perimeter screening of the mobile home
park must be provided as required through permit approval.



   (G)   Landscaping.  Landscaping must be provided on all areas not
used for buildings, parking, roadway, pathways, or recreational facilities. 
Existing natural landscape features should be retained where possible and
integrated into the landscape plan.  The landscaping is considered actual
planting areas of lawn, trees, planter boxes, shrubs, groundcover, or other
decorative material as approved by the Planning Director.  Fountains, ponds,
sculpture, and decorative screen walls as an integral part of the landscaping
scheme are permitted.



   (H)   Pedestrian walkways. A connected pedestrian walkway system
must be provided within the mobile home park providing access to the units,
recreation areas, and open space.  The walks must be a minimum of four feet
in width and constructed of concrete or a similar durable material.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.280  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME SITES OR LOTS.



   The following development standards apply to all mobile home sites and
lots within a mobile home park located in the City of Santa Paula.



   (A)   Occupancy.  Each mobile home site or lot must accommodate
only one mobile home, recreational vehicle, or commercial coach.



   (B)   Drainage.  The area beneath each mobile home must be sloped
to provide for drainage from beneath the mobile home to an outside surface
drainage facility.



   (C)   Lot/space area and dimensions.  Each mobile home site or lot
must contain a minimum area of 3,500 square feet for exclusive use by the
occupants of the site or lot.  For mobile home subdivisions, each individual
lot must conform to the minimum requirements established for the zone in
which the subdivision is located.  Each site or lot must have a minimum
width of 45 feet and a minimum depth of 65 feet.



   (D)   Accessory structures.



      (1)   Accessory buildings and structures located on a mobile
home site or lot may extend into the required separations cited in subsection
D above, provided that a minimum separation of six feet is maintained between
the edge of the projection and an adjacent mobile home, building, accessory
structure, or projection. 



      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures must be set back a
minimum distance of three feet from any mobile home lot line.  However,
carports, awnings, fences, windbreaks, and stairways may be installed to the
lot line.



   (E)   Site or lot coverage.  The area of a mobile home or lot site
covered by the mobile home and all accessory buildings and structures must
not exceed 75% of the site or lot area.



   (F)   Required landscaping.  A minimum of 20% of each mobile home
site or lot must be landscaped with plant materials, including at least one
tree on each space.



   (G)   Lot access.  Each mobile home site or lot must have direct
access to an abutting roadway that provides circulation throughout the mobile
home park or subdivision.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.13.290  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this division, the
following additional requirements contained in this Title 16 apply to mobile
home parks and subdivisions:



Chapter 16.40:  General Property Development Standards



Chapter 16.46:  Off-Street Parking and Loading



Chapter 16.48:  Signs



Chapter 16.54 - 16.76:  Standards for Specific Land Uses



Chapter 16.112:  Nonconforming Uses



Chapter 16.114:  Nonconforming Structures



Chapter 16.116:  Nonconforming Lots



Chapter 16.230:  Home Occupations



Chapter 16.80:  Subdivisions



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.13.300  [RESERVED.]



DIVISION 7:  DENSITY BONUSES AND CONCESSIONS



§ 16.13.310  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This Division is intended to implement state law requirements to
provide housing opportunities for very low, low and moderate-income persons.
All projects qualifying for a density bonus are subject to the city's growth
management allocation procedures and requirements.  In enacting this
Division it is the city's intent to implement Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65915, et
seq. as follows:



   (A)   Allow higher density for residential projects when developers
guarantee that a portion of their housing development will be affordable to
households of very low, low or moderate income and seniors;



   (B)   Allow higher density for residential projects when developers
donate land to develop dwelling units for very low, low or moderate-income
households;



   (C)   Ensure affordable units are constructed and located to appear
similar to market-rate units;



   (D)   Allow higher density, incentives, or concessions for
residential projects where developers provide child care facilities; and



   (E)   Allow certain concessions when needed to offset the costs of
developing affordable housing for very low, low and moderate-income
households.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.13.311  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this Division. Words and phrases not defined by this Division have the
meaning set forth elsewhere in this Development Code, the Cal. Health &
Safety Code, or Cal. Gov't Code.



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING COSTS - Has the same meaning as set forth in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 50052.5, or any successor statute or regulation.



   AFFORDABLE RENTS - Has the same meaning as set forth in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 50053, or any successor statute or regulation.



   AFFORDABLE SALE PRICE - Means the price for a dwelling unit that can be
financed by a fixed rate mortgage where the monthly payment constitutes an
affordable housing cost. The monthly payment must include the principal plus
interest plus taxes plus homeowner's association fees (if applicable).



   AFFORDABLE UNITS - Means those dwelling units which will be guaranteed
by the developer to be rented or sold for a period of time, agreed to by the
city and developer, to low- or very low-income households.



   DENSITY BONUS - Means an increase over the otherwise allowable maximum
residential density for a property.



   DENSITY BONUS UNITS - Means additional units that may be allowed to be
built if the density bonus is granted.



   INCENTIVE OR CONCESSION - Means a relaxation of development standards
or zoning requirements which results in identifiable cost reductions where
such incentives and concessions are consistent with the general plan,
including, without limitation, reductions in setback; square footage or lot
size requirements; the ratio of vehicle parking spaces that would otherwise
be required; or approval of mixed use zoning if commercial, office or other
land uses would be compatible with the housing project as well as the
existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing
project will be located.



   SENIOR OR SENIOR CITIZEN - Means a person 62 years of age or older or
55 years of age or older in a senior citizen housing development of at least
35 dwelling units, or a qualified permanent resident as defined in Cal. Civil
Code §§ 51.2 and 51.3.  All qualifying senior projects must have
significant facilities and services for seniors as defined in 42 USC
3607(b)(2).



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07; Am. Ord. 1244, passed 10-15-12)



§ 16.13.312  DENSITY BONUSES AND CONCESSIONS – IN GENERAL.



   Nothing in this Division constitutes a waiver of any discretionary or
ministerial approval required by this Development Code.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.13.313  DETERMINATION OF BONUS.



   Applicants who request a density bonus and agree to construct a
residential project of five or more dwelling units may be granted a density
bonus. All density bonuses referred to in this section are a specified
percentage over the maximum density permitted in the underlying zone district.



   (A)   A density bonus of 20% will be granted to projects in which
one or more of the following is included:



      (1)   At least 5% of the total dwelling units of a housing
development are restricted to very low income households. An additional 2.5%
density bonus will be granted for each additional 1% increase of very low
income restricted dwelling units above 5%, to a maximum density bonus of 35%,
as illustrated in Table 1, Application of Density Bonus;



      (2)   At least 10% of the total dwelling units of a housing
development are restricted to low income households. An additional 1.5%
density bonus will be granted for each additional 1.5% of low income
restricted dwelling units above 10%, to a maximum density bonus of 35%, as
illustrated in Table 1, Application of Density Bonus;



      (3)   Senior citizen housing developments of 35 or more units
in which 100% of the units are provided to qualifying residents; or



      (4)   At least 10% of the total dwelling units of a common
interest development are restricted to moderate income households, provided
that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase.



   (B)   A density bonus of 5% will be granted to a condominium project
or a planned unit development, that provides at least 10% of the total number
of units to households of moderate income. An additional 1% density bonus
will be granted for each additional 1% of moderate income restricted dwelling
units above 10%, up to a maximum of 35%, as illustrated in Table 1,
Application of Density Bonus.



 




Table 1:  Application of Density Bonus For Very Low, Low and Moderate Income
Units




Very Low Income Units

 

Low Income Units

 

Moderate Income Units




% Very Low Income Units

 

Permitted % Density Bonus

 

% Low Income Units

 

Permitted % Density Bonus

 

% Moderate Income Condo/PUD units

 

Permitted % Density Bonus



5
 
20
 
10
 
20
 
10
 
5


6
 
22.5
 
11
 
21.5
 
11
 
6


7
 
25
 
12
 
23
 
12
 
7


8
 
27.5
 
13
 
24.5
 
13
 
8


9
 
30
 
14
 
26
 
14
 
9


10
 
32.5
 
15
 
27.5
 
15
 
10


11
 
35
 
16
 
29
 
16
 
11


35% Maximum Density Bonus
 
17
 
30.5
 
17
 
12


18
 
32
 
18
 
13


19
 
33.5
 
19
 
14


20
 
35
 
20
 
15


35% Maximum Density Bonus
 
21
 
16


22
 
17


23
 
18


24
 
19


25
 
20


26
 
21


27
 
22


28
 
23


29
 
24


30
 
25


31
 
26


32
 
27


33
 
28


34
 
29


35
 
30


36
 
31


37
 
32


38
 
33


39
 
34


40
 
35


35% Maximum Density Bonus




 



   (C)   A density bonus of 15% will be granted to applicants that
donate sufficient real property to restrict at least 10% of the units for
very low-income households. A density bonus will increase by 1% for every
additional 1% of very low income restricted dwelling units above 10%, up to a
maximum of 35%. All of the following conditions must be met to allow this
density bonus:



      (1)   Real property must be conveyed in fee simple to the city
or a person who is qualified to construct affordable housing approved and
designated by the city.



      (2)   Real property must measure a minimum of one acre in size
or be able to accommodate 40 units per acre.



      (3)   Transferred real property must be appropriately
designated by the General Plan for high density residential development
before final project approval.



      (4)   Transferred real property must be zoned for high density
residential use before final project approval.



      (5)   Transferred real property must be adequately served by
infrastructure before final project approval.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07; Am. Ord. 1244, passed 10-15-12)



§ 16.13.314  CONSTRUCTION AND LOCATION OF AFFORDABLE UNITS.



   All units that are constructed for very low, low or moderate income
households must meet the following minimum standards:



   (A)   Distribution.  Except as otherwise required, affordable units
must be constructed concurrently with, or before, construction of market rate
units. All affordable units must be reasonably distributed throughout the
project as approved by the Planning Commission, must be constructed of
similar materials and both interior and exterior must be finished at a
comparable quality as the market rate units. Affordable dwelling units must
measure not less than 90% of the average square footage of market rate units
with the same number of bedrooms.



   (B)   Comparable amenities. Residents of affordable units may not be
charged for amenities not charged to other residents, including without
limitation, access to recreational facilities, parking, cable TV, and
interior amenities like dishwashers and microwave ovens. Optional services
for all residents must be the same. Tenants of affordable units cannot be
required to purchase additional services.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.13.315  AFFORDABILITY.



   Affordable units must generally be reserved for occupancy by very low
or low income households for at least 30 years after the city issues
certificates of occupancy. Affordable units offered for sale to moderate
income households in condominiums or planned developments must generally be
reserved for occupancy for at least ten years after the city issues
certificates of occupancy. Such reservations must be accomplished by a
recorded deed restriction or other long-term legal mechanism in a form
approved by the City Attorney.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.13.316  AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS AGREEMENT.



   Persons conditionally granted an affordable housing density bonus,
development concession, or reduction in parking standards must enter into an
agreement with the city in a form approved by the City Attorney.  The
agreement must, at a minimum, include the following:



   (A)   The total number of units that will be constructed and the
number of units that will be made affordable to very low, low or
moderate-income households must be clearly stated;



   (B)   The affordable units must be reserved for very low and low
income households;



   (C)   Resale controls must be included as a deed restriction
consistent with this subsection;



   (D)   If reduced parking standards were approved for the project,
the number of bedrooms of each unit must be identified;



   (E)   Applicant must provide written evidence to the city that
initial occupants of all affordable units meet the necessary income
qualifications.  The property owner must provide an annual report to the
city certifying tenants of qualifying rental units meet the income and rent
limit requirements;



   (F)   Every purchaser of moderate-income owner-occupied units must
certify the unit will be the purchaser’s primary place of residence, and
every renter of low or very low income units must certify the unit will be
occupied by the household renting the unit;



   (G)   Applicant must provide written evidence to the city that
initial owner occupants of moderate income units meet the necessary income
qualifications.  Subsequent sale of moderate income units must be limited to
moderate income households, as approved by the city.  In addition, sale
proceeds of moderate income units sold after the first ten years of occupancy
by moderate income household(s) must be distributed as follows:



      (1)   Initial owner is entitled to receive the value of the
down payment, documented improvements to the property and a proportional
share of the unit’s appreciation, in accordance with the formula in Cal.
Gov’t Code § 65915.



      (2)   The city must receive its proportional share of
appreciation of the unit in addition to the amount of the original subsidy. 
The city must use the proceeds within three years to promote affordable,
owner-occupied housing.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07; Am. Ord. 1244, passed 10-15-12)



§ 16.13.317  CHILD CARE FACILITIES.



   (A)   The city will grant either of the following to projects that
include a proposal for a child care facility located on the premises of the
project:



      (1)   A density bonus that is an amount of square feet of
residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet
in the child care facility; or



      (2)   An additional concession or incentive that contributes
significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child
care facility. The applicant must provide substantial evidence that any such
concession is needed for the economic feasibility of the child care facility.



   (B)   In order to receive the additional child care density bonus,
the project must comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   The child care facility must remain in operation for a
period of time that is as long or longer than the period of time during which
the density bonus units are required to remain affordable; and



      (2)   Of the children who attend the child care facility, the
percentage of children of very low income, low income, and moderate income
households must be equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units
that are proposed to be affordable to very low income, low income, and
moderate income households.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any requirement in this section, the city is
not required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care
facility if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that the community has
adequate existing child care facilities.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.13.318  DEVELOPMENT CONCESSIONS.



   (A)   An applicant for a density bonus may submit a proposal for
specific incentives or concessions.  The city must allow the concessions or
incentives requested by the applicant unless the city finds, based upon
substantial evidence, any of the following:



      (1)   The concession or incentive is not required to ensure
housing costs meet affordability standards, as defined in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 50052.5, or to ensure rents in affordable units meet the
requirements of this Division.



      (2)   The concession or incentive would have a specific
adverse impact, as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65589.5(d)(2), upon the
public health and safety, or physical environment, or any real property that
is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse
impact without rendering the development unaffordable to very low, low, and
moderate-income households.



      (3)   The concession or incentive would be contrary to state
or federal law.



   (B)   The number of city zoning or development standards that can be
waived or modified must be consistent with the following table, Table 2,
Affordable Housing Development Concessions:



 


Table 2:  Affordable Housing Development Concessions




Number of Concessions

 

Percentage Affordable Housing




Very Low

 

Low

 

Moderate Condos and/or PUD's



1
 
5%
 
10%
 
10%


2
 
10%
 
20%
 
20%


3
 
15%
 
30%
 
30%


Income categories cannot be combined to achieve a greater number of
concessions than that identified in this table.



 



   (C)   The applicant must provide substantial evidence that any such
concession is needed to sufficiently reduce the cost of the housing
development.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07; Am. Ord. 1244, passed 10-15-12)



§ 16.13.319  PARKING STANDARDS.



   If a project qualifies for a density bonus, an applicant may request
reduced parking standards for the entire project site. Reduced parking
standards may be requested and will be approved even if a density bonus is
not being requested. Reduced parking requirements must include guest and
handicapped parking, may be provided as tandem spaces, and may be uncovered,
provided the spaces are located on-site. Reduced parking standards will be as
follows:



   (A)   One on-site parking space per unit for units with one bedroom
or less.



   (B)   One and one-half on-site parking spaces per unit for units
with two bedrooms.



   (C)   Two on-site parking spaces per unit for units with three or
more bedrooms.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.13.320  OTHER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Applicant may request waiver of any additional development standards if
the applicant provides substantial evidence that such waivers are necessary
to make the project economically feasible and do not have unmitigatable
impacts.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.13.321  INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS.



   The inclusionary housing requirements set forth in this Title continues
to apply to all development projects, whether or not a density bonus is
requested or granted. Units constructed pursuant to the inclusionary housing
requirements cannot be used to seek concessions as part of the density bonus
ordinance. The units requested under the density bonus ordinance are in
addition to any units required under the inclusionary housing ordinance.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.13.322  CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   Any developer converting existing rental apartments of five units or
more to condominiums who seeks a density bonus, must make such application in
conjunction with its tentative map application pursuant to the Subdivision
Map Act, this Development Code, and consistent with Cal. Gov't Code §
65915.5. Any appeal or any concession or incentive or review by the Planning
Commission or City Council, automatically requires an appeal of the
underlying map to that body.



(Ord. 1173, passed 7-2-07)



DIVISION 8:  INCLUSIONARY HOUSING



§ 16.13.400  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers,
as set forth in the California Constitution, and the city's Housing Element,
as set forth in the Santa Paula General Plan, for the purpose of increasing
affordable housing within the city's jurisdiction for very low and low income
households.



   (B)   This chapter is also intended to further the economic
integration and geographic balance of affordable housing in the city's
developing areas.



   (C)   This chapter is intended to establish standards and procedures
that will require developers to construct affordable housing for in projects.



   (D)   In addition, this chapter is adopted to implement the Act's
requirements regarding affordable housing as set forth in the Plan and Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 33413. In doing so, the City Council intends to
implement the Act; codify existing practices; contribute to the city's need
for affordable housing; meet the city's RHNA allocations; and ensure longterm
affordability of dwelling units. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor
will it, conflict or supersede with the Act. Rather, the provisions in this
chapter affecting plan area development are intended to supplement and
implement the Act.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.401  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   ACT means the Community Redevelopment Law set forth at Cal. Health &
Safety Code §§ 33000, et seq.



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING means dwelling units made available to low, very
low, and (if within the Plan area) moderate income households whether or not
required by this chapter.



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND means an account established pursuant to
this chapter into which in-lieu fees, as described in this chapter, will be
deposited. The funds of the account cannot be commingled with the city's
other funds.



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING COST has the same meaning as set forth in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 50052.5, and any successor statute or regulation.



   AFFORDABLE RENT has the same meaning as set forth in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 50053, and any successor statute or regulation.



   AREA MEDIAN INCOME has the same meaning as set forth in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 50093, and any successor statute or regulation.



   DEVELOPER means a person seeking city approval for a project.



   DIRECTOR means the City Manager or designee.



   DWELLING UNIT means one or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters, with full cooking, sleeping, and
bathroom facilities for the exclusive use of a single household.



   GMA means a growth management allocation issued in accordance with the
city Growth Management Ordinance as set forth in this code.



   HOUSEHOLD means one person living alone or two or more persons sharing
residency whose income is considered for housing payments.



   HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.



   INCLUSIONARY HOUSING UNIT means a dwelling unit built pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter and made available to low or very low income
households or, if in the plan area, to moderate income households. Unless
otherwise specified, this term includes both on-site and off-site
inclusionary housing.



   INCOME ELIGIBILITY means the gross annual household income considering
household size and number of dependents, income of all wage earners, elderly
or disabled family members, and all other sources of household income.



   IN-LIEU FEE means a fee paid to the city by a developer in-lieu of
providing, through direct construction and deed restrictions, the
inclusionary housing units otherwise required by this code. The in-lieu fee
must be deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and must be used for
constructing affordable housing. Such fees may be pooled with other funds to
provide additional affordable housing.



   LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS mean households where the gross annual income
does not exceed 80% of the county median household income as defined in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 50079.5, and any successor statute or regulation.



   MARKET RATE UNIT means a dwelling unit where the rental rate or sales
price is not restricted by this code.



   MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD means a household with an income not
exceeding qualifying limits set for "persons and families of low or moderate
income" in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50093, and any successor statute or
regulation;



   OFF-SITE INCLUSIONARY HOUSING UNIT means inclusionary housing units
constructed on real property within the city's jurisdiction other than real
property affected by a project.



   ON-SITE INCLUSIONARY HOUSING UNIT means inclusionary housing units
constructed on real property affected by a project.



   PLAN AREA means the boundaries depicted in the Santa Paula
Redevelopment Plan adopted by Resolution No. 90-10 on July 9, 1990, as
amended and updated in accordance with the Act;



   PLAN AREA PROJECT means any proposal for constructing seven or more
dwelling units within the plan area that require discretionary city approval
pursuant to this code.



   PROJECT means any proposal for constructing ten or more dwelling units
requiring discretionary city approval pursuant to this code.



   PUBLIC OFFICIAL means the city's elected and appointed officials and
those employees who have, because of their position, policy-making authority
or influence over city housing programs. The term includes a public
official's immediate family members and business partners.



   RHNA means Regional Housing Needs Allocation as calculated by the
California Department of Housing and Community Development.



   VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS means households where the gross annual
income does not exceed 50% of the county median household income as defined
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50105, and any successor statute or
regulation.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.402  INCLUSIONARY HOUSING UNITS; APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, developers must provide one of
the following as a condition for project approval:



      (1)   Reserve at least 15% of all dwelling units in a project
for low-income households;



      (2)   Reserve at least 10% of all dwelling units in a project
for very low-income households;



      (3)   Construct off-site inclusionary housing for low-income
households equivalent to 17% of all dwelling units in a project;



      (4)   Construct off-site inclusionary housing for very
low-income households equivalent to 12% of all dwelling units in a project; or



      (5)   Pay an in-lieu fee as established by City Council
resolution.



   (B)   This section does not apply to plan area projects. For
projects located both inside and outside the plan area, this section applies
only to dwelling units located outside the plan area.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05; Am. Ord. 1187, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.13.403  CALCULATIONS FOR INCLUSIONARY HOUSING UNITS.



   (A)   For all new plan area projects, at least 15% of the total
units must be inclusionary housing units restricted for occupancy by
moderate, low, or very low-income households.



   (B)   The number and type of inclusionary housing units required for
a particular plan area project will be determined at the time of granting
GMAs.



   (C)   At least 40% of the required inclusionary housing units within
the plan area project must be restricted to very low-income households. The
remaining 60% may be restricted to moderate or low- income households.



   (D)   Developers cannot pay an in-lieu fee to satisfy the
requirements of this chapter for a plan area project.



   (E)   For plan area projects, should any requirement of the Act
conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the Act's requirements will
control.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05; Am. Ord. 1187, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.13.404  EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to:



   (A)   The reconstruction of any structures destroyed by acts of
nature such as fire, flood, or earthquake where reconstruction does not
increase the number of residential dwelling units by ten or more for projects
or seven or more for plan area projects;



   (B)   Residential building additions, repairs, or remodels if such
work does not increase the number of existing dwelling units to ten or more
for projects or seven or more for plan area projects; or



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided for plan area projects, any
project for which a density bonus was granted pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §
65915.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.405  CALCULATIONS FOR INCLUSIONARY HOUSING UNITS.



   Except as otherwise provided for plan area projects, the actual number
of inclusionary housing units that a developer must construct in accordance
with this chapter is calculated as follows:



   (A)   The percentage of inclusionary housing units required by this
chapter will be applied to the total number of dwelling units proposed for a
project;



   (B)   At the developer's option, any remainder resulting from the
calculation in this section may be converted into an in-lieu fee or rounded
up to the nearest whole number;



   (C)   For example, and without limitation, if a project has a total
of 11 dwelling units and the developer opts to construct inclusionary housing
units for very low-income households, then the developer would be required to
construct 1.1 inclusionary housing units (10% multiplied by 11 dwelling
units). Because of the remainder, the developer could either construct an
additional inclusionary housing unit or convert the remainder into an in-lieu
fee payable to the city as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.406  PLAN AREA PROJECT CALCULATIONS.



   (A)   When calculating the number of required inclusionary units for
plan area projects, any additional units authorized as a density bonus
pursuant to this code will not be counted in determining the required number
of inclusionary units.



   (B)   In general, any decimal fraction resulting from a calculation
greater than 0.5 will be rounded up to the nearest whole number and decimal
fractions less than 0.5 will be rounded down to the nearest whole number.



   (C)   For very low-income household inclusionary units, any decimal
fraction of one-tenth (0.1) or greater will be rounded up to the nearest
whole number.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.407  AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN.



   (A)   To meet the requirements of this chapter, a developer may
obtain Planning Commission approval for an affordable housing plan. Except as
otherwise provided for plan area projects, an affordable housing plan may
include a combination of on-site and off-site inclusionary housing units;
in-lieu fees; or other proposal designed to provide new affordable housing.



   (B)   For plan area projects, an affordable housing plan may include
a combination of on-site and off-site inclusionary housing units; or other
proposal designed to provide new affordable housing in accordance with the
Act. Housing plans proposing off-site inclusionary housing units must provide
at least two off-site inclusionary housing for every one required on-site
inclusionary housing unit in accordance with Cal. Health & Safety Code §
33413 of the Act.



   (C)   The Planning Commission may approve an affordable housing plan
upon making the following findings:



      (1)   The affordable housing plan meets or exceeds the city's
objectives for affordable housing whether set forth in this chapter, this
code, the Santa Paula General Plan, or other City Council actions;



      (2)   That it is impracticable for a project to strictly
comply with the percentages set forth above for inclusionary housing units
because of the size, location, financing, or other restrictions on the
project; and



      (3)   That approving the affordable housing plan would be
consistent with the purpose of this chapter.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.408  STANDARDS.



   (A)   Inclusionary housing units must be reserved for very low, low,
or (if within the plan area) moderate-income households and be provided at
affordable housing costs. The maximum allowable affordable rents and
affordable housing cost for inclusionary housing units will be adopted
annually by City Council resolution. Such prices must be based on the number
of bedrooms and made with reference to the income limits for Ventura County
as determined by HUD.



   (B)   For inclusionary housing units available for rent, affordable
housing costs must not exceed 30% of 50% of area median income for Ventura
County adjusted by family size appropriate for the dwelling unit.



   (C)   For inclusionary housing units available for sale, affordable
housing costs must not exceed 30% of 80% of the area median income adjusted
for family size appropriate for the unit.



   (D)   For inclusionary housing units provided in the project area
available for rent, affordable housing costs must not exceed 30% of 110% of
the area median income for Ventura County adjusted by family size appropriate
for the unit.



   (E)   For inclusionary housing units provided in the project area
available for sale, affordable housing costs must not exceed 35% of 110% of
the area median income for Ventura County adjusted by family size appropriate
for the unit.



   (F)   Affordable housing costs will be based upon the income limits
for Ventura County as determined by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development per Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 50053 and 50052.5.



   (G)   Except as otherwise provided for plan area projects, all
inclusionary housing units must generally be reserved for occupancy by very
low, low, or (if within the plan area) moderate-income households between 45
and 55 years but in no event less than 30 years after the city issues
certificates of occupancy. Such reservation must be accomplished by a
recorded deed restriction or other long-term legal mechanism in a form
approved by the City Attorney.



   (H)   Except as otherwise required, inclusionary housing units must
be constructed concurrently with, or before, construction of market rate
units. Certificates of occupancy issued for inclusionary housing units within
any clearly defined construction phase must be obtained before the same
percentage of market rate units are complete and certificates of occupancy
are issued. Such certificates of occupancy will not be issued for the last
percentages of market rate units until all the required inclusionary units
are fully complete and certified for occupancy.



   (I)   All inclusionary units built on the project site must be
reasonably distributed throughout the project as approved by the Planning
Commission, must be constructed of similar materials and both interior and
exterior must be finished at a comparable quality as the market rate units.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.409  PERFORMANCE SECURITY FOR INCLUSIONARY HOUSING UNITS.



   Upon application by a developer and for good cause shown, the Planning
Director may, but is not required to, allow a developer to delay construction
of inclusionary housing units. Any such approval is conditioned upon the
developer providing sufficient security, in a form approved by the City
Attorney, to insure performance under this chapter. Without limitation, good
cause may include funding restrictions for projects involving nonprofit
corporations or use of public agency monies.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.410  IN-LIEU FEES AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND.



   (A)   Except for plan area projects, developers may pay a fee
instead of providing on-site or off-site inclusionary housing units as set
forth in this chapter. In-lieu fees will be based upon the methodology for
calculating the in-lieu fee on a project-by-project basis as determined by
City Council resolution.



   (B)   The City Manager, or designee, must create and administer an
Affordable Housing Trust Fund. The City Council must use the Fund exclusively
to provide for affordable housing and for reasonable costs associated with
the development of affordable housing. In-lieu fees collected pursuant to
this chapter must be deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.



   (C)   Any fee required pursuant to this chapter must be paid in full
before the city issues a certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit in
the project.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.411  ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTS.



   (A)   Except in the plan area, only very low and low-income
households are eligible to occupy inclusionary housing units. In the plan
area, moderate- income households are also eligible to occupy inclusionary
housing units in conformance with this chapter. The Director is authorized to
establish administrative policies and procedures to determine income
eligibility, minimum and maximum occupancy standards and other eligibility
criteria in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Public officials are ineligible to occupy any inclusionary
housing unit during the term of applicable rental or sales price limits.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.412  TRANSFER OF TITLE.



   (A)   For owner-occupied inclusionary housing units, title may
transfer because of changes in circumstance, including, without limitation,
death, marriage, and divorce. Except as otherwise provided, if such a changed
circumstance results in a title transfer which causes a household to become
ineligible for an inclusionary housing unit, then the inclusionary housing
unit must be sold to an eligible household within 180 days after title
transfer occurs.



   (B)   Upon the death of one owner, title in the property may
transfer to the surviving joint tenant without respect to the
income-eligibility of the household.



   (C)   If, following the death of all owners of an inclusionary
housing unit, title transfers to the child or children of such owners, the
inclusionary housing unit must be sold to an eligible household within one
year after title transfer occurs if the child or children are ineligible to
own the inclusionary housing unit as determined by this chapter.



   (D) Inheritance of an inclusionary unit by any other person whose
household is not income-eligible shall require resale of the unit to an
income-eligible household as soon as is feasible but not more than 180 days
from when the estate is settled.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.413  DEED RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   A written agreement must be executed between the developer and
city that specifies the number, type, and location of all inclusionary
housing units; the formula for determining rental rates or sales prices of
all inclusionary housing units; the method of providing proof of eligibility
as a very low, low, or (if within the plan area) moderate-income household,
and such additional information as may be required by the city to determine
the developer's compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   For projects, such an agreement must specify that the required
inclusionary housing units must be reserved for, and rented or sold to, very
low and low-income households. Further, the term of such an agreement must
generally be between 45 and 55 years, but in no event less than 30 years.



   (C)   For plan area projects, such an agreement must specify that
the required units must be reserved for, and rented or sold to, very low,
low, and moderate- income households. Further, the term of such agreements
must be at least 55 years for rental dwelling units and 45 years for owner
occupied dwelling units.



   (D)   The agreement must be in a form approved by the City Attorney,
and, upon execution of the agreement, it must be recorded with the Ventura
County Recorder's office.



   (E)   A new deed restriction must be executed and recorded upon each
change of ownership to maintain the restrictions on inclusionary units before
the term for such restrictions expires.



   (F)   A certificate of occupancy may not be issued for a project
subject to the provisions of this section until after the agreement required
by this section is executed.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.414  REFUND OF FEES.



   A pro-rata refund of the following fees for each of the inclusionary
units in the residential development will be granted to an applicant upon the
affordable housing agreement being recorded:



   (A)   Design review fee; and



   (B)   Growth management allocation process fee.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.415  RENTAL UNITS; AFFORDABLE RENT.



   Rental units must be offered to eligible households at an affordable
rent. The owner of rental inclusionary units must certify each tenant
household's income to the city or designee at the time of initial rental and
annually thereafter. The owner must obtain and review documents that
demonstrate the prospective renter's total income, such as income tax returns
or W-2s for the previous calendar year, and submit such information on a form
approved by the city.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.416  GROWTH MANAGEMENT ALLOCATION.



   A residential development subject to this chapter must include, as part
of its GMA application, the number and type of inclusionary units required by
this chapter. The approval of GMAs will specify the number and type of
inclusionary units required by this chapter and further condition the GMAs by
requiring deed restrictions as set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.417  WAIVERS; MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The requirements of this chapter may be modified or waived if
the applicant demonstrates to the Director that application of this chapter
would constitute a taking of property in violation of the United States or
California Constitutions.



   (B)   An application for a waiver or modification must be made
concurrently with GMA application.



   (C)   When determining whether to modify or waive the requirements
of this chapter, the Director may assume each of the following when
applicable:



      (1)   The applicant is subject to this chapter;



      (2)   The extent to which the applicant will benefit from
incentives offered by this code;



      (3)   The applicant is obligated to provide the most
economical inclusionary housing units feasible in terms of construction,
design, location and tenure; and



      (4)   The applicant is likely to obtain other housing
subsidies where such funds are reasonably available.



   (D)   The Director's decision is the city's final decision. An
applicant may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction within
90 days after the decision in accordance with Cal. Civ. Pro. Code §1094.6.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



§ 16.13.418  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   In addition to the general remedies provided by this code and
other applicable law, the Director and City Attorney are authorized to take
any appropriate enforcement action to ensure compliance with this chapter,
including, without limitation:



      (1)   Actions to revoke, deny or suspend any permit, including
a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or discretionary approval.



      (2)   Actions to recover civil fines, restitution to prevent
unjust enrichment from a violation of this chapter, and/or enforcement costs,
including attorneys fees.



      (3)   Eviction or foreclosure.



      (4)   Any other appropriate action for injunctive relief or
damages.



   (B)   Failure of any public official, employee, or agent to fulfill
the requirements of this chapter does not excuse any person, owner,
household, or other party from complying with the requirements of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1142, passed 11-7-05)



DIVISION 9:  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR DISABLED AND HANDICAPPED
INDIVIDUALS



§ 16.13.500  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with the city’s police powers
and as required by the Fair Housing Law.  It is intended to provide equal
access to residential housing throughout the city’s jurisdiction regardless
of an individual’s physical or mental abilities.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.501  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.  Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the
meanings stated in the Fair Housing Law and any successor statutes or
regulations.



   DISABLED PERSON - Means an individual who has a physical or mental
impairment that limits one or more of that person’s major life activities;
anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a medical
record of having such an impairment.  A DISABLED PERSON does not include
individuals currently using controlled substances as defined by federal law.



   FAIR HOUSING LAW - Means existing law affecting reasonable
accommodation in housing including, without limitation, the reasonable
accommodation required by 42 USC § 3604(f)(3)(B) and reasonable
accommodation required by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 12927(c)(1) and 12955(l).



   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION - Means any request by, or on behalf of, a
disabled person for a reasonable deviation from the city’s strict
application of its land use or building regulations as set forth in this
code, or as adopted by reference in this code, in order for such disabled
person to use and enjoy a dwelling.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.502  NOTICE.



   The city must post notice in the same manner as it posts meeting
agendas advising disabled persons regarding the reasonable accommodation that
may be provided in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.503  REQUESTING REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION.



   (A)   A disabled person or disabled person’s representative may
request reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   The Director, or designee, must provide reasonable assistance
to disabled persons, or their representatives, to seek reasonable
accommodation. Such assistance must occur during any part of a request
including, without limitation, the initial application and any appeal.



   (C)   A request for reasonable accommodation must be filed on a form
provided by the Director.  The application must include the following:



      (1)   Evidence of the property owner’s consent, usually in
the form of the owner’s signature on the application;



      (2)   A description of how the property will be used by the
disabled individual(s), e.g., for residential habitation, and the specific
reason that reasonable accommodation is desirable;



      (3)   Evidence of the applicant’s disability as reasonably
determined by the Director including, without limitation, an individual’s
medical record; correspondence from a currently licensed healthcare
professional; or documentation from the California Department of Motor
Vehicles demonstrating that the individual qualifies for disabled parking;



      (4)   Verification by the applicant that the property is the
primary residence of the person for whom reasonable accommodation is
requested.



   (D)   The city cannot require a fee for filing an original
application.  However, the city may establish a fee for appealing decisions
pursuant to City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.504  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Unless the Director determinates otherwise, approving a
reasonable accommodation is an administrative determination by the Director
without the need for a public hearing.



   (B)   Upon accepting a reasonable accommodation request application
as complete, the Director must review the application for conformance with
the provisions of this Title 16.  Based on this review, the Director must
act to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application.



   (C)   Within 30 days of receiving a completed application, the
Director must issue a statement of decisions and findings.  The statement
must recite, among other things, the facts and reasons for granting or
denying the application.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.505  ACTION BY THE DIRECTOR.



   The Director may take one of the following actions:



   (A)   Approval.  There are no conditions or requirements other than
those specified by the application.  After the date of final determination,
the proposed project may be developed in compliance with the reasonable
accommodation approved by the Director.



   (B)   Disapproval.  When a reasonable accommodation application is
disapproved, an application for the same project or a similar use on the same
property cannot thereafter be accepted for a period of one year from the date
of final determination, except that the Director may specify that, if the
action is due to details or technical issues, this time limit does not apply.



   (C)   Conditional approval.  Any application may be approved
subject to conditions the Director deems necessary for compliance with city,
state and federal regulations related to the protection of general health,
welfare, and safety of the surrounding area.  After the date of final
determination, the proposed project may be developed in compliance with the
reasonable accommodation approved by the Director along with applicable
conditions of approval.



   (D)   Withdrawal.  With the concurrence of or at the request of the
applicant, any a permit application may be withdrawn.  When an application
is withdrawn, such action is effective immediately and is not subject to
appeal.  Thereafter, such application is null and void and the property must
have the same status as if no application had been filed.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.506  FINDINGS.



   The following findings must be made in order to approve a request for
reasonable accommodation:



   (A)   The parcel and/or housing, which is the subject of the request
for reasonable accommodation, will be occupied as the primary residence by an
individual protected under the Fair Housing Laws.



   (B)   The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to one or more individuals protected under the
Fair Housing Laws.



   (C)   The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an
undue financial or administrative burden on the city.



   (D)   The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental
alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or other procedures
of the city.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.507  CONDITIONS - GENERALLY.



   A reasonable accommodation granted under this chapter is subject to the
following general conditions:



   (A)   The reasonable accommodation applies only to the specific
disabled person;



   (B)   Changes in use or circumstances that negates the basis for the
reasonable accommodation renders it void;



   (C)   Except as otherwise specifically accommodated pursuant to this
chapter, the approved reasonable accommodation is subject to all uniform
building codes as adopted by this code.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.508  CONDITIONS - SPECIAL.



   In addition to the general conditions, the Director may impose the
following conditions:



   (A)   Reasonable accommodations affecting an exterior physical
improvement must be designed to be substantially similar to the architectural
character, colors, and texture of materials of its surrounding dwelling
units; and



   (B)   Such additional conditions that the Director in good faith
believes are required to reconcile the approved reasonable accommodation with
other requirements of this code while still implementing the purpose of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.509  PERMIT APPEAL AND REVOCATION.



   A reasonable accommodation request may be appealed or revoked pursuant
to Chapter 16.206 of this code.  Disabled persons may request reasonable
accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted
including, without limitation, extension of time periods in order to
accommodate the individual’s disability.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.510  COMPLIANCE.



   Establishment, maintenance and operation of the use or uses proposed by
the application must comply with the information and specifications shown in
the Director’s approval.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.511  ACTION IN WRITING.



   The determination on each application, including any required findings
and any other reasons that serve to explain the determination, and all
conditions of approval, must be in writing.  A copy of the written
determination must forwarded to the applicant following the date of final
determination and is made available, at cost, to any person desiring a copy
of such determination.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.512  FINAL DETERMINATION.



   The determination of the Director is effective 15 days after the date
the decision is made and after all appeals, if any, are resolved.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.13.513  ONE STOP PERMITTING.



   A reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with this chapter
does not require any separate permit.  However, as provided in this section,
a reasonable accommodation does not run with the land; it constitutes a
permit issued to a specific disabled person and may be revoked or rendered
void in accordance with this section.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



CHAPTER 16.15:  COMMERCIAL ZONES



Section



   16.15.010   Purpose and intent



   16.15.020   Land use and permit requirements



   16.15.030   Development standards



   16.15.040   Landscaping



   16.15.050   Outdoor use and storage



   16.15.060   Bathing and showering facilities



   16.15.070   Buffering requirements



   16.15.080   Design principles



   16.15.090   Other applicable regulations



§ 16.15.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Five commercial zones are established to preserve and enhance areas
throughout the city for a variety of commercial business activities that
contribute to the community's economic well-being.  These provisions set
forth standards to ensure the compatible and mutually beneficial interaction
of commercial uses with residential consumers; to protect adjacent properties
from excessive illumination, noise, traffic and other nuisances; to encourage
quality development projects, and to accommodate the varied needs of the
business community.



   (A)   Commercial Neighborhood (C-N).  The Commercial Neighborhood
(C-N) zone accommodates low-scale community-oriented stores, offices, and
service businesses.  The zone provides commercial areas convenient to
neighborhood residents, with limited impact in terms of traffic, noise, and
on-site activity. 



   (B)   Commercial Office (C-O).  The Commercial Office (C-O) zone
accommodates professional business offices; medical, real estate, financial,
and administrative offices; and similar uses, as well as closely related
service and retail businesses.  Mixed use commercial and multiple-family
residential development is also permissible in this zone.



   (C)   Central Business District (CBD).  The Central Business
District (CBD) zone provides a pedestrian-scale commercial district with an
emphasis on small-scale businesses intended to serve the local community and
tourists.  The character of the CBD zone is intended to be that which
promotes the historic identity of the past through the creation of an
identifiable downtown and an emphasis on architectural style.  The CBD zone
will support a mix of complementary retail, service, office, civic, cultural,
and residential uses.



   (D)   General Commercial (C-G).  The General Commercial (C-G) zone
accommodates a broad range of retail and wholesale commercial enterprises,
service uses, entertainment uses, offices and other businesses that serve
both local and regional customer bases.  Development may consist of
stand-alone stores or coordinated commercial centers.  Multiple-family
residential development is also conditionally permissible in this zone.



   (E)   Highway Commercial (C-H).  The Highway Commercial (C-H) zone
accommodates large-scale regional commercial uses and light industrial
uses.  Examples of uses include automotive sales, large retail or discount
stores, and other commercial uses oriented toward automobile traffic. 
Industrial uses include research and development facilities, light
manufacturing, and work/sale uses that support the agricultural industry.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.15.020  LAND USE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Table 15-1 identifies the uses permitted in the C-N, C-O, C-G,
C-H and CBD zones.  Retail and service commercial uses represent the primary
permitted uses, although other uses are allowed as accessory, conditionally
permitted, and temporary uses, as indicated in Table 15-1.  Accessory uses
are not permitted on any property where a permitted primary use does not
already exist.



   (B)   Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be
subject to special conditions regarding the location, operation, or design of
the use.  Such uses are marked in Table 15-1 with an asterisk (*), and the
special conditions that apply are contained in Chapters 16.54 through 16.76
(Standards for Specific Land Uses) of this Title 16.



   (C)   For uses not listed in Table 15-1, the provisions of §
16.03.020 (Planning Director Responsibilities) of this Title 16 will apply.



(Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07; Am. Ord. 1262,
passed 2-1-16)



 




TABLE 15-1
Permitted and Conditional Uses - Commercial Zones




Use

 

C-N

 

C-O

 

CBD

 

C-G

 

C-H




Agricultural-Related Uses

 


Agricultural Production
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

P



Fruit/Agriculture Stands
 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T



Agricultural Equipment and Supplies Sales and Repair
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Auction, Livestock
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Automotive/Vehicle-Related Uses
 


Automobile Service Stations (fuel sales; see Chapter 16.72)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Automotive Parts Sales, without Installation
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

P

 

P



Automotive Parts Sales, with Installation
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Automotive Repair (Major) - bodywork/painting, engine repair
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Automotive Repair (Minor) - lube/tune, window tinting, mufflers (not to
include tractor, semi-trailer, or the like)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P



Automotive Sales (New/Used) - Car, RV, Truck
 

X

 

C

 

X

 

C

 

C



Automotive Wrecking
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Car Washes, Full Service and Self Service
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Truck Stop & Repair
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Vehicle Impound or Storage Yard
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Vehicle Leasing/Rental
 

X

 

C

 

X

 

C

 

C



Vehicle Storage Facility, including RVs and Boats
 

C

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Boarding and Lodging Facilities
 


Bed and Breakfast Inn
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Boardinghouse/Roominghouse
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

X



Congregate Care Housing Facility
 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Hotels/Motels
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Conference Facility
 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Eating/Drinking Establishments
 




Coffee, Juice Café
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Delicatessen/Sandwich Shop (no alcoholic beverage sales)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Restaurant with no drive-through (a)
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P



Restaurant with drive-through (see Chapter 16.66) (a)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C*

 

C*



Restaurant, Fast-food (a)
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Restaurant (outdoor dining on private property) (a)
 

C

 

C

 

P*

 

P

 

P



Restaurant (outdoor dining on public right-of-way) (See Chapter 124) (a)
 

C

 

C

 

P*

 

C

 

C



Night Club/Bar/Lounge (a)
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Entertainment/Recreation Uses
 


Adult Business/Entertainment Enterprise (see Chapter 16.54)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C*



Amusement Park
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Amusement Arcade or Center (see Chapter 16.56)
 

X

 

X

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Auditorium, Convention Halls, and Theaters
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Batting Cage, Driving Range, or Similar Outdoor Sporting facility
 

C

 

C

 

X

 

P

 

C



Billiard/Pool Hall (a)
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Bowling Alley
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Café Entertainment (See Chapter 124)
 
X
 
X
 
D
 
X
 
X


Cultural Center
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Health/Athletic Club
 

X

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C



Indoor Recreation Center
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Library or Museum
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Massage Establishment (see Chapter 119 of Title 11)
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Miniature Golf
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Rodeo Arena
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Skate Park or Rink
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Slot Car Racing
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Theater, Cinema (Movie)
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

P



Theater, Stage
 

C

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Financial Institutions
 


Banks, Savings and Loans, and Credit Unions
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Medical/Care Facilities
 




Blood Bank
 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Day Care Home, Large Family - Adult or Child (See Chapter 16.60)
 

C*

 

A*

 

C*

 

C*

 

X



Day Care Home, Small Family - Adult or Child (See Chapter 16.60)
 

C*

 

A*

 

C*

 

C*

 

X



Child Day Care Center (See Chapter 16.60)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

P*

 

C*



Clinic, Outpatient
 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Community Care Facility (see Chapter 16.64)
 

X

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

X



Drug and Alcohol Clinic/Rehabilitation (See Community Care Facility)
 

---

 

---

 

---

 

---

 

---



Convalescent Home or Hospital
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Emergency Shelter
 

X

 

C

 

X

 

C

 

C



Hospital/Surgery (See Civic/Institutional Zone)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Medical Laboratory
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Medical Office (see Professional & Administrative Offices)
 

---

 

---

 

---

 

---

 

---



Urgent Care Facility
 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Personal Service
 




Barber/Beauty/Nail Shop
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Dance/Music Schools/Martial Arts Studio
 

C

 

X

 

C

 

P

 

X



Dry Cleaner without on-site cleaning facilities
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Dry Cleaner with on-site cleaning facilities
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Laundromat
 

P

 

X

 

X

 

P

 

X



Leather, Luggage and Shoe Repair
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Professional and Administrative Offices
 




Office - Medical, Dental, Optometry, Chiropractic and the like
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Office - Business or Professional
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Veterinary Office
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

X



Residential Uses
 




Live/work studio
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Dwelling, Multi-Family (Constructed to R-4 Standards)(b)
 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Dwelling, Single-Family
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Mixed Use Residential and Commercial Development     

(See Subsection 16.15.030(D)) (b)
 

X

 

P*

 

C*

 

C*

 

X



Home Occupations
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

X



Retail Commercial
 




Antique Store (see also "Thrift Store")
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Art Galleries and Studios
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Auction businesses conducted within a building, excluding livestock sales
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Automotive (see Automotive/Vehicle- Related Uses above)
 

---

 

---

 

---

 

---

 

---



Bakery, Retail (with or without on-premises baking)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Book Store
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Clothing/Apparel Sales
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Confectionary Store, Candy Sales
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Convenience Store or Mini-market (a)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Department Store
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

P

 

P



Discount Store
 

P

 

X

 

C

 

P

 

C



Fabric & Craft Store
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Flower/Gift Shop
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Furniture, Furnishings and Appliances (Sales)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Grocery Store or Market
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Hardware Store
 

P

 

X

 

P

 

P

 

C



Home Improvement Store with Outdoor Display of Lumber/Garden
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Jewelry Store
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Liquor Store (see Chapter 16.58) (a)
 

C*

 

X

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Mobile Home Sales
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Music Store
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Nurseries/Garden Supplies
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

P

 

P



Office Supplies/Equipment
 

X

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Pet Shop/Store
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

P

 

P



Pharmacy
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Plumbing Supplies
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

P

 

P



Shopping Center A (less than 50,000 gross square feet of leasable area)
 

C

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Shopping Center B (from 50,000 gross square feet up to 150,000 square feet of
leasable area)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Shopping Center C (from 150,000 gross square feet up to 400,000 square feet
of leasable area)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Shopping Center D (over 400,000 gross square feet of leasable area)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Thrift Store, Secondhand Store or Sales (see also "Antique Store")
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

X



Warehouse Retail Store
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Service Commercial
 




Catering Service
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P



Cleaning/Janitorial
 

X

 

P

 

X

 

P

 

P



Copy Center/Postal Center
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Equipment Rental/Sales/Service Yard
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Interior Design Shop
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Laboratories (film, medical/dental)
 

X

 

C

 

X

 

C

 

C



Photography Shop/Studio/Film Processing
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X



Printing/Publishing Facilities
 

X

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P



Recycling Center (See Industrial Zones for Recycling Facility)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C*

 

C*



Travel Agency
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Welding/Repair and Related Uses
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Other
 




Alcoholic Sales (See Chapter 16.58)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Antenna, Satellite or Dish (See Section 16.50.020)
 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*



Antenna, Wireless Communications (See Chapter 16.50)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Assembly Halls (includes Church, Temple, or Other Religious Institutions) 
(see Chapter 16.62)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Cannabis Delivery
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Commercial Cannabis Activities
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Cultivation of Cannabis or Medical Marijuana
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Carnival
 

X

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T



Cemetery
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Check Cashing Business
 

C

 

X

 

C

 

P

 

C



Club, Lodge, and Meeting Hall (See Assembly Hall above)
 

---

 

---

 

---

 

---

 

---



Educational Institutions (Public or Private)
 

C

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P



Drive-Thru Establishment, Non-Restaurant (see Chapter 16.66)
 

X

 

C*

 

X

 

C*

 

C*



Funeral Parlor/Mortuary
 

X

 

C

 

X

 

C

 

C



Media  Broadcasting Station
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Newsrack (See Chapter 16.68)
 

A*

 

A *

 

A*

 

A*

 

A*



Parking Lot for off-site use
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Pawn Shop
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

P

 

X



Utility Substation
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Swap Meet/Flea Market
 

X

 

X

 

T

 

T

 

T



Tattoo Studio
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C

 

X



Trade/Technical School
 

X

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P



Wedding Chapel
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X





 



Key:   P  = Permitted Use                  A  = 
Permitted as an Accessory Use



      C  =  Conditional Use Permit Required      T  = 
Temporary Use Only, Permit Required



         (See Chapter 16.218)            *  =  Special
use conditions and/or development standards apply



      X  =  Not Permitted               --- = Not
Applicable.  See comment in "use" field. 



      D =  Dining Entertainment Permit Required



Notes:   (a)   Any use involving alcoholic beverage sales requires a
Conditional Use Permit.



      (b)   Density bonus may apply



For uses not listed in Table 15-1, the provisions of Section 16.03.020 of
this Title 16 will apply.  However, in no case will a building exceed 4
stories or 50 feet in the C-G zone, and 8 stories or 100 feet in the C-H zone.



 




TABLE 15-2
Development Standards - Commercial Zones




Development Standards

 

Zone




C-N

 

C-O

 

CBD (a)

 

C-G

 

C-H



1.  Minimum Lot Size
 
5,000 sf
 
8,000 sf
 
3,000 sf
 
12,000 sf
 
20,000 sf


2.  Minimum Lot Width
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
30 ft.
 
75 ft.
 
100 ft.


3.  Minimum Lot Depth
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
75 ft.
 
200 ft.


4.  Floor Area Ratio      (FAR)-Maximum  (b)
 
0.25
 
0.5
 
2.0
 
0.35
 
0.35


5.  Front Yard Setback - Minimum
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
0 sf, or 10 ft. if across the street from a residential zone
 
10 ft.
 
10 ft.


6.  Side Yard Setback - Minimum

    ·  Street Side

    ·  Interior

    ·  Abutting residential zone
 

10 ft.

5 ft.

10 ft.
 

10 ft.

5 ft.

10 ft.
 

0 ft.

0 ft.

10 ft.
 

10 ft.

5 ft.

10 ft.
 

10 ft.

5 ft.

10 ft.


7.  Rear Yard Setback-Minimum

    ·  Abutting residential zone
 
10 ft.

10 ft.
 
5 ft.

10 ft.
 
0 ft.

10 ft.
 
5 ft.

10 ft.
 
0 ft.

25 ft.


8.  Lot  Coverage (Maximum) (c)
 
75%
 
75%
 
100%
 
80%
 
80%


9.  Building Height (Maximum)   
 
1 story or    20 ft.
 
2-1/2 stories or 35 ft.
 
3 stories or 45 ft.
 
3 stories or 45 ft. (d)
 
3 stories or 45 ft. (d)




 



Abbreviations:  sf = square feet, ft. = feet



Notes:   (a)   See additional standards for CBD zone for development
requirements and exceptions (Section 16.15.030 (C)).



      (b)   Additional FAR may be approved through Conditional Use
Permit review and approval.



      (c)   Lot coverage includes building footprint, storage areas,
driveways, parking lot, and other impervious surface areas.



      (d)   Additional building height or stories may be approved
through Conditional Use Permit review and approval.  However, in no case
will a building exceed 4 stories or 50 feet in the C-G zone, and 8 stories or
100 feet in the C-H zone.



§ 16.15.030  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Table 15-2 identifies the development standards applicable to
all development in the C-N, C-O, CBD, C-G, and C-H zones. 



   (B)   Those lots shown on an approved and recorded subdivision map
or certificate of compliance may be used as a building site irrespective of
the minimum lot size, lot width, and lot depth standards set forth in Table
15-2.



   (C)    Additional standards for Central Business District (CBD)
Zone.  In addition to the development standards contained in Table 15-2, the
following standards apply to development in the CBD zone. 



      (1)   Shared parking.  Shared parking is encouraged pursuant
to the provisions of § 16.46.060 of this Title 16.



      (2)   Zero Lot Line on Main Street between 7th Street and 12th
Street.



         (a)   Either the first floor or the second floor must be
built to and parallel with the front property line.



         (b)   The second floor of all structures must be built
to and parallel with the front property line, except that up to 50% of the
second floor frontage may be set back only if the first floor is built to and
parallel to the front property line.



      (3)   Encroachment into required setbacks.



         (a)   Architectural features may project up to three
feet beyond the property or right-of-way line, provided such projection is a
minimum of eight feet above the highest point of publicly owned ground over
which such features project.  No feature may project into any adjoining
privately owned parcel, nor obstruct a vehicle access route or parking area.



         (b)   Awnings may project up to eight feet beyond the
property or right-of-way line, provided such projection is a minimum of 12
feet above the highest point of ground over which the awning projects.



      (4)   Mechanical/electrical equipment and satellite dish
antennae.  All mechanical/electrical equipment and satellite dish antennae
must be screened by architectural treatments compatible with the architecture
of the building they serve.  All rooftop equipment must be placed behind a
permanent parapet wall or equipment screen so that it is completely screened
from view from the ground level. 



      (5)   Outdoor dining.



         (a)   Restaurants with outdoor dining areas on private
property are permitted.



         (b)   Restaurants with outdoor dining areas on public
property or right-of-way may obtain a permit pursuant to Chapter 124 of this
Code.



      (6)   Design guidelines.  All development must comply with
the Design Guidelines for Downtown Santa Paula, adopted by resolution of the
City Council.



   (D)   Standards for Mixed-Use Development.



      (1)   Mixed-use developments that contain both commercial and
residential uses must comply with the following standards:



         (a)   Retail/commercial uses must be located on the
ground floor level in the entire portion of the building fronting the primary
street, and must occupy a minimum of 30% of the ground floor area.



         (b)   Residential dwelling units, cultural uses, and
office uses are allowed on the second and third floors, and behind the ground
floor retail/commercial use.



         (c)   Residential development must comply with the
development standards of the R-4 zone, with the exception of the front yard
setback for second and third story residential development above commercial
development, and the requirement to provide private usable open space.



         (d)   Separate entrances to the different use
occupancies must be provided for residential and nonresidential uses. When
possible, separate entrances to residential units must be provided in the
front of the building.  Separations will be reviewed through the applicable
discretionary permit review process. Adequate soundproofing and odor control
between residential and nonresidential uses must be provided.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1151, passed 1-3-06; Am. Ord. 1159,
passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.15.040  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Purpose.  Landscaping is to be used to provide attractive
planted areas that complement buildings on a site, to reduce heat and glare,
to control soil erosion, and to screen incompatible land uses.



   (B)   Landscaping requirements.



      (1)   Landscape coverage of a building site must be provided
as follows:



 

Zone
 
% Coverage Required (Minimum)


C-N
 
25%


C-O
 
25%


CBD 

  Zero-lot-line:

  All other:
 

0%

10%


C-G, C-H
 
20%



 



Such landscaping may include any landscaping required in off-street parking
areas.



      (2)   Along any property line abutting a residential zone, a
minimum 10-foot landscaped setback must be provided in all commercial
zones.  One tree must be provided for each 20 linear feet of such setback
buffer.



      (3)   All required front yards and street facing side yards
must be landscaped.



      (4)   Landscaping of required off-street parking areas must be
provided as set forth in § 16.46.100 (Landscaping Requirements) of Chapter
16.46 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) of this Title 16.



      (5)   No more than 15% of any required landscaped area may
consist of hardscape or other non-plant materials such as fountains, rocks,
bark, masonry or brickwork, walkways, or similar feature.



      (6)   Landscaped areas must have a minimum width of 5 feet,
including any curbs or similar borders.  Narrower landscaped areas may be
provided but must not be counted toward meeting the coverage requirements set
forth in paragraph 1 above.



      (7)   Any area within required setbacks not used for other
purposes must be landscaped.



      (8)   Landscaping used to screen storage areas, trash
enclosures, parking areas, public utilities, and other similar building
features must be planted at a height and density to provide the desired
screening effect within three years of initial planting.



      (9)   Street trees must be provided consistent with City
Resolution 3675 establishing guidelines for the preparation of landscape and
irrigation plans.



      (10)   All landscaping must comply with City Resolution 3675
establishing guidelines for the preparation of landscape and irrigation plans.



   (C)   Irrigation required.  All required landscape areas must be
provided with permanent irrigation systems suitable for the type of
landscaping provided.



   (D)   Landscape maintenance.  All landscaping must be permanently
maintained in a neat and healthy condition.  Maintenance of approved
landscaped installations must consist of regular watering, pruning,
fertilizing, clearing of debris and weeds, the removal and replacement of
dead plants, and the repair and replacement of irrigation systems.



   (E)   Landscape and irrigation plans required.



      (1)   Landscape and irrigation plans are required for all
development proposals in any commercial zone.  The plan must indicate the
square footage of each landscaped area, report the total square footage
devoted to landscaping, identify each landscaping area and the types of
plants to be provided therein, list the container size of each plant, and
clearly portray the entire landscaping layout and irrigation system.



      (2)   Landscape design plans must be prepared by a California
Registered Landscape Architect, unless such requirement is waived by the
Planning Director or designee.



      (3)   No building permit may be issued until landscaping and
irrigation plans have been reviewed and approved by the Planning Director or
designee.  The Landscape Architect must certify the plans have been
implemented according to the approved plans.



   (F)   Water-conserving features.  Landscape and irrigation plans
are encouraged to take full advantage of the wide range of drought-tolerant
landscape material and low-water-flow irrigation systems available within the
framework established by this section, except where such action conflicts
with adopted fire prevention plans, or the Fire Chief determines that such
would create a fire hazard.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.15.050  OUTDOOR USE AND STORAGE.



   (A)   C-N, C-O, and C-G Zones. All uses within the C-N, C-O, and C-G
zones must be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, with
the exception of parking and loading facilities, the permitted display of
vehicles, and permitted temporary uses. No outdoor storage is permitted.



   (B)   CBD Zone - Outdoor Display of Merchandise.



      (1)   It is unlawful to display merchandise on public property
without a valid encroachment permit issued pursuant to this code.



      (2)   Merchandise cannot project more than four feet beyond
the store front.



      (3)   Merchandise can be displayed outside only during
business hours.



      (4)   The aggregate merchandise display area cannot exceed 50%
of the linear frontage of the store front or six linear feet, whichever is
greater.



      (5)   It is unlawful to display merchandise as follows: in
such a manner as to present a hazard to safety; impede the normal flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic; create a display that is detrimental to the
appearance of the premises and surrounding property; or is in any other
manner detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare.



      (6)   Required parking spaces cannot be used for merchandise
displays.



   (C)   C-H Zone.



      (1)   All sales and manufacturing activity, with the exception
of vehicle sales, must occur within a fully enclosed building or other
approved interior space to the principal building.



      (2)   Outdoor storage is permitted only within a rear or
interior side yard. Such storage must be entirely shielded from view from any
public right-of-way and from adjacent properties by a combination of fencing,
walls, and/or landscaping. All screening materials must be neatly maintained,
kept in good repair, and erected and maintained in a  manner that achieves
all intended screening purposes. The design, materials, and location of the
screening is subject to the approval of the Planning Director or designee.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1201, passed 2-17-09)



§ 16.15.060  BATHING AND SHOWERING FACILITIES.



   Unless specifically required by federal, state or local law, no shower
or other bathing facilities are permitted within a project in any commercial
or industrial building unless authorized by a Conditional Use Permit or
Planned Development approval.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.15.070  BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS.



   Where a commercial, office or industrial/ manufacturing use abuts a
property in a residential zone, a masonry wall of minimum height six feet,
with screen landscaping, must be erected and maintained between the two
uses.  The wall is measured from the highest adjacent grade. Masonry walls
greater than 40 feet in total length must be designed with architectural
columns at intervals lengths of between 12 to 16 feet.  Landscape screening
of the wall must also be provided on the commercial property. 







Figure 15-1



Buffering of Commercial Uses



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.15.080  DESIGN PRINCIPLES.



   The design of structures on the industrial zoned lots must comply with
the Design Review guidelines as adopted under City Council Resolution 5298,
and the Downtown Development Report.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.15.090  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this Chapter 16.15, the
following applicable requirements in this Title 16 will apply to development
in commercial zones:



Chapter 16.40:  General Property Development Standards



Chapter 16.42:  Performance Standards



Chapter 16.44:  Fences, Wall, and Hedges



Chapter 16.46:  Off-Street Parking and Loading



Chapter 16.48:  Signs



Chapter 16.50:  Antennas and Other Telecommuni- cations Facilities



Chapter 16.54 - 16.76:  Standards for Specific Land Uses



Chapters 16.110-16.118:  Nonconformities



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



CHAPTER 16.21:  INDUSTRIAL ZONES



Section



   16.21.010   Purpose and intent



   16.21.020   Land use and permit requirements



   16.21.030   Development standards



   16.21.040   Accessory uses



   16.21.050   Outdoor use and storage



   16.21.060   Landscaping



   16.21.070   Bathing and showering facilities



   16.21.080   Buffering requirements



   16.21.090   Design principles



   16.21.100   Other applicable regulations



§ 16.21.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Four industrial zones and one industrial park overlay zone are
established to preserve and enhance areas for a variety of
manufacturing/industrial business activities and support commercial
businesses.  This chapter sets forth standards to ensure compatibility
between manufacturing/industrial uses and other land uses; to protect
adjacent properties from excessive illumination, noise, noxious gases, odor,
smoke, traffic, vibration, unsightliness and other nuisances; to encourage
quality development; and to accommodate the varied needs of the business
community.



   (A)   Commercial/Light Industrial Zone (C/LI).  The C/LI zone
allows heavy commercial uses that may involve outdoor storage activity and
low-intensity industrial businesses, including small-scale manufacturing,
warehousing and storage.  This zone is intended to provide a district for a
mix of commercial and industrial operations that do not produce emissions of
odor, dust, gas, fumes, smoke, glare, liquids, waste, noise, vibrations,
disturbances or other similar impacts to surrounding properties.  All
operations are to be conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.



   (B)   Light Industrial Zone (LI).  The LI zone allows low-intensity
industrial businesses, including small-scale manufacturing, warehousing and
storage.  This zone is intended to provide an exclusive district for
industrial operations that do not produce emissions of odor, dust, gas,
fumes, smoke, glare, liquids, waste, noise, vibrations, disturbances or other
similar impacts to surrounding properties.  All operations are to be
conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.



   (C)   Industrial Zone (I).  The I zone allows a wide range of
assembly, distribution, industrial, manufacturing, storage uses, and other
industrial businesses that serve both local and regional customer bases. 
Limited outdoor operations that do not create objectionable impacts to
surrounding properties, such as emissions of odor, dust, gas, fumes, smoke,
glare, liquids, waste, noise, vibrations, disturbances or other similar
impacts, are permitted in this zone.  Heavy industrial uses are required to
mitigate objectionable characteristics through the application of site design
standards, environmental standards, and by review under a Conditional Use
Permit in accordance with Chapter 16.218 of this Title 16.



   (D)   Industrial Park Overlay Zone (IP).  The IP zone is an overlay
zone that can be applied to the preceding three zones in order to provide
greater flexibility in industrial design and allow low-intensity industrial,
commercial, and office uses within master-planned, integrated industrial
subdivisions. Commercial uses that support industrial activities are also
permitted within the IP overlay zone.



   (E)   Manufacturing Zone (M-1).



      (1)   The M-1 zone is intended to provide a district of
manufacturing, processing or treatment or products and heavy commercial uses
in a manner to assure compatibility with adjacent uses.



      (2)   In addition to the uses identified in Table 21-1, the
M-1 zone allows any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products
other than any which produces, causes or emits any fumes, odor, dust, smoke,
gas, noise or vibrations which are or may be detrimental to properties in the
neighborhood or to the welfare of the occupant thereof.



      (3)   Uses customarily incidental to any of the conditionally
permitted uses set forth in Table 21-1 and accessory buildings when located
on the same lot are permitted; provided, that all activities other than
incidental storage, must be conducted within a completely enclosed building
when appropriate for that business; open storage of materials and equipment
is permitted only when incidental to the use of the light manufacturing use
conducted on the premises, and such opt storage must conform with the
requirements of § 16.21.050.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.21.020  LAND USE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Table 21-1 identifies uses permitted in the C/LI, LI, I and M
zones.  Industrial/manufacturing and commercial uses represent the primary
permitted uses, although other uses are allowed as accessory, conditionally
permitted, and temporary uses, as indicated in Table 21-1.  Accessory uses
are not permitted on any property where a permitted primary use does not
already exist.



   (B)   Certain permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses may be
subject to special conditions regarding the location, operation, or design of
the use.  Such uses are marked in Table 21-1 with an asterisk (*), and the
special conditions that apply are contained in Chapters 16.54 through 16.76
(Standards for Specific Land Uses) of this Title 16.



   (C)   For uses not listed in Table 21-1, the provisions of §
16.03.020 (Planning Director Responsibilities) of this Title 16 apply.



 


TABLE 21-1
Permitted and Conditional Uses - Industrial Zones




Use

 

C/LI

 

LI

 

I

 

M-1





Accessory buildings necessary to use located on same lot or parcel
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Adult Entertainment Establishment (see Chapter 16.54)
 

X

 

X

 

C*

 

X



Alcohol and Alcoholic Beverages Manufacturing
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Animal Hospitals, Kennels & Veterinary Clinic
 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P



Automobile Service Station (fuel sales; see Chapter 16.72)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C



Automotive Repair and/or Tune-up Shop
 

P

 

C

 

C

 

P1



Automobile dismantling
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Assembly (small scale, see definition)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Assembly (large scale, see definition)
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P



Cannabis Delivery
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Commercial Cannabis Activities
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Cultivation of Cannabis or Medical Marijuana
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X



Catering establishment and box lunch preparation
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

P



Commercial Retail Businesses - 30,000 sf or smaller, and not listed otherwise
in Table 21-1
 

P

 

C

 

X

 

X



Commercial Retail Businesses - Over 30,000 sf, and not listed otherwise in
Table 21-1
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Commercial Service Businesses - 10,000 sf or smaller, and not listed
otherwise in Table 21-1
 

P

 

C

 

C

 

X



Commercial Service Businesses - Over 10,000 sf, and not listed otherwise in
Table 21-1
 

C

 

X

 

X

 

X



Day Care Center (See Chapter 16.60)
 

C*

 

C*

 

X

 

X



Day Care Center, Employer-Sponsored Child (See Chapter 16.60)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Distribution (low intensity, e.g. local distribution)
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P



Distribution (high intensity, e.g. regional distribution, freight terminal)
 

C

 

X

 

P

 

P



Distribution - wholesale alcohol
 

X

 

C

 

C

 

X



Drive-through Facilities (see Chapter 16.66)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

X*



Dwelling - Farmworker Housing, Migrant Farmworker Housing
 

C

 

C

 

X

 

X



Dwelling - Live/work studio
 

C

 

C

 

X

 

X



Dwelling - Caretaker
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Emergency shelters (see Chapter 16.78)
 

P

 

X

 

X

 

X



Equipment Rental
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P



Farm vehicle sales, storage, repair, and auction (b)
 

C

 

X

 

P

 

X



Food Processing
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

P



Furniture Sales, Rentals, or Repairs
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Health Clubs
 

C

 

C

 

X

 

X



Laboratories
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Libraries, museums and private clubs
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Lumberyards
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

P



Manufacturing (small scale) See Definition
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Manufacturing (large scale) See Definitions
 

X

 

X

 

P

 

P



Manufacturing - chemicals, alcohol, asphalt, batteries, rubber fabrication
 

X

 

C

 

C

 

C



Motion Picture Studio
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Nurseries
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Office - Business or Professional - As primary use
 

P

 

P

 

X

 

X



Office - Business or Professional - As accessory to primary commercial or
industrial use
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Processing (small scale - see definition) (a)
 

X

 

P

 

X

 

P



Processing (large scale - see definition) (a)
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Public Facilities for governmental purposes
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Public Storage Facility/Mini-warehouse
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Public Utility Yards
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Recreational enterprises and facilities
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Recycling Facility (see Chapter 16.70)
 

X

 

C*

 

C*

 

P*



Research and Development Businesses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Restaurants, including fast-food
 

C

 

C

 

X

 

X



Slaughtering
 

X

 

X

 

C

 

C



Storage (large scale, e.g. construction equipment, building material,
operating motor vehicles, transit and transportation equipment (b))
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P



Storage - non-operating motor vehicles, even when in conjunction with another
use on the same lot or parcel
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Surface Mining and Reclamation (See Chapter 16.100 et seq.)
 

X

 

X

 

C*

 

C*



Telecommunications Facilities (see Chapter 16.50)
 

C*

 

C*

 

C*

 

C*



Trade School
 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P



Truck Repair and Overhauling
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

P



Trucking, freighting or draying yards or terminals
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

C



Utility Distribution and Transmission Stations
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Vehicle impound yards (b)
 

X

 

C

 

P

 

P



Vehicle parts and equipment stores
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

P



Vehicle sales - wholesale (b)
 

C

 

X

 

C

 

X



Vehicle sales - retail
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Vehicle rental agency
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Warehouse (other than Distribution)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

X



Wholesaling
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

X





 



Key:   P =    Permitted Use            A =   Permitted
as an Accessory Use



   C =   Conditional Use Permit Required   X =   Not Permitted



      (See Chapter 16.218)         * =   Special use
conditions and/or development standards apply.



1.  When operated or maintained wholly within a building.



Notes:   (a)   Food Processing is accepted and addressed separately
above.



   (b)   See Section 16.21.050 regarding outdoor storage and activity.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06; Am. Ord. 1172,
passed 7-2-07; Am. Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13; Am. Ord. 1262, passed 2-1-16)



§ 16.21.030  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Table 21-2 identifies the development standards that apply to
all development in the C/LI, LI, I and M-1 zones.



 




TABLE 21-2
Development Standards - Industrial Zones




Development Standards

 

Zone

 





C/LI

 

C/LI (IP)

 

LI

 

LI



(IP)

 

I

 

I



(IP)

 

M-1



1.   Minimum size for Industrial subdivision (see Section 16.21.030(B))
 
5 acre
 
5 acre
 
5 acre
 
5 acre
 
5 acre
 
5 acre
 
5 acre


2.   Minimum Lot Size
 
6,000 sf
 
6,000 sf
 
10,000 sf
 
10,000 sf
 
1 acre
 
1 acre
 
1 acre


3.   Minimum Lot Width
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
50 ft.


4.   Minimum Lot Depth
 
80 ft.
 
80 ft.
 
100 ft.
 
100 ft.
 
200 ft.
 
200 ft.
 
200 ft.


5.   Floor Area Ratio (FAR)- Maximum (a) 
 
0.35
 
0.25
 
0.35
 
0.25
 
0.35
 
0.25
 
0.35


6.   Front Yard Setback - Minimum
 
10 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.b


7.   Side Yard  Setback - Minimum
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


* Interior
 
0 ft.
 
5 ft
 
0 ft.
 
5 ft
 
0 ft.
 
5 ft
 
0 ft.


* Street Side
 
10 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.


* Abutting residential zone
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.


8.   Rear Yard Setback - Minimum
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


* Abutting nonresidential zone
 
0 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
0 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
0 ft.


* Abutting residential zone
 
40 ft.
 
40 ft.
 
40 ft.
 
40 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
5 ft.


9.   Lot Coverage - Maximum
 
80%
 
75%
 
85%
 
80%
 
85%
 
80%
 
85%


10.   Building Height - Maximum
 
35 ft.
 
35 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
45 ft.




 



Abbreviations:  sf = square feet, ft. = feet



Note:   a)   Additional FAR may be approved through Conditional Use
Permit review and approval.



   b)   All buildings must be located not nearer than 35 feet from the
center line of the street or 5 feet, whichever is greater.



   (B)   Additional standard for Industrial Park (IP) Overlay Zone. 
Every industrial park subdivision must have a minimum of 5 acres overall.  A
maximum of 75% of the park may have parcels in accordance with the minimum
lot size requirements of the underlying zone (see Table 21-2).  The
remaining 25% of the parcels must be 4 acres in size or larger.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06; Am. Ord. 1172,
passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.21.040  ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   In the LI and I zones, incidental retail sales in connection
with the primary use are permitted, provided any retail display and sales
area does not exceed 25% of the total building area, and provided that the
business complies with § 37.19 of the Santa Paula Municipal Code regarding
sales tax.



   (B)   Recreational facilities for employees are permitted as
accessory uses to the primary use.



   (C)   Antennas and other telecommunication facilities must conform
to the provisions of Chapter 16.50.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.21.050  OUTDOOR USE AND STORAGE.



   C/LI, LI, I and M Zones.



   (A)   All commercial, manufacturing and processing activities must
occur within a fully enclosed building or other approved interior space
unless otherwise authorized by this chapter.



   (B)   Outdoor storage is permitted only within a rear or interior
side yard.  Such storage must be entirely screened from view from any public
right-of-way by a combination of fencing, walls, and/or landscaping.  Chain
link fencing is allowed only with wood or metal slatting, and must comply
with all parts of this section.  All screening materials must be neatly
maintained, kept in good repair, and erected and maintained in a manner that
achieves all intended screening purposes.



   (C)   When outdoor storage is located on a parcel without a
building, the storage must be entirely screened from view with a solid
(opaque) wall or fence.



   (D)   Landscaping must be placed in front of any wall or fence
adjacent to a public right-of-way either in a landscape planter or through
the use of landscape pockets provided along the wall.



   (E)   Chain link fencing with wood or metal slatting is an
acceptable screening material only for areas not visible from a public street
or parking lot.



   (F)   No storage of materials or equipment shall exceed the height
of such required screening.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1167,
passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.21.060  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Purpose.  Landscaping is to be used to provide attractive
planted areas which complement buildings on a site, reduce heat and glare,
control soil erosion, and screen unsightly storage and parking areas.



   (B)   Landscaping requirements.



      (1)   Landscape coverage of a building site must be provided
as follows:



 


Zone

 
% Coverage Required (Minimum)


C/LI
 

20%



LI
 

15%



I
 

15%




 



Such landscaping may include any landscaping required in off-street parking
areas (See § 16.46.140)



      (2)   Along any property lines abutting a residential zone, a
minimum 15-foot landscaped setback must be provided.  One tree must be
provided for each 20 linear feet of such setback buffer.



      (3)   All required front yards must be landscaped.



      (4)   Landscaping of required off-street parking areas must be
provided as set forth in § 16.46.140 (Landscaping Requirements) of Chapter
16.46 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) of this Title 16.



      (5)   No more than 15% of any required landscaped area can
consist of hardscape or other non-plant materials such as patios, walkways,
fountains, rocks, bark, masonry or brickwork, or similar feature.



      (6)   Landscaped areas must have a minimum width of five feet,
including any curbs or similar borders.  Narrower landscaped areas may be
provided but can not be counted toward meeting the coverage requirements set
forth in paragraph (1) above.



      (7)   Any area within required setbacks not used for other
purposes must be landscaped.



      (8)   Landscaping used to screen storage areas, trash
enclosures, parking areas, public utilities, and other similar building
features must be planted at a height and density to provide the desired
screening effect within three years of initial planting.



      (9)   Street trees must be provided consistent with City
Resolution 3675 establishing guidelines for the preparation of landscape and
irrigation plans.



      (10)   All landscaping must comply with City Resolution 3675
establishing guidelines for the preparation of landscape and irrigation plans.



   (C)   Irrigation required.  All required landscape areas must be
provided with permanent automatic irrigation systems suitable for the type of
landscaping provided.



   (D)   Landscape maintenance.  All landscaping must be permanently
maintained in a neat and healthy condition.  Maintenance of approved
landscaped installations must consist of regular watering, pruning,
fertilizing, clearing of debris and weeds, removal and replacement of dead
plants, and repair and replacement of irrigation systems and hardscape.



   (E)   Landscape and irrigation plans required.



      (1)   Landscape and irrigation plans are required for all
development proposals.  Such plans must indicate the square footage of each
landscaped area, report the total square footage devoted to landscaping,
identify each landscaping area and the types of plants to be provided
therein, list the container size of each plant, and clearly portray the
entire landscaping layout and irrigation system.



      (2)   Landscape design plans must be prepared by a California
Registered Landscape Architect, unless waived by the Planning Director or
designee.



      (3)   No building permit will be issued until landscaping and
irrigation plans have been reviewed and approved by the Planning Director or
designee.  The Landscape Architect must certify the plans have been
implemented according to the approved plans.



   (F)   Water-conserving features.  Landscape and irrigation plans
must take full advantage of available drought-tolerant landscape materials
and low-water-flow irrigation systems, except where such action conflicts
with adopted fire prevention plans, or the Fire Chief determines that such
would create a fire hazard.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.21.070  BATHING AND SHOWERING FACILITIES.



   Unless specifically required by federal, state or local law, no shower
or other bathing facilities are permitted within any industrial or commercial
building unless authorized by a Conditional Use Permit or Planned Development
approval.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.21.080  BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS.



   Where an industrial use abuts a property in a residential zone, a
masonry wall of minimum height eight feet must be erected and maintained
between the two uses.  The wall shall be measured from the highest adjacent
grade.  Masonry walls greater than 40 feet in total length must be designed
with architectural columns at intervals lengths of between 12 to 16 feet. 
Landscape screening of the wall must also be provided on the industrial
property.







Figure 17-1



Buffering of Industrial Uses



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.21.090  DESIGN PRINCIPLES.



   The design of structures on the industrial zoned lots must comply with
the Design Review guidelines as adopted under City Council Resolution 5298.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 11-20-06)



§ 16.21.100  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this Chapter 16.21, the
following applicable requirements of this Title 16 must apply to development
in industrial zones:



Chapter 16.40:  General Property Development Standards



Chapter 16.42:  Performance Standards



Chapter 16.44:  Fences, Wall, and Hedges



Chapter 16.46:  Off-Street Parking and Loading



Chapter 16.48:  Signs



Chapter 16.50:  Antennas and Other Telecommuni- cations Facilities



Chapters 16.54 -16.76:  Standards for Specific Land Uses



Chapters 16.110-16.118:  Nonconformities



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1167,
passed 11-20-06)



CHAPTER 16.23:  INSTITUTIONAL/CIVIC ZONE



Section



   16.23.010   Purpose and intent



   16.23.020   Land use and permit requirements



   16.23.030   Development standards



   16.23.040   Landscaping



   16.23.050   Other applicable regulations



§ 16.23.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of the Institutional/Civic (IN) zone is to provide
adequate space for community facilities of a public or quasi-public nature in
locations best suited to serve the needs of the community, to protect such
lands from intrusion by other uses, and to set forth those development
standards necessary to ensure that such uses will be compatible with
surrounding land uses.



   (B)   Civic and institutional uses generally are located on parcels
throughout the city surrounded by a multitude of other zones and land uses. 
In order to make civic and institutional uses compatible with their
surrounding uses, the development standards contained in this chapter are
based upon the development standards applicable to zones adjoining proposed
civic and institutional uses. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.23.020  LAND USE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  Permitted uses in the Institutional/Civic
zone are as follows:



      (1)   Park and recreation facilities such as parks, trails,
linear parks, open space, and flood control facilities.



      (2)   Public schools, colleges, and similar public educational
institutions.



      (3)   Civic buildings such as City Hall, community center, and
fire station.



   (B)   Uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit.  The following uses
may be permitted subject to Conditional Use Permit review pursuant to Chapter
16.218 (Conditional Use Permits) of this Title 16.  Special conditions that
may apply to these or other institutional/civic uses are contained in
Chapters 16.54 through 16.76 (Standards for Specific Land Uses) of this Title
16.



      (1)   Private recreation facilities.



      (2)   Public and private golf courses.



      (3)   Public and private utility facilities such as water
treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, and electric power transformer and
distribution facilities.



      (4)   Cemeteries.



      (5)   Hospitals and medical clinics.



   (C)   Use requiring a Temporary Use Permit.  The following uses may
be permitted with a Temporary Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 16.228
(Temporary Use Permits) of this Title 16.



      (1)   One-time or annually occurring events such as arts and
craft shows and exhibits, carnivals, circuses, fairs, seasonal outdoor sales,
and farmers' markets.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.23.030  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   The development standards applicable to the zone adjoining any
property zoned Institutional/Civic will apply to that
Institutional/Civic-zoned property.  Where more than one zone adjoins the
Institutional/Civic-zoned property and the requirements of adjoining
properties are different, the standards of the adjoining zones will be
averaged to determine the applicable standards for the Institutional/Civic
property. 



   (B)   Along any property line of a parcel in the Institutional/Civic
zone which adjoins a residential zone, a solid masonry wall not less than six
feet high must be built and maintained at such property line. The required
wall may be replaced by suitable landscaping of a screening nature, approved
by the Planning Director, which must be continuously maintained to achieve
the desired screening effect.



   (C)   All mechanical and electrical equipment, including duct work
and piping, whether located at ground or rooftop level, must be screened from
the view of an adjacent property or public right- of-way in a manner which is
reasonably compatible and harmonious with the architectural style and detail
of the building and must be located in a position satisfactory to the Fire
Marshal and Planning Director or their designees.



   (D)   Outdoor storage of materials, products, and equipment, and any
other outdoor use must be screened on all sides from view of adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way, as directed by the Planning Director.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.23.040  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Purpose.  Landscaping is to be used to provide attractive
planted areas which complement buildings on site, reduce heat and glare,
control soil erosion, and screen storage and parking areas.



   (B)   Landscaping requirements.



      (1)   Landscaping must cover a minimum of 20% of the building
site.  Such landscaping must be provided inclusive of any landscaping
required in off-street parking areas (see § 16.46.140).



      (2)   All required front yards and street facing side yards
must be landscaped.



      (3)   Landscaping of required off-street parking areas must be
provided as set forth in § 16.46.100 (Landscaping Requirements) of Chapter
16.46 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) of this Title 16.



      (4)   No more than 20% of any required landscaped area may
consist of hardscape or other non-plant materials such as fountains, rocks,
masonry or brick work, paving, or similar feature.



   (C)   Irrigation required.  All required landscape areas must be
provided with permanent automatic irrigation systems suitable for the type of
landscaping provided.



   (D)   Maintenance required.  All landscaping must be permanently
maintained in a neat and healthy condition and in a manner that prevents
adverse public health, safety, and welfare effects. Maintenance of approved
landscaped installations must consist of regular watering, pruning,
fertilizing, clearing of debris and weeds, removal and replacement of dead
plants, and repair and replacement of irrigation systems.



   (E)   Landscape and irrigation plans required.



      (1)   Landscape and irrigation plans are required for all
development proposals. Such plans must indicate the square footage of each
landscaped area, report the total square footage devoted to landscaping,
identify each landscaping area and the types of plants to be provided
therein, list the container size of each plant, and clearly portray the
entire landscaping layout and irrigation system.



      (2)   No building permit will be issued until landscaping and
irrigation plans have been reviewed and approved by the Planning Director.



   (F)   Water-conserving features.  Landscape and irrigation plans
must take full advantage of available drought-tolerant landscape materials
and low-water-flow irrigation systems, except where such action conflicts
with adopted fire prevention plans, or the Fire Chief determines that such
would create a fire hazard.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.23.050  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



Chapter 16.46:  Off-Street Parking and Loading



Chapter 16.48:  Signs



Chapters 16.54 -16.76:  Standards for Specific Land Uses



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.25:  SPECIFIC PLAN ZONE



Section



   16.25.010   Purpose and intent



   16.25.020   Specific Plan zones established



   16.25.030   Minimum requirements for Specific Plans



   16.25.040   Compliance with approved Specific Plan



§ 16.25.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Specific Plans are recognized as planning tools that facilitate the
logical, coordinated planning of a large area for a variety of land uses and
types of development. The Specific Plan (SP) zone is established to provide
maximum flexibility in the development of large properties that may benefit
from unique or special land use and design policies and standards not
otherwise possible under conventional zoning controls, and to establish
uniform procedures for the adoption and implementation of specific plans.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.25.020  SPECIFIC PLAN ZONES ESTABLISHED.



   Each specific plan area in the city will be identified on the zoning
map by a number. The numbers will refer to the following specific plans:



   SP-1   Adams Canyon



   SP-2   Fagan Canyon



   SP-3   East Area 1



   SP-4   East Area 2



   SP-5   South Mountain



   SP-6   West Area 2



   SP-7   Airpark



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1182, passed 2-4-08)



§ 16.25.030  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC PLANS.



   Chapter 16.216 (Specific Plans) of this Title 16 identifies the
required contents and submittal requirements for all specific plans.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.25.040  COMPLIANCE WITH APPROVED SPECIFIC PLAN.



   (A)   When a specific plan is adopted for an area, the specific
plan's land use designations, standards, and other requirements will
supersede and control any contrary provision of this chapter. On issues that
an adopted specific plan is silent, development within the specific plan area
will be implemented pursuant to the development standards and procedures in
this Title 16.



   (B)   All subdivision, public works projects, development
agreements, and other development- related activity within a specific plan
zone must be consistent with the adopted specific plan for that area.  Land
projects cannot be approved in an area zoned Specific Plan if a specific plan
has not been adopted for that area.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.27:  AIRPORT ZONES



Section



   16.27.010   Purpose and intent



   16.27.020   Applicability



   16.27.030   Use restrictions



   16.27.040   Development standards



   16.27.050   Special performance standards



   16.27.060   Other applicable regulations



§ 16.27.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The Santa Paula Airport is a privately owned and operated aviation
facility. The proximity of the airport to populated areas of the city
necessitates the establishment of special use regulations and development
standards to ensure compatibility between the airport and surrounding land
uses. These use restrictions and development standards are based on the
Ventura County Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan (VCACLUP), a document that
governs all aviation facilities in the County, and the State Aeronautics
Program 1993 Airport Land Use Planning Handbook.



   In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 50485 et seq., the purpose of
this subchapter is to prevent creation or establishment of airport hazards
and to provide for the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation or
marking and lighting of existing airport hazards.



   Four zones, three of which are overlay zones, are designed to
accommodate the operations of the airport while maintaining safety as a
priority.



   (A)   Airport Operational Zone - KO.  The purpose of the Airport
Operational (KO) zone is to provide an area to facilitate airport operations.
The zone applies to airport facilities that are open to the public and
maintain a valid permit from the California Aeronautics Commission
designating the facility as an airport available to the public, subject to
airport administration regulations.



   (B)   Airport Safety Overlay Zone (KS).  The purpose of the Airport
Safety (KS) overlay zone is to limit uses and restrict development within
areas classified as the Runway Protection Zone, Outer Safety Zone, and
Sideline Safety Zone, as identified for the Santa Paula Airport in the
VCACLUP.



      Within the KS Zone, subzones are established as follows:



      (1)   KS-IS Inner Safety Subzone. Inner safety subzones are
located near each end of the airport runway.  Each such subzone is 250 feet
in width along a line parallel to and 200 feet beyond the designated
threshold of the runway and flares uniformly to a width of 450 feet along a
line parallel to and 1,200 feet beyond such threshold.  The extended
centerline of the runway bisects the subzone.  This zone corresponds to the
Runway Protection Zone (a.k.a. inner safety zone) for the Santa Paula
Airport, identified in the VCACLUP.



      (2)   KS-OS Outer Safety Subzone.  Outer safety subzones are
located near each end of the airport runway.  Each such subzone is 450 feet
in width along a line parallel to and 1,200 feet beyond the designated
threshold of the runway and flares uniformly to a width of 950 feet along a
line parallel to and 3,700 feet beyond such threshold.  The extended
centerline of the runway bisects the subzone.  This zone corresponds to the
Outer Safety Zone for the Santa Paula Airport, identified in the VCACLUP.



   (C)   Airport-Influenced Overlay Zone (KI).  The purpose of the
Airport-Influenced (KI) overlay zone is to require less-intense uses and
development within the area in which airplane traffic is concentrated. The
boundaries of the (KI) overlay correspond to the boundaries of the Traffic
Pattern Zone, as identified for the Santa Paula Airport in the VCACLUP.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.27.020  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter will apply to the three airport zones.
Two of the zones are overlays and therefore, in the event that these
restrictions conflict with the underlying zone, the more restrictive
provisions will apply. In the event that a lot or parcel of land is located
partly within an overlay zone, the restrictions applicable to such overlay
zone will apply to the part of the lot or parcel located within the overlay
zone.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.27.030  USE RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Airport Operational Zone - KO.



      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the
KO Zone:



         (a)   Runways, taxiways, and other surfaces used by
airplanes on the ground



         (b)   Communication facilities.



         (c)   Terminal buildings.



         (d)   Sale of aviation fuel and products.



         (e)   Airplane rentals.



         (f)   Charter and delivery services.



         (g)    Flying schools.



         (h)    Air photographer, survey and map-making services.



         (i)    Aircraft storage and tie downs.



         (j)   Aircraft repair and servicing.



      (2)   Uses requiring a Conditional Use Permit.  The following
uses may be permitted subject to Conditional Use Permit review pursuant to
Chapter 16.218 (Conditional Use Permits) of this Title 16.



         (a)   Airplane sales, including equipment and supplies.



         (b)   Service establishments for airport business:



            i.   Car rental;



            ii.   Restaurant, café, cafeteria; and



            iii.    Taxistand.



         (c)   Industrial uses listed as permitted in the LI
Zone, subject to the same conditions and restrictions as in the LI Zone,
provided that they are found to be compatible with existing, proposed or
allowed uses within the zone.



   (B)   Airport Safety Overlay Zone (KS).  Notwithstanding the use
regulations of the underlying zone, any use involving, as the primary
activity, the manufacture, storage, or distribution of explosives or
flammable materials is prohibited.



   The following land use restrictions apply to the KS Overlay Zone and
the KS-IS and KS-OS subzones.  In the event that these restrictions are in
conflict with the base zoning as shown on the zoning map or in the event that
land is located in two or more subzones, the more restrictive will apply. 
In the event that a lot or parcel of land is located partly within one or
more of the subzones, the restrictions applicable to such subzone or subzones
will apply to that part of the lot or parcel located within the subzone or
subzones.



      (1)   KS-IS Inner Safety Subzone.



         (a)   Land use within the inner safety subzone is
intended to have few or no people and no structures or obstructions. 
Prohibited uses include:



            i.   Buildings or structures;



            ii.   Outdoor amusement;



            iii.   Outdoor commercial or industrial operation;



            iv.   Parks;



            v.   Resorts and camps;



            vi.   Storage or manufacture of explosives or
petroleum products;



            vii.   Trees;



            viii.   Uses prohibited in the outer safety
subzone;



            ix.   Uses that attract birds.



         (b)   The following uses are permitted in the KS-IS
subzone if such use is permitted in the underlying zone and only if found to
conform to the Federal Aviation Administration guidelines:



            i.   Communications facilities;



            ii.   Golf course, except clubhouse;



            iii.   Landscaping, except trees;



            iv.   Outdoor storage;



            v.   Automobile parking;



            vi.   Streets;



            vii.   Utilities.



      (2)   KS-OS Outer Safety Subzone.



         (a)   Land use within the outer safety subzone is
intended to have low population densities and reduced lot coverages. 
Prohibited uses include:



            i.   Auditoriums/theaters;



            ii.   Churches/synagogues;



            iii.   Hospitals/convalescent homes;



            iv.   Hotels/motels;



            v.   Outdoor sports arenas;



            vi.   Outdoor amphitheaters;



            vii.   Residences;



            viii.   Schools;



            ix.   Transportation terminals.



         (b)   The following uses are permitted in the KS-OS
subzone if such use is permitted in the underlying zone and only if found to
conform to the Federal Aviation Administration guidelines:



            i.   Manufacturing;



            ii.   Light industrial;



            iii.   Research and development;



            iv.   Business parks/corporation offices;



            v.   Commercial offices;



            vi.   Commercial retail and wholesale;



            vii.   Golf course;



            viii.   Landscaping;



            ix.   Outdoor storage;



            x.   Automobile parking.



   (C)   Airport-Influenced Overlay Zone (KI).  Land uses in the
VCACLUP traffic pattern zone is intended to exclude large assemblages of
people and have reduced lot coverages.  Prohibited uses include:



      (1)   Auditoriums/theaters;



      (2)   Churches/synagogues;



      (3)   Hospitals/convalescent homes;



      (4)   Other high-occupancy uses;



      (5)   Outdoor amphitheaters;



      (6)   Outdoor arenas;



      (7)   Schools (with exception of flight schools);



      (8)   Transportation terminals.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.27.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Airport Operational Zone - KO.  Airport operational
facilities must be designed in accordance with the recommended standards of
the Federal Aviation Administration document AC 150/5300-4A, Utility
Airports, as minimum for Stage 1, basic utility airports except as amended
below:



      (1)   Minimum land area: 25 acres



      (2)   Minimum runway length: 2,000 feet, with 2,450-foot
maximum



      (3)   Dimensional standards and setbacks:



         (a)    Runway width: 45 feet



         (b)    Runway safety area width: 100 feet



         (c)    Landing strip length beyond runway end: 100 feet



         (d)   Taxiway width: 20 feet



         (e)    Runway centerline to taxiway centerline: 95 feet



         (f)    Runway centerline to property line: 150 feet



         (g)    Runway centerline to building restriction line,
taxiway side, both sides: 100 feet



         (h)   Taxiway centerline to airplane tiedown area: 20
feet



         (i)   Taxiway centerline to fixed or movable
obstruction: 50 feet



         (j)   Primary surface width: 200 feet



         (k)   Clear zone, width at start: 250



         (l)   Clear zone, runway end to start of clear zone: 200
feet



         (m)   Clear zone: 1,000 feet in length or 50 feet
vertical clearance between terrain and approach surface



         (n)   Clear zone, width at end of clear zone: 450 feet



         (o)   Approach slope: 20 to 1



      (4)   Yards.  All buildings must be set back from any
property line fronting on or paralleling a dedicated street or frontage road
a minimum of 15 feet.



      (5)   Maximum building height of structure: 35 feet.



      (6)   Lot coverage: All main buildings, accessory buildings,
and structures for nonresidential uses must cover not more than 50% of the
total building site including street or greenbelts. Residential structures
and uses are not permitted in the KO zone.



      (7)   Parking.  The provisions of Chapter 16.46 apply;
except, that all open parking areas must have a minimum of 10% of its area
devoted to permanently maintained landscape materials consisting of ground
cover, shrubs, trees and other plant materials.



      (8)   Aviation fuel must be stored in aircraft tanks, in
delivery units approved by the Fire Department, or in aviate fuel storage
tanks reserved for such use, as approved by the Fire Department.



   (B)   Airport Safety Overlay Zone (KS).



      (1)   KS-IS Inner Safety Subzone.



         (a)   Buildings and structures are prohibited in the
KS-IS zone.



      (2)   KS-OS Outer Safety Subzone.



         (a)   Lot coverage: All main buildings, accessory
buildings and structures must cover not more than 25% of the total building
site including any streets or greenbelts.



         (b)   Maximum building height of structure: 35 feet.



   (C)   Airport-Influenced Overlay Zone (KI).



      (1)   Lot coverage.



         (a)   Nonresidential uses: All main buildings, accessory
buildings, and structures for nonresidential uses must cover not more than
50% of the total building site including street or greenbelts.



         (b)   Residential uses:  All main buildings, accessory
buildings, and structures for residential uses must cover not more than 25%
of the total building site, including streets or greenbelts.



      (3)   Maximum building height of structure: 35 feet.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.27.050  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   The following performance standards apply to the Airport Operational
zone (KO), the Airport Safety Overlay Zone (KS) and Airport Influenced
Overlay Zone (KI):



   (A)   Surfacing and dust control.  All surfaces must be properly
drained, graded and maintained free of weeds, trash, and other debris.



   (B)   Waste disposal.  No harmful, noxious, or objectionable
discharge of any waste materials, fumes, dust, or smoke are permitted into or
upon the ground, sanitary or storm sewer system, water or water system, nor
into the atmosphere.  Incineration of waste materials is prohibited.  Food
related waste must be stored in a manner that does not attract birds.



   (C)   Heat and glare.  Any operation producing glare or heat must
be performed within a building or enclosed or screened area so that such
glare or heat is not perceptible, without instruments, beyond the property
lines of the parcel of origin.



   (D)   Electronic and radio interference.  No operation may emit
electrical, electronic, or radio emissions that will interfere with,
obstruct, or adversely affect the operation of air navigation aids and radio
communication.



   (E)   Vibration.  No operation is permitted that emits ground
vibrations perceptible without instruments beyond the property lines of the
parcel of origin.



   (F)   Fire insurance rating.  No operation may, by its nature,
increase the fire insurance rating for adjoining or adjacent property.



   (G)   Landscaping.  Required front and street side yards, excepting
pedestrian and vehicular access and all areas not otherwise covered with
buildings or paved, must be landscaped and maintained with planting
materials, or at least 75% of the surface-area must be in planting and the
remainder in landscaping aggregate, excluding asphalt.



   (H)   Fair disclosure.  A fair disclosure agreement and covenant
must be recorded on the deed for the property by the owner and/or developer
of the property.



   (I)   Nuisance.  All structures, landscaping, and other development
features must be designed to minimize their attraction of birds.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.27.060  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this chapter, any
applicable requirements in the following chapters apply to development in any
of the three airport zones:



Chapter 16.40:  General Property Development Standards



Chapter 16.44:  Fences, Wall, and Hedges



Chapter 16.46:  Off-Street Parking and Loading



Chapter 16.48:  Signs



Chapter 16.50:  Antennas and Other Telecommuni- cation Facilities



Chapter 16.54 -16.76:  Standards for Specific Land Uses



Chapters 16.110-16.118:  Nonconformities



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.29:  RAILROAD OVERLAY ZONE



Section



   16.29.010   Purpose and intent



   16.29.020   Land use regulations



   16.29.030   Additional development standards



§ 16.29.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The Railroad (RR) overlay zone is to provide for additional
property maintenance standards and use regulations on those properties
adjacent to railroad rights-of-way used for both freight, commercial
passenger, and tourist-oriented rail travel.



   (B)   The (RR) overlay zone may be used only in conjunction with an
underlying zone.



   (C)   The boundaries of the (RR) overlay correspond to the
boundaries of the railroad corridor, as identified in the City of Santa Paula
Land Use Element, which is 100 feet wide, with 50 feet on each side of the
centerline of the track.  This area is approximately 200 feet wide adjacent
to Santa Paula Depot between Davis Street and Ojai Street.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.29.020  LAND USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  In addition to uses permitted in the
underlying zone, the following uses are permitted:



      (1)   Tourist-oriented commercial uses where the underlying
zone is commercial or industrial in nature.



      (2)   Hiking, biking, and similar recreational trails.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  In addition to uses permitted in the
underlying zone, the following use(s) may be permitted subject to Conditional
Use Permit review pursuant to Chapter 16.218 (Conditional Use Permits) of
this Title 16:



      (1)   Train station.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.29.030  ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards apply in addition to the
requirements of the underlying zone:



   (A)   Along any property line abutting a railroad right-of-way, a
minimum 5-foot-wide landscaped setback must be provided for screening
purposes.  Such landscape screening must consist of trees capable of
attaining a minimum 15-foot height within 5 years of initial planting.



   (B)   Outdoor storage is permitted only within a rear or interior
side yard.  Such storage must be entirely shielded from view from any public
right-of- way by a combination of fencing, walls, and/or landscaping.  All
screening materials must be neatly maintained, in good repair, and kept in a
manner that all screening purposes are achieved.



   (C)   All manufacturing and processing activities must occur within
a fully enclosed building or other approved fully screened interior space.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.31:  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE



Section



   16.31.010   Purpose and intent



   16.31.020   Circumstances for use of PD Overlay Zone



   16.31.030   Application requirements



   16.31.040   Development standard modifications



   16.31.050   Modification to approved plans



   16.31.060   Time limit for use of planned development permit



§ 16.31.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The Planned Development (PD) overlay zone is established to
allow alternative development standards to be applied in limited
circumstances where a property or development would benefit from the
application of unique and innovative design; to permit greater design
flexibility than is feasible under the strict application of conventional
zoning and subdivision regulations; and to assist in preservation of areas of
natural scenic beauty.



   (B)   The PD overlay zone may only be used in conjunction with
another zone.  All regulations pertaining to the zone with which the PD
overlay zone is combined will apply to the combined district, except that the
specified requirements may be modified as provided for in this chapter.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.31.020  CIRCUMSTANCES FOR USE OF PD OVERLAY ZONE.



   The PD overlay zone may be considered for use only in the following
circumstances: 



   (A)   Where a property is proximate to public parks, public
buildings, areas of public interest such as locations of natural beauty, of
exceptional natural resources, and areas of historical significance;



   (B)   Where a disparity exists between adjacent zones warranting
special conditions to protect the more restricted zone; and/or



   (C)   Where a new residential project or conversion of an existing
residential use or uses proposes residential units on smaller lots than
permitted in the zone but provides compensating open space and recreational
facilities, provided overall density conforms to limits established in the
Santa Paula General Plan.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.31.030  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any proposal to apply the PD overlay zone to a property will
require a zone change pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 16.210 (Zone
Change) of this Title 16.



   (B)   An application for a zone change to the PD overlay zone will
also require a concurrent planned development permit application.  No
planned development permit application may be submitted for a property that
is not zoned PD or will not be so zoned concurrently with the planned
development permit.



   (C)   No permit will be issued for the grading of land, for the
construction, erection or moving of any building or structure, nor for the
use of any land within the Planned Development Overlay zone unless a planned
development permit was approved in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, that additions of up to 600 square feet, or up to
30% of the existing square footage, whichever is less, to existing
single-family dwellings or residential accessory structures on single-family
lots, which said additions conform to all ordinances of the city, including
the setback provisions of Chapter 16.13, and which are limited to a cut or
fill of two feet for the building pad, are exempt from the requirements of
obtaining a planned development permit.



   (D)   All PD overlay zone change and planned development permit
applications must be filed pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 16.202
(Applications, Processing, Filing, and Fees) of this Title 16.



   (E)   The planned development permit submittal requirements are as
follows:



      (1)   Context plan consisting of photos and analysis of
surrounding properties.



      (2)   Detailed and fully dimensioned plot plan drawn to scale,
clearly showing all property lines, existing and proposed buildings,
structures, streets, sidewalks, walls, fences, recreational vehicle storage,
patios, recreational area, lighting provisions, trash facilities, and other
information necessary for plan review.



      (3)   A grading plan drawn to a minimum 5-foot contour, which
indicates existing topography and proposed earth movement, finish grade
elevations, proposed cut-and-fill slopes, necessary cross-sections, and the
extent and method of drainage control.



      (4)   A map indicating existing and proposed utility systems
and services which includes, but is not limited to, sewage, fire hydrants,
water, gas, drainage, television reception, communication, and electrical
systems capable of serving the entire planned development.



      (5)   A detailed landscaping plan showing the size, location,
and type of landscaping proposed; the irrigation facilities; and method of
maintenance thereof.



      (6)   Elevations of each building, structure, or groups of
buildings shown on all sides.



      (7)   A full-color rendering that shows the general character
of architecture and reasonably depicts the typical design layout for
presentation to the Planning Commission.  A colored photo (minimum size 8
inches by 10 inches) may be substituted for the original as the file copy.



      (8)   Computation of the amount of improved and unimproved
open space in number of net square feet.



      (9)   Street cross-section details and approximate curb radii,
including public and private streets, if applicable.



      (10)   Any additional materials as determined by the Planning
Director to be necessary.



   (F)   All maps, plans, and diagrams must include reproducibles,
except for the required colored renderings.



   (G)    All drawings must be on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets.



   (H)   Each map, except elevations, must be drawn to an engineers'
scale of no smaller than 1 inch equals 50 feet and no larger than 1 inch
equals 10 feet.



   (I)   If more than one sheet for any exhibit is necessary, an index
sheet must be used showing the relationship of each sheet.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.31.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARD MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   In approving a planned development permit in a PD overlay zone
in accordance with the overall purposes and standards of this chapter, the
Planning Commission and City Council may impose special requirements and
permit variations from the standards of the underlying zone as follows:



      (1)   Lot size and dimensions.  The Commission or Council may
allow for reduced lot sizes or lot dimensions, provided overall project
density or intensity conforms to limits established in the Santa Paula
General Plan.



      (2)   Traffic circulation and parking.  The Commission or
Council may require the provision of a reasonable number of off-street
parking and loading spaces when not otherwise required for the zone when
traffic conditions such as reduced or limited street capacity or a clustering
of high-traffic generators are found to warrant same.  The Commission or
Council may require that parking areas, access, and traffic circulation
patterns be designed to segregate pedestrians from vehicles, prevent traffic
congestion within the parcel or on adjacent streets, and protect the privacy
of abutting uses and residential streets.



      (3)   Building height.  The Commission or Council may
require, where the privacy of abutting parcels are threatened, a reduction in
the building height limit normally permitted in a zone.  In other situations
where abutting property is not threatened and where additional building
height will not present incompatibilities or general public health and safety
concerns, heights in excess of the basic height limit of the zone may be
permitted.



      (4)   Yard area. 



         (a)   The Commission or Council may permit modifications
to the amount and disposition of yard space, provided that the aggregate yard
area provided must be at least equal to the aggregate area required by the
zones, and further provided that the yard areas at the boundary of the zone
do not conflict with the required yards of any abutting zone. 



         (b)   Interior yard space and other yard areas may be
required to be increased where density, height, or similar matters have been
increased.



      (5)   Landscaping.  The Commission or Council may require
additional landscaping to enhance the appearance of the use and the
neighborhood. 



      (6)   Appearance.  The Commission or Council may require a
design with orientation to provide for special treatment of buildings and
structures and layout of open spaces to avoid potentially unsightly or
undesirable aesthetic conditions. 



      (7)   Other.  The Commission or Council may impose other
controls or allow other deviations from standard requirements to achieve
project objectives, such as but not limited to permitted projections into
required yards, fence heights, and permitted landscaping materials.



   (B)   The Commission and Council, in allowing for such
modifications, must be guided by the overriding concern of community welfare
expressed by the goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan and
other adopted policies.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.31.050  MODIFICATION TO APPROVED PLANS.



   (A)   Subsequent modifications or changes to an approved planned
development permit will be processed in the same manner as the original
application.



   (B)   If the character of the proposed change is of a nature that
the intensity of the use of the parcel has not increased so as to have any
additional adverse effect on abutting parcels, or the general health, safety,
welfare and morals of the community, and where the initial conditions of
approval are still adequate for the protection of same as determined by the
Planning Director, the modification will be processed under a minor
modification permit, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.222 (Minor
Modifications) of this Title 16. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.31.060  TIME LIMIT FOR USE OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   After approval of a planned development permit, initiation of
the improvements authorized therein must be begun within 12 months, unless
some other period is specified by the Planning Commission, or the permit will
become null and void.



   (B)   A planned development permit subject to lapse may be renewed
for a single one-year period, provided that the application for renewal is
filed with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date, pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 16.222 (Minor Modifications) of this Title 16. 
Additional renewals will require a public hearing before the Planning
Commission.



   (C)   The Planning Commission may grant or deny an application for
renewal of a planned development permit.  As part of its action, the
Commission may also modify existing conditions of approval or add new
conditions to reflect any change in circumstances related to the planned
development permit and surrounding properties.



   (D)   In the event the Planning Commission denies the owner's
application for extension, the owner may appeal to the City Council.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.33:  HISTORIC LANDMARK OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS



Section



   16.33.010   Purpose and intent



   16.33.020   Procedures for establishment



   16.33.030   Review of projects



   16.33.040   [Reserved]



   16.33.050   Maintenance of property



   16.33.060   Alteration permit



   16.33.070   Consistency with other laws



   16.33.080   Other applicable regulations



§ 16.33.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this overlay district is to establish the protection and
recognition of historic buildings and neighborhoods with historic merit. 
The overlay will require special development and design review standards for
projects within this identified Historic Overlay district.  This chapter
provides for the identification and designation of historic places,
buildings, works of art, neighborhoods, and other objects of historic or
cultural interest within the city.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.33.020  PROCEDURES FOR ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   Applications for designation of a historic landmark may be
initiated by any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in
the property proposed for the landmark designation.  The authorized agent of
any person with a legal vested interest may also initiate an application. 
The Planning Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to
apply prior to the acceptance of any application.



   (B)   Applications for designation of a historic district may be
initiated by any individual, the Planning Director, the Planning Commission,
or the City Council.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.33.030  REVIEW OF PROJECTS.



   (A)   Determination of application's merit.  Upon acceptance of an
application for designation of a historic landmark or historic district as
complete, the Planning Director will forward the application to the Design
Assistance Committee for a preliminary assessment of the merits of the
application, in accordance with City Council Ordinance No. 816.



   (B)   No merit determination.  If the Design Assistance Committee
determines that the application has no merit, the application will be
rejected and no further action will be taken, unless an appeal to the
Historic Preservation Commission is filed pursuant to the  provisions of
Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations).



   (C)   Merit determination.  If the Design Assistance Committee
determines that the proposed historic landmark or district designation has
merit, the Commission will set a date for a public hearing to consider the
application.



   (D)   Public hearing - Historic Preservation Commission. 



      (1)   A public hearing before the Historic Preservation
Commission will be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 16.204 (Public Hearings).



      (2)   At the public hearing, the Commission will review the
application and receive evidence as to how or why the proposed historic
landmark or district represents and exemplifies an important aspect of the
cultural or architectural history of the City of Santa Paula or Ventura
County. 



      (3)   The Commission will act by resolution to recommend to
the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
proposed application. 



      (4)   The Commission's resolution will include its
recommendation and will be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the
matter for public hearing before the City Council. 



   (E)   Public hearing - City Council.



      (1)   Upon receipt of the Historic Preservation Commission
resolution, the City Clerk will set the matter for hearing before the City
Council as provided for in Chapter 16.204 (Public Hearings).



      (2)   At the hearing, the City Council will review the
Commission's recommendation and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed designation of a historic landmark or district furthers the goals of
the city with respect to the identification and protection of important
historic and cultural resources.



      (3)   The City Council will act by ordinance to approve,
approve with modifications, or deny the application.  The Council's action
will be final and will become effective upon the effective date of the
ordinance.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.33.040  [RESERVED.]



§ 16.33.050  MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY.



   The owner or individual in charge of a designated landmark or a
structure within a historic district must maintain the designated landmark or
structure within the historic district in good condition, in accordance with
City Council Ordinance No. 816.  If the owner or individual in charge fails
to make the necessary improvements for maintenance, the city may make the
improvements and charge the costs as a lien against the property.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.33.060  ALTERATION PERMIT.



   (A)   Public hearings will be required for the review and approval
of a permit for alteration, restoration, construction, removal or demolition
of or on a designated historic landmark or property within the historic
district, unless the Building Official, in accordance with City Council
Ordinance No. 816, declares the subject structure unsafe. 



   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission will serve as the hearing
body on matters related to the approval/disapproval of alteration permits.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.33.070  CONSISTENCY WITH OTHER LAWS.



   When state and federal laws are in conflict with the provisions for
preservation and maintenance of historic landmarks outlined in this Title 16
and City Council Ordinance No. 816, the provisions of state and federal laws
will prevail to the extent of the conflict.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.33.080  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this Chapter 16.33, the
provisions of Chapter 16.200 (Administration of the Development Code) and
City Council Ordinance No. 816 will apply to the designation of historic
landmarks and districts.



Chapter 16.232:  Tree Removal Permit



City Council Ordinance No. 816



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.34:  HISTORICAL PROPERTY AGREEMENTS



Section



   16.34.010   Purpose



   16.34.020   Definitions



   16.34.030   Application for agreement



   16.34.040   Review process; Commission



   16.34.050   Review process; City Council consideration



   16.34.060   Recording



   16.34.070   Notice for public hearings



   16.34.080   Agreement; general conditions



   16.34.090   Termination



   16.34.100   Automatic renewal; nonrenewal



   16.34.110   Fees



   16.34.120   Nonexclusive



§ 16.34.010  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is intended to implement the Mills Act (Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 50280, et seq.) for the purpose of authorizing the city to enter into
agreements with private owners of historical property for rehabilitation,
restoration, preservation, and maintenance of qualified historical property.
To provide incentive for such property owners, this Chapter will allow
certain tax reductions pursuant to Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code §§ 439, et seq.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.020  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this article. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter will have the
meanings stated elsewhere in this code, or under the Act, if defined there.



   ACT means the Mills Act as set forth at Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 50280,
et seq.



   AGREEMENT means a written contract entered into between the city and an
owner in accordance with this chapter.



   COMMISSION means the Historic Preservation Commission established by
this code;



   DIRECTOR means the Planning Director or other person designated by the
City Manager;



   OWNER means a person owning a qualified historical property;



   QUALIFIED HISTORICAL PROPERTY means privately owned property that is
not exempt from property taxation that is all of the following:



      (1)   Individually listed in the National Register of Historic
Places or the California Register of Historic Resources;



      (2)   Designated as a city landmark pursuant to Ordinance No.
816 (adopted November 21, 1984) or as set forth by this code; and



      (3)   A commercial use.



   WORK includes rehabilitation, restoration, preservation, or maintenance
of a qualified historical property.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.030  APPLICATION FOR AGREEMENT.



   An owner, or designee, may apply to the Director for an agreement on a
form provided by the Director. The application must contain at least the
following:



   (A)   The address and location of the qualified historical property;



   (B)   Documentary evidence that the property is a qualified
historical property;



   (C)   A legal description of the property;



   (D)   A title report or other evidence verifying the owner's
property interest in the qualified historical property;



   (E)   The nature and estimated cost of proposed work;



   (F)   A maintenance plan for the qualified historical property;



   (G)   Such additional information the Director reasonably requires
to thoroughly evaluate an application for an agreement.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.040  REVIEW PROCESS;  COMMISSION.



   (A)   Within 30 days after receiving a complete application, the
Director must determine whether or not an application should be considered
for an agreement. The Director's failure to render a decision within 30 days
is deemed a denial.



   (B)   If the Director determines an application should be considered
for an agreement, the Director will forward a recommendation to the
Commission for Public Hearing and Consideration.



   (C)   Not later than 30 days after the Director forwards an
application, the Commission should hold a public hearing to review the
application for the agreement and consider whether to recommend to the City
Council whether an agreement is desirable. Failure to conduct a public
hearing, or make a recommendation, within this time period will have no
effect on the application or the City's decision regarding the application.



   (D)   Any Commission recommendation to the City Council will be set
forth in a written resolution that makes findings supporting the Commission's
recommendations. Such findings should include, if applicable, how the work
proposed by the application will benefit the city.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.050  REVIEW PROCESS - CITY COUNCIL CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   Within 30 days after the Commission makes a recommendation,
the City Council should conduct a public hearing to consider the
recommendation and other evidence. Failure to conduct a public hearing, or
make a recommendation, within this time period will have no effect on the
application or the city's decision regarding the application.



   (B)   Following the public hearing, the city Council may take any
appropriate action regarding an application for an agreement including,
without limitation, authorizing the city manager, or designee, to enter into
an agreement with an owner; denying the application; or remanding the
application back to the Commission for additional information.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.060  RECORDING.



   If the City Council authorizes an agreement, the City Clerk must cause
such a contract to be recorded with the Ventura County Recorder's office
within 20 days after the agreement is fully executed.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.070  NOTICE FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   Notices for the public hearings set forth in this chapter will be
accomplished in accordance with Title 16 of this Code and Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 6061.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.080  AGREEMENT; GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Completion of work. Agreements must include terms and
conditions requiring the owner to complete the work and maintain the
qualified historical property in accordance with the owner's maintenance
plan. So long as the owner performs the work and maintains the qualified
historical property, that property is eligible for reassessment of valuation
pursuant to Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code §§ 439, et seq. (including, if
applicable, subsequently enacted amendments) if the Ventura County Assessor
determines that those provisions of the California Revenue and Taxation Code
apply to the qualified historical property.



   (B)   Term. The term of agreements are a minimum of ten years.



   (C)   Compliance with applicable law. In addition to all other
applicable laws, the owner must agree to complete the work and maintain the
qualified historical property in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the office of Historic Preservation of the California Department of Parks and
Recreation and the United States Secretary of the Interior's standards for
the treatment of historic properties.



   (D)   Inspections. The owner must give the city permission to
periodically examine the interior and exterior of the qualified historical
property. Such permission must extend to the Ventura County Assessor and the
state of California including, without limitation, the State Board of
Equalization, so that the owners' continued compliance with the agreement can
be verified.



   (E)   Binding on successors. Agreements must include a requirement
that the agreement be binding upon, and inure to the benefit of, all
successors in interest of the owner. A successor in interest will have all of
the rights and obligations of the original owner.



   (F)   Indemnification. Agreements must include a hold harmless
provision which will, in part, cause owners to indemnify the city, its
elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and agents from any
liability arising from the owner's activities. The provision must be in a
form approved by the city attorney.



   (G)   Insurance. Owners must obtain liability insurance from an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state of California and
having a financial rating in Best's Insurance Guide of not less than "A VII."
Such insurance will provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for
death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way
connected with the owner's activities. Such insurance will be based upon the
nature of the franchisee's activities, the risks foreseeably involved, and
will be in the amount prescribed by city council resolution or city policy.
Insurance will name the city and the city's elected and appointed officials,
officers, and employees as additional insureds under the coverage afforded.
In addition, such insurance will be primary and noncontributing with respect
to any other insurance available to the city and will include a severability
of interest (cross-liability) clause.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.090  TERMINATION.



   (A)   Agreements must include a provision allowing the City Council
to terminate the agreement if, after a public hearing, it finds any one of
the following:



      (1)   The owner breached the agreement;



      (2)   The property subject to the agreement no longer meets
the definition of a qualified historical property set forth in this chapter;
or



      (3)   The owner failed to pay reasonable inspection fees or
otherwise failed to cooperate in allowing periodic inspections of the
property as required by this chapter or the agreement.



   (B)   Should an agreement be terminated in accordance with this
chapter, the owner must pay a cancellation fee of 12.5% of the full value of
the property at the time of cancellation as determined by the Ventura County
Assessor, or such other percentage or amount provided by applicable law,
without regard to the agreement.



   (C)   Should a qualified historical property be acquired through
eminent domain or in lieu of eminent domain, and the City Council determines
that such acquisition frustrates the purpose of the agreement; the agreement
will be terminated without a cancellation fee.



   (D)   The City Council's authority to terminate any agreement
pursuant to this chapter is not exclusive and is cumulative with all other
remedies available in law or equity.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.100  AUTOMATIC RENEWAL; NONRENEWAL.



   (A)   Agreements must contain a clause that automatically renews the
term of the agreement, upon the anniversary date of its initial term, for an
additional term of one year.



   (B)   Should an agreement contain an automatic renewal clause, then
the agreement may be cancelled as follows:



      (1)   By the city upon written cancellation notice at least 60
days before the renewal date;



      (2)   By the owner upon written cancellation notice at least
90 days before the renewal date.



   (C)   Should a nonrenewal notice be served by either the city or the
owner, the agreement will remain in effect until its anniversary date.



   (D)   An owner may, upon receipt of a nonrenewal notice from the
city, make a written protest to the City Council of the nonrenewal. Such
written protest must state with specificity the reasons for such protest. The
City Council may, at any time before the effective date of the nonrenewal,
rescind the nonrenewal notice.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.110  FEES.



   (A)   Fees to compensate the city for processing and administering
applications for agreements may be adopted by City Council resolution. Such
fees may not amount to more than 100% of the amount needed to reimburse the
city for processing costs of the agreement including, without limitation,
reasonable attorney's fees and administrative costs.



   (B)   The city may impose separate inspection fees, after approving
an agreement, to reimburse the city for actual inspection costs associated
with enforcing the agreement and this chapter.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



§ 16.34.120  NONEXCLUSIVE.



   Utilizing this chapter is only one method of preserving historically
significant properties within the city's jurisdiction. Nothing in this
chapter is intended to preclude, nor does it, the city or an owners to take
other action for preserving historically significant properties.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-16-09)



CHAPTER 16.35:  HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES OVERLAY ZONE



Section



   16.35.01   Purpose and intent



   16.35.02   Definitions



   16.35.03   Application



   16.35.04   Eligibility criteria



   16.35.05   Relationship to State Density Bonus Law



   16.35.06   Procedure



   16.35.07   Site development permit



   16.35.08   Temporary uses permitted



   16.35.09   Accessory uses permitted



   16.35.10   Parking standards, incentives and waivers



   16.35.11   Site development standards for residential uses



   16.35.12   General requirements



   16.35.13   Application



   16.35.14   Affordable housing agreement



   16.35.15   Administration and appeals



§ 16.35.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to allow development of affordable
housing within the Commercial/Light Industrial zone.  The intent is to
facilitate the realization of affordable housing objectives presented in the
Santa Paula Housing Element of the General Plan.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING - Means dwelling units made available to moderate,
low, and very low income households.



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING COST - Has the same meaning as set forth in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 50052.5, and any successor statute or regulation.



   AFFORDABLE RENT - Has the same meaning as set forth in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 50053, and any successor statute or regulation.



   AREA MEDIAN INCOME - Has the same meaning as set forth in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 50093, and any successor statute or regulation.



   ASSEMBLY HALL - Means a building or portion of a building used for
large scale public or private gatherings of people.  For example, and
without limitation, ASSEMBLY HALLS include private educational facilities;
clubs, and similar kinds of facilities whether available for public or
private use.



   CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY - Has the same meaning as set forth in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 159676, for children 12 years of age or younger who
are residents of the qualified housing development.



   DEVELOPMENT SITE - Means the site on which the qualified housing
development will be constructed.



   DEVELOPMENT STANDARD - Means site or construction conditions that apply
to a residential development pursuant to applicable law.



   DIRECTOR - Means the Director or such other director designated by the
City Manager.



   HOUSEHOLD - Means one person living alone or two or more persons
sharing residency whose income is considered for housing payments.



   HUD - Means the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.



   INCENTIVE - Has the same meaning as Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 and
includes reduction in site development standards, modification of zoning
regulations, approval of mixed use zoning and other incentives that would
result in cost reductions.



   LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS - Mean households where the gross annual income
does not exceed 80% of the county median household income as defined in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 50079.5, and any successor statute or regulation.



   MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD - Means a household with an income not
exceeding qualifying limits set for “persons and families of low or
moderate income” in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50093, and any successor
statute or regulation.



   QUALIFIED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT - Means a rental housing project that
meets the eligibility criteria set forth in this chapter.



   VERY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS - Means households where the gross annual
income does not exceed 50% of the county median household income as defined
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50105, and any successor statute or
regulation.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.03  APPLICATION.



   (A)   This section applies to affordable housing projects that are
located in the Commercial/Light Industrial zone.



   (B)   Affordable housing projects to which this section applies
include the following:



      (1)   Projects located on vacant sites.



      (2)   Projects located on building sites or within structures
that include vacant residential, commercial or industrial uses.



      (3)   Projects where residential uses replace commercial or
industrial uses in a pre-existing structure.



   (C)   In all cases, the residential uses must satisfy the
regulations in this chapter including, without limitation, the site
development standards.



   (D)   Any commercial or industrial uses must comply with the
applicable zoning regulations.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.04  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.



   To be considered a qualified housing development under this chapter,
the affordable housing development must meet the following criteria:



   (A)   It must be a rental project.



   (B)   100% of the units must be available for affordable housing
(the manager’s unit is exempted).



   (C)   At least 60% of the total number of units must be reserved for
low-income households.  This percentage may be decreased to 45% if there
will be greater than 30% of the total number of units reserved for very-low
income households.



   (D)   At least 20% of the total number of units must be reserved for
very-low income households.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.05  RELATIONSHIP TO STATE DENSITY BONUS LAW.



   Since the affordability requirements of this chapter are more
restrictive than those in State Density Bonus Law, it is assumed that any
qualified housing development will also qualify for a density bonus.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.06  PROCEDURE.



   The Director will review an application received for a site development
permit issued in accordance with this chapter and must issue a site
development permit within 60 days of deeming the application complete if the
Director finds all of the following:



   (A)   The application complies with all applicable law including,
without limitation, this chapter;



   (B)   The application complies with the design requirements of this
chapter;



   (C)   The application is consistent with the General Plan and this
code.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.07  SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   The qualified housing projects allowed by this chapter require
a SDP.



   (B)   Applications for a site development permit pursuant to this
chapter are subject to an administrative review process.  Pursuant to Cal.
Gov’t Code § 65583.2(i), such permits do not require discretionary local
government review or  approval that constitutes a project for purposes Cal.
Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq.



   (C)   The administrative review process does not include the
requirement for a public hearing.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.08  TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED.



   Temporary uses identified by this chapter are allowed.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.09  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   The following accessory uses and structures are allowed when
customarily associated with, and subordinate to, a permitted residential use
on the same development site and when consistent with the approved site
development permit for the project.



   (A)   Uses which include:



      (1)   Garages and carports;



      (2)   Fences and walls;



      (3)   Patio covers; and



      (4)   Swimming pools.



   (B)   All signs except roof signs or projecting signs.



   (C)   Noncommercial keeping of pets and animals.



   (D)   Home occupations.



   (E)   Manager’s unit which is exempt from affordability
requirements.



   (F)   Child day care facility.



   (G)   Accessory uses and structures which the Director finds
consistent with the design of the development project and consistent with the
purpose and intent of these regulations.



   (H)   Assembly halls.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.10  PARKING STANDARDS, INCENTIVES AND WAIVERS.



   (A)   If the qualified housing development meets the criteria set
forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 (State Density Bonus Law) and is eligible
to receive a density bonus, the applicant may request that the required
number of parking spaces set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 be applied
to the project.



   (B)   Parking space requirements for projects eligible for a density
bonus are as follows (inclusive of handicapped and guest parking):



      (1)   Zero to one bedroom:  one on-site parking space;



      (2)   Two to three bedrooms:  two on-site parking spaces;



      (3)   Four or more bedrooms:  two and one-half on-site
parking spaces.



      (4)   These parking space requirements are considered an
alternative site development standard applied to the project and will not be
considered as one of the incentives for which the project may be eligible.



   (C)   In addition to the reduced parking space requirements,
applicants with qualified housing developments that qualify for a density
bonus are entitled to request from one to three incentives that would result
in the reduction of affordable housing costs based upon their level of
affordability.  The applicant will receive the following incentives or
concessions:



      (1)   One incentive or concessions for projects that include
at least 10% of the total units for lower income households, at least 5% for
very low income households, or at least 10% for persons and families of
moderate income in a common interest development.



      (2)   Two incentives or concessions for projects that include
at least 20% of the total units for lower income households, at least 10% for
very low income households, or at least 20% for persons and families of
moderate income in a common interest development.



      (3)   Three incentives or concessions for projects that
include at least 30% of the total units for lower income households, at least
15% for very low income households, or at least 30% for persons and families
of moderate income in a common interest development.



   (D)   The requested incentives must be granted unless one of the
following findings is made:



      (1)   The concession or incentive is not required in order to
provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code
§ 50052.5, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in
Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(c).



      (2)   The concession or incentive would have a specific
adverse impact, as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65589.5(d)(2), upon public
health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is
listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there
is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific
adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and
moderate-income households.



   (E)   Applicants may also request additional waivers to development
standards.  Each waiver, or modification, requested must demonstrate the
waiver is necessary to physically accommodate the number of units to which
the developer is entitled under Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65915 et seq.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.11  SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES.



   (A)   The site development standards for residential uses are the
base site development standards of the zoning district in which the qualified
housing development is located.  The maximum density for each development
site is 21 dwelling units per gross acre.  Parking requirements must be in
accordance with the residential requirements of § 16.35.10 of this ordinance
or according to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65915 et seq.



   (B)   Child care facilities may be included in the qualified housing
development at the discretion of the applicant and are subject to an
administrative review process.  They do not require a separate use permit. 
The child care facility would be available only to children who reside in the
qualified housing development.



   (C)   The following are the base district site development standards
for residential uses and co-located child care facilities in the zones where
qualified housing developments can be developed:



      (1)   Twenty percent of the lot is to be open space (10% must
contain amenities, 10% must contain landscaping);



      (2)   Front yard setback 20 feet;



      (3)   Rear yard setback 20 feet (single story);



      (4)   Rear yard setback 15 feet (second story or higher); and



      (5)   Building height: 3 stories, maximum 45 feet high.



   (D)   Landscaping must be installed and maintained as required by
the city landscape regulations.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.12  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The following conditions apply to all qualified housing developments:



   (A)   Occupancy standards for each dwelling unit must meet the
minimum standards of the 1997 California Uniform Housing Code or the
California Employee Housing Act, depending upon which is applicable.



   (B)   Before the city issues a certificate of occupancy, the owner
must submit a management plan that provides for on-site property management
subject to the Director’s approval.



   (C)   Dwelling units must remain affordable in the original
affordability category for a period of not less than 55 years.



   (D)   When determining the maximum affordable rent, the Director
must use following HUD guidelines regarding household and unit size
assumptions:



 


Unit Size

 

Household Size



Studio
 
1 person


1-bedroom
 
2 persons


2-bedroom
 
4 persons


3-bedroom
 
6 persons


4-bedroom
 
8 persons



 



   (E)   A building facade color and materials palette must be
submitted for approval by the Director before the city issues any grading or
building permit.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.13  APPLICATION.



   Applications for a qualified housing development must include a
description of the following:



   (A)   A narrative of the purpose and the scope of the qualified
housing development.



   (B)   Identification of the neighborhood that will be served by the
qualified housing development.  A map with boundaries of the qualified
housing development must be included.



   (C)   Documentation of neighborhood services (public transportation,
schools, shopping, etc.).



   (D)   An explanation regarding how the qualified housing development
promotes affordable housing.



   (E)   A discussion regarding any other relevant issues regarding
land use.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.14  AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT.



   (A)   A written agreement must be executed between the developer and
city that specifies the number and type of all affordable housing within a
qualified housing development; the formula for determining rental rates of
all affordable housing; the method of providing proof of eligibility as a
very low, low, or moderate-income household; and such additional information
as may be required by the city to determine the developer’s compliance with
this chapter.



   (B)   Such an agreement must specify that the required qualified
housing development must be reserved for and rented to very low and
low-income households.  Further, the term of such an agreement must be at
least 55 years.



   (C)   The agreement must be in a form approved by the City Attorney,
and, upon execution of the agreement, it must be recorded with the Ventura
County Recorder’s office.



   (D)   A new deed restriction must be executed and recorded upon each
change of ownership to maintain the restrictions on qualified housing
development before the term for such restrictions expires.



   (E)   A certificate of occupancy cannot be issued for a project
subject to the provisions of this section until after the agreement required
by this section is executed.



   (F)   The obligation of the owner to provide for management of the
qualified housing development including maintenance.  Management must also
monitor the use of parking spaces within the qualified housing development to
assure that the parking spaces are provided, maintained and used in
accordance with the terms of the affordable housing agreement.



   (G)   The obligation of the owner to pay the costs of monitoring the
continued affordability of the project by the city.  The monitoring program
and associated fees will be established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.35.15  ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS.



   The Director is authorized to administer this chapter.  An applicant
may appeal any decision of the Director to the Planning Commission by filing
a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten calendar days after
notice of the Director’s action has been communicated to the applicant.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



CHAPTER 16.40:  GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



Section



   16.40.010   Purpose and intent



   16.40.020   Access and circulation



   16.40.030   Boundary walls



   16.40.040   Building height measurement



   16.40.050   Clear-sight triangle area



   16.40.060   Drainage and storm water control



   16.40.070   Mechanical equipment screening



   16.40.080   Outdoor sales



   16.40.090   Property maintenance



   16.40.100   Recreational vehicle parking and storage



   16.40.110   Solid waste/recycling receptacles and enclosures



   16.40.120   Substandard lots



   16.40.130   Through lots



   16.40.140   Permitted projections into required setbacks



   16.40.150   Yard regulations



   16.40.160   Rooftop solar energy systems



§ 16.40.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This chapter establishes site planning, development standard, property
maintenance, and property use regulations applicable to all properties in the
city.  This chapter also sets forth special land use regulations and
development standards that apply to specified uses that are permitted in
several zones.



   The regulations contained in this chapter are established to enhance
the appearance of the community; to provide measurable standards of
appropriate, acceptable, and functional site design; to deter blighting and
nuisance conditions; to minimize hazards to the public; and to protect
private investments made in private property.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.020  ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.



   (A)   Safe, adequate, and legal access required.



      (1)   Every development site must be provided, to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer, with safe and adequate vehicle and
pedestrian access that minimizes traffic hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.



      (2)   Every development site must have legal access to a
public street in the form of either direct parcel frontage on such a street,
permanent access via a public or private easement, or access via a recorded
reciprocal access agreement.  Shared driveways are not permitted.



   (B)   Circulation.  Every development project must provide safe and
adequate internal vehicle and pedestrian circulation that, to the maximum
extent feasible based on specific development site physical characteristics,
separates pedestrian circulation from vehicular circulation, incorporates
defensible space design considerations, and complements the internal
circulation and public access provided on any adjacent development sites. 
Where feasible, parking lots must connect.  Future vehicle and pedestrian
connections must also be provided.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.030  BOUNDARY WALLS.



   Wherever a boundary wall is required by this Title 16 to separate
abutting land uses, such wall must be constructed of materials complementary
in style, color, and form to the structure or structures on the same
development site as the wall.  Through the design review, conditional use
permit, or similar project review process, conditions may be placed on the
permit approval requiring additional wall treatment, including, but not
limited to, landscaping, wall placement and wall height.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.040  BUILDING HEIGHT MEASUREMENT.



   Building height must be measured as set forth in § 16.05.030 ("B"
Definitions) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.050  CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE AREA.



   The intent of the clear-sight triangle area is to ensure visibility for
operators of motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians on intersecting
roadways.  Within a clear-sight triangle area, nothing may be placed,
planted, erected, or allowed to grow that extends above 36 inches in height,
measured from the adjacent street, alley, or sidewalk grade (Figure 40-1). 
However, pole signs with a sign face that is at least eight feet above grade
may be placed within a clear-sight triangle area. 







Figure 40-1



Clear-Sight Triangle Area



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.060  DRAINAGE AND STORM WATER CONTROL.



   All development projects must include on-site drainage and storm water
control improvements which, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, safely
and adequately convey runoff to public drainage control and storm drain
facilities, avoid impact on adjacent properties, and meet applicable National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System requirements.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.070  MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREENING.



   All mechanical and electrical equipment, including ducting and piping,
whether located at ground level or on a rooftop, must be screened from
view.  Such screening must be compatible with and complementary to the
architectural style and detail of the structure that they serve and must be
located in a position satisfactory to the Fire Marshal and the Planning
Director, or their designees.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.080  OUTDOOR SALES.



   Except as otherwise provided by this Code, the outdoor display of goods
and materials for sale, lease, or rent, except for automobiles, motorcycles,
recreational vehicles, and similar vehicles, is not permitted unless
associated with a special event for which a Temporary Use Permit has been
granted pursuant the provisions of Chapter 16.228 of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1201, passed 2-17-09)



§ 16.40.090  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All properties in the city must be maintained in a manner
which avoids potentially adverse health, safety, and aesthetic conditions,
and which is consistent with any property maintenance regulations adopted by
the city.



   (B)   At a minimum, the following property maintenance standards
apply:



      (1)   Abandoned and inoperable automobiles; recreational
vehicles; camper shells; or boats must not be kept on an unscreened driveway
of private property for more than seven days.



      (2)   Debris, rubbish, and trash, including but not limited to
discarded furniture, appliances, boxes, toys, building materials, etc., must
not be visible from public rights-of-way for more than three days.



      (3)   All structures and walls must be maintained free of
graffiti.



      (4)   Structurally unsafe buildings, including but not limited
to those with known fire hazards; faulty weather protection broken roofs;
windows and doors; partially constructed structures when construction has
ceased; unoccupied buildings that are left open; hazardous fences or walls;
abandoned signs; and damaged buildings must be demolished, removed, or fenced
to prevent public access.



      (5)   Clotheslines are not allowed in front yards, nor may
fences, walls, doors or windows be used as clotheslines.



      (6)   Erosion, subsidence, and surface water problems within a
property must be abated.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.100  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Front yard parking time limit.  No recreational vehicle, or
any trailer used for towing or parking such vehicle, is permitted to be
parked in any front yard, including any driveway or portion of a driveway
within a front yard, in any zone district for a time period exceeding 48
hours.



   (B)   Size and number limit of vehicles in residential zone
districts.  Parking of recreational vehicles is permitted in the side and
rear yards of lots in residential zone districts, subject to the following
restrictions:



      (1)   A maximum of one recreational vehicle is permitted on a
residential property; and



      (2)   The vehicle does not exceed a height of 96 inches or a
length of 32 feet; and 



      (3)   The vehicle is set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
front property line and three feet from the side and rear property lines.



   (C)   Recreational vehicle storage.  Recreational vehicle storage
in any nonresidential zone district must be permitted only in approved
storage facilities.  Screening must be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 16.46.130 of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.110  SOLID WASTE/RECYCLING RECEPTACLES AND ENCLOSURES.



   (A)   Facilities required.  The design of any new, substantially
remodeled, or expanded multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, or
institutional building or structure must provide for solid waste storage
facilities and enclosures that will accommodate anticipated solid waste
collection needs, will allow for efficient and safe waste removal, and will
accommodate collection and removal of recyclable materials. 



   (B)   Site development standards.



      (1)   Solid waste storage areas must be located where they do
not interfere with the traffic patterns of persons or vehicles.



      (2)   Solid waste storage areas must be located where they are
readily accessible to collection personnel at all times.



      (3)   Solid waste storage enclosures for residential
developments must be located where they are screened from view from public
streets and highways.



      (4)   Solid waste storage areas must be provided on a level
surface so that storage containers remain at rest without auxiliary
restraining devices.



   (C)   Solid waste storage area enclosures.



      (1)   All commercial and industrial developments and all
apartment or condominium developments of three or more dwelling units per lot
or building site must provide enclosures for refuse containers built to city
standards.



      (2)   The exterior architectural treatment and color of waste
storage areas must be compatible with the main building treatment. 



      (3)   All business and property owners are responsible for
policing trash and debris generated from their property.



      (4)   Solid waste storage areas must not be allowed within the
front 20 feet of a property, nor in the side ten feet on the street side of a
corner lot.



      (5)   All solid waste enclosures must have an opaque gate with
a closable latch.



      (6)   Each solid waste enclosure must be constructed to have
the minimum dimensions of 12 feet wide, eight feet deep and five feet high,
and must include a roof in accordance with Ventura County Storm Water Urban
Impact Mitigation Plan (SQUIMP) requirements.  The city may require a larger
enclosure as needed to accommodate solid waste collection and recyclable
materials containers.  The configuration of the enclosure may be varied to
accommodate the design of the site and number of containers over the minimum
needed.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.120  SUBSTANDARD LOTS.



   When a lot has less than the minimum required area, width, or depth
stipulated for the zone district in which it is located, and provided such
lot was of record as a legal lot on the effective date of any ordinance
establishing minimum lot area, width, or depth, such lot must be considered
to meet the applicable minimum lot area, width, or depth requirements for
that zone district. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.130  THROUGH LOTS.



   (A)   Subdivisions must be designed without through lots, if
possible.



   (B)   On a through lot, either lot line adjacent to the public
right-of-way may be designated as the front lot line.



   (C)   In such cases, the minimum rear yard setback must equal the
average setback of primary structures on the adjoining lots.  Where such
adjoining lots are undeveloped, the minimum rear yard setback must conform to
the front yard setback for the zone district in which the property is located.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.140  PERMITTED PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED SETBACKS.



   Architectural and structural features on a building are permitted to
project into a required setback as set forth in Table 40-1, but in all cases
must be at least three feet from any property line.



 


TABLE 40-1
Permitted Projections into Required Setback Areas




Feature

 

Permitted Projection



Eaves, cornices, bay windows, other architectural features not providing
floor space
 
2 ft. maximum


Fireplace structures, 8 ft. wide or less
 
2 ft. maximum


Stairways, fire escapes
 
Pursuant to Building Code


Uncovered porches at first floor level, handicap ramps
 
6 ft. into front and side yard


Balconies
 
3 ft. maximum



 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.150  YARD REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All required yards and setback areas must be unobstructed from
the ground to the sky except for landscaping, walkways, required driveway and
similar features.



   (B)   No parcel or development site may be divided or reduced in
area or dimension in any manner that causes a required yard area to be
reduced below the minimum standard for the zone district in which the parcel
or development site is located.



   (C)   When a common lot line separating two or more contiguous lots
is covered by a building or buildings, or when such lots are used as a single
development site, such lots constitute a single development site, and the
yard setbacks required by this Title 16 will not apply to the common lot line.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.40.160  ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   This section sets forth requirements for permitting of solar energy
systems installed on roofs.



   (A)   Administrative permit requirements. Rooftop solar energy
systems shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Rooftop energy systems may be installed upon issuance of
an administrative permit in compliance with Chapter 16.238.



      (2)   Applications for rooftop energy systems may be submitted
electronically, and an electronic signature shall be accepted in lieu of a
wet signature.



      (3)   A complete application meeting the requirements of the
city’s approved streamlined solar permitting checklist shall be approved in
accordance with Chapter 16.40 upon successful completion of an inspection by
the Director or his or her designee. No more than one inspection shall be
required except where the system fails an initial inspection or a separate
fire safety inspection is required.



      (4)   Notwithstanding § 16.238.07, review of an application
for an administrative permit for a rooftop energy system shall be limited to
a determination of whether the system meets all health and safety
requirements of federal and state law, and local standards and regulations
necessary to ensure that the proposed system will not have a specific,
adverse impact upon the public health or safety.



      (5)   Notwithstanding subparagraph (4) above, a conditional
use permit shall be required where the Director finds, based on substantial
evidence, that the solar energy system could have specific, adverse impact on
public health and safety. If the Director finds that a conditional use permit
is required, such permit shall not be denied unless the Director makes
written findings based on substantial evidence in the record that the
proposed system would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health
and safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or
avoid that impact.



      (6)   Any conditions imposed on a permit to install a rooftop
energy system shall be designed to mitigate specific, adverse impacts upon
the public health and safety at the lowest cost possible.



      (7)   Development standards. Rooftop energy systems shall
conform to all applicable height standards as set forth in Title 16 of the
Santa Paula Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1257, passed 10-19-15)



CHAPTER 16.42:  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



Section



   16.42.010   Purpose and intent



   16.42.020   Air quality



   16.42.030   Electrical interference



   16.42.040   Hazardous materials



   16.42.050   Light and glare



   16.42.060   Odors



   16.42.070   Noise



§ 16.42.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Performance standards are established to ensure compatibility between
adjacent land uses, to prevent environment degradation, and to establish
standards that work to protect community health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.42.020  AIR QUALITY.



   (A)   No smoke of any type will be emitted from a source in excess
of Ventura County Air Pollution Control District (VCAPCD) standards.



   (B)   No elements of dust, fly ash, vapors, fumes, gases or other
forms of air pollution will be permitted in excess of the standards set by
the VCAPCD or that can cause damage to human health, animals, vegetation, or
that can cause excessive soiling at any location.



   (C)   In enforcing these regulations, the city will use the same
point of measurement as utilized by the VCAPCD.



   (D)   Before a building or occupancy permit is issued by the city,
the applicant must be required to show proof that necessary permits have been
secured from the VCAPCD or that the project is exempt from VCAPCD regulations
as of the date of filing of the city application.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.42.030  ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE.



   No activity will be permitted which causes electrical disturbance
affecting the operation of equipment located beyond the property line. 
Radio, television, and microwave transmitters must be suitably wired,
shielded, and controlled so that they do not emit electrical waves or
impulses that may affect other electronic devices or equipment.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.42.040  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   (A)   Storage of hazardous materials, liquids and chemicals.



      (1)   Non-residential property.  Hazardous materials, liquids
and chemicals must not be stored in any zone within the city unless a
conditional use permit is obtained to allow such storage. 



         (a)   Exceptions:



            i.   Below-ground storage of flammable and
combustible liquids.



            ii.   Hazardous materials, liquids and chemicals
not requiring a permit by California Fire Code.



         (b)   Conditions.  Any storage of hazardous materials,
liquids and chemicals authorized by the Planning Commission or, on appeal, by
the City Council would be subject to conditions established by the Fire,
Building and Safety, Public Works, and Planning Departments.



      (2)   Residential property.  In no case would such storage be
permitted in a residentially zoned parcel or on any site maintained in whole
or in part for residential uses.



         (a)   Exceptions:



            i.   Flammable or combustible liquids not
requiring a permit by the California Fire Code.



            ii.   Liquefied petroleum gases not requiring a
permit by the Fire Code; provided, however, in no case may storage of more
than 20 water gallons capacity take place on a residentially or
agriculturally zoned parcel or on any site maintained in whole or in part for
residential uses, unless such storage takes place within the fuel tanks of a
propane-powered vehicle which is legally permitted to be parked or stored on
such parcel.



   (B)   When, in this section, references are made to the California
Fire Code, it will be construed to mean the current edition of the California
Fire Code as adopted by the city. 



   (C)   The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
the California Department of Health Services (DHS) identify hazardous
materials and prescribe handling, use, and disposal practices.  In order to
protect the health and welfare of Santa Paula residents and visitors, the
use, storage, manufacture, or disposal of hazardous materials will be
regulated and monitored according to standards established by these agencies
and as outlined in this section.



   (D)   A risk management and prevention program in accordance with
Article 2 of the California Health and Safety Code, together with an
inventory statement that is in accordance with federal, state, and local
laws, must be prepared for all structures and land uses using materials
identified as hazardous by the DHS or the EPA.



   (E)   The use and storage of flammable or explosive materials must
comply with the fire prevention code of the city and all applicable
ordinances.  No open burning is permitted unless a written permit for such
activity has been issued by the Ventura County Air Pollution Control District.



   (F)   No liquid or solid waste or similar material that may
contaminate the water supply, or interferes with the bacterial processes in
sewage treatment or otherwise causes the emission of dangerous or offensive
elements are permitted to be discharged into the public sewer or private
disposal system, except in accordance with the requirements of the health
ordinance, industrial waste ordinance, and other applicable regulations.



   (G)   No activity will be permitted if it potentially emits
dangerous levels of radioactivity at any time.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.42.050  LIGHT AND GLARE.



   (A)   Lighting sufficient for safety purposes must be provided at
entryways, along walkways, between buildings, and within parking areas.



   (B)   Lighting standards must not exceed the maximum permitted
building height or 25 feet, whichever is less.



   (C)   The candle power of all lights must be the minimum needed to
accomplish the purpose of the light.  Figure 42-1 may be used as a guide for
determining the lighting required.



   (D)   No flickering or flashing lights will be permitted in any
residential or commercial zone.  All lights must be constant and must not
change intensity or color more often than once every 30 minutes.







Figure 42-1



Typical Lighting Pattern



   (E)   Lights sources must not be located in setback buffer areas,
except those required to illuminate pedestrian walkways.



   (F)   All lights must be directed downwards, oriented and shielded
to prevent light from shining onto adjacent properties, onto public
rights-of-way, and into driveway areas in a manner that would obstruct
drivers' vision.



   (G)   Lighting for advertising signs must not cause light or glare
on surrounding properties.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.42.060  ODORS.



   (A)   Any process that creates or emits any odors, gases, or other
odorous matter must comply with applicable standards established and enforced
by the Ventura County Air Pollution Control District.



   (B)   No odors, gases, and odorous matter may be emitted in
quantities to be detectable when diluted in a ratio of 1 volume diluted air
to 4 volumes clean air at the point of greatest concentration.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.42.070  NOISE.



   (A)   The requirements set forth in Chapter 93 of the Santa Paula
Municipal Code will apply to all properties in the City of Santa Paula.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.44:  FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES



Section



   16.44.010   Purpose and intent



   16.44.020   Maximum height



   16.44.030   Electric, barbed wire, and razor- edged fences



   16.44.040   Location in right-of-way



   16.44.050   Construction and maintenance



§ 16.44.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The city recognizes the need and desire of property owners to establish
fences, walls, and similar barriers on their properties to prevent trespass,
ensure the safety of persons, and protect materials stored on a property. 
The city also recognizes that erecting and maintaining such fences, walls,
and similar barriers in a neat, functional and safe condition improves
property appearance and works toward city goals of achieving an overall
quality community aesthetic.  The standards contained in the Section are
established toward these ends.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.44.020  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.



   (A)   The maximum permitted height for any fence, wall, or hedge in
any front yard will be 42 inches.



   (B)   The maximum permitted height for any fence, wall, or hedge in
any side or rear yard will be six feet, measured from the base of the fence
at the lowest adjacent ground level of the property (see Figure 44-1), except:



      (1)   Within a 10-foot by 10-foot, 45° triangle on each side
of a driveway on the side property line a 42-inch fence, wall, or hedge is
permitted (See Figure 46-1).



      (2)   Within a 10-foot by 10-foot, 45° triangle at the rear
street-side corner of a corner lot, a 42-inch fence, wall or hedge is
permitted.



   (C)   The height of any fence, wall, and hedge within any
clear-sight triangle area will be restricted as specified in § 16.40.050
(Clear Sight Triangle Area).



   (D)   Retaining walls and fences may exceed the maximum permitted
height if required to do so for slope retention purposes, subject to review
and approval by the City Engineer and Planning Director.  Retaining walls
over five feet in height must be stepped.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)







Figure 44-1



Fence Heights



§ 16.44.030  ELECTRIC, BARBED WIRE, AND RAZOR-EDGED FENCES.



   (A)   Electric fences.  Aboveground electrified fences will not be
permitted anywhere in the city.



   (B)   Barbed wire and razor-edged fences.



      (1)   Barbed wire, razor-edged, and similar fencing materials
will be permitted only in the rear and side yards of properties in the O,
A-1, R-A, C-G, C/LI, LI, I and KO zones.



      (2)   In the O, A-1, and R-A zones, the following will apply:



         (a)   On parcels one acre or larger, barbed wire may be
placed only on fences six feet in height or higher.



         (b)   On parcels of less than one acre, barbed wire is
permitted only on fences serving as animal enclosures, and such that all
barbed wire or razor edge wire is three inches or greater inside such
enclosed fencing.



      (3)   In the C-G, C/LI, LI, I and KO zones, the following will
also apply:



         (a)   Barbed wire, razor-edged, and similar fencing
materials will be permitted only around open storage areas.



         (b)   Wherever any fence or wall abuts a property zoned
for residential use, the barbed wire, razor-edged, or similar fencing
material must be at least 6 feet above the ground level of the residential
parcel, and must be located to the interior of said fencing by no less than
three inches.



   (C)   Alternative fencing.  In the C-G, C/LI, LI, I and KO zones,
spiked or pointed fencing may be used as an alternative to barbed wire and
razor-edged wire, provided such spikes or points are at least 6 feet above
ground level, the spikes or points are blunt for at least one inch at the
end, and are angled inward toward the interior of the property.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.44.040  LOCATION IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Fences and walls that conform to the height limits specified in this
chapter may be placed within the public right-of-way abutting the affected
parcel, provided the following provisions are met:



   (A)   The fence or wall must be located behind the sidewalk or the
location of any future sidewalk.



   (B)   The fence or wall must be removed upon request by the city or
any public utility company at the expense of the affected property owner.



   (C)   The fence or wall must not obstruct any fire hydrant, public
utility meter, or utility box or riser unless the utility companies have
agreed in writing that they have no objection to the construction of the
fence or wall.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.44.050  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All fences and walls must be constructed in accordance with
standard accepted practices and applicable codes.



   (B)   In the commercial and industrial zones, masonry walls greater
than 40 feet in total length must be designed with architectural columns at
intervals lengths of between 12 to 16 feet.



   (C)   All fences and walls must be maintained in a neat, safe, and
quality condition, free of graffiti, and consistent with any property
maintenance regulations adopted by the city.



   (D)    Fences and walls visible from the public right-of-way must be
compatible in terms of design and materials with the main structure on the
site and integrated into the overall landscaping plan for the site. The use
of chain link fencing is discouraged unless the fence is screened by
landscaping.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



CHAPTER 16.46:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



Section




Division 1:  Parking




   16.46.010   Purpose and intent



   16.46.020   Applicability



   16.46.030   Restriction on use of parking facilities



   16.46.040   Number of parking spaces required



   16.46.050   Parking required for additions and remodeling of
residential use



   16.46.060   Shared parking



   16.46.070   Driveway and access standards - Residential uses



   16.46.080   Driveway and access standards - Nonresidential uses



   16.46.090   Driveway slope standards



   16.46.100   Parking standards and dimensions



   16.46.110   Residential garages and carports



   16.46.120   Required parking area improvements



   16.46.130   Required screening



   16.46.140   Required landscaping



   16.46.150   Remote parking



   16.46.160   Nonconforming parking



   16.46.170   [Reserved]




Division 2:  Loading




   16.46.180   Loading spaces required



   16.46.190   Loading space dimensions



   16.46.200   Development standards



   16.46.210   Passenger loading



DIVISION 1:  PARKING



§ 16.46.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of the parking and loading requirements set forth in this
chapter is to ensure that each development project in the city provides
adequate off-street parking facilities, loading areas, and vehicle movement
areas to meet the demands of the associated use.  The intent of these
regulations is to ensure that the use of land does not interfere adversely
with circulation on public rights-of-way, that private on-site circulation
does not pose a potential safety hazard, and that surrounding uses are
insulated from the noise and traffic impacts associated with off-street
parking and loading activities.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.020  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The minimum standards of this chapter will apply to all new
construction, expansion, renovation, conversion, and alteration of existing
uses or structures in all zones.



   (B)   Off-street parking and loading spaces must be provided at the
time of commencement of the use of the land or construction of the building,
or at the time of renovation, conversion, alteration, or expansion by adding
floor area, dwelling units, rooms, beds, or seats to a structure.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.030  RESTRICTION ON USE OF PARKING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Required parking spaces and areas must not be used for the
sale or display of goods and services, nor for the sale, display, repair or
dismantling of motor vehicles, nor for the storage of inoperable or
unlicensed vehicles, unless otherwise permitted by subsection (C) below.



   (B)   Parking areas in any zone may be used for temporary, special
events with authorization from the owner or operator of the parking area and
subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 16.228
of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.040  NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.



   (A)   General.  Table 46-1 specifies the number of off-street
parking spaces required for permitted land uses.



   (B)   Fractional spaces.  All fractional spaces will be rounded up
to the next highest whole number.



   (C)   Combined uses.  When two or more uses are combined on a given
site, the required parking will be calculated as the combined total required
for each individual use.  Where two or more uses exist within a single
building, parking will be calculated based on the percentage of floor area
devoted to each use.



   (D)   Compact and handicap parking.  The calculation of the number
of compact and handicap parking spaces to be provided will be based upon the
total number of spaces required.  Handicapped (accessible) parking must
comply with standards set forth in the Building Code.



   (E)   Unspecified land use.  If a land use is not specifically
listed in Table 46-1, the Planning Director will decide which standard most
closely reflects the demand for parking that will be generated by the
proposed project.



   (F)   Reduction of spaces.



      (1)   The minimum number of required parking spaces for a use
or combination of uses on the same or adjoining sites may be reduced by not
more than 50% and other parking requirements adjusted, subject to minor
modification in accordance with Chapter 16.222 of this Title 16, when the
Planning Director finds that adequate parking is provided for customers,
employees, clients, residents, and visitors.  If the project is subject to
the issuance of a discretionary permit, such as a conditional use permit, the
Planning Commission will review the request for the adjustment of parking
requirements.



      (2)   The applicant must demonstrate that parking demand will
be reduced by one or more methods, including, but not limited to,
carpools/vanpools, varied work shifts, use of company-operated buses,
transit/vanpool fare subsidy, preferential parking for carpools/vanpools,
shared parking facilities or bicycle parking facilities.  The applicant must
show how the measures will be implemented, the permanency of such measures,
the number of vehicles the measures will replace, the person responsible for
implementing the measures (if any) and other pertinent information. 



      (3)   A notice of land use restriction must be recorded to
inform future buyers of the property of the requirements of the approved
parking reduction.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.46.050  PARKING REQUIRED FOR ADDITIONS AND REMODELING OF RESIDENTIAL
USE.



   (A)   Single-family residential uses. Whenever any addition to or
remodeling of an existing residential unit is proposed whereby such addition
or remodeling will result in an increase in the total floor area of the unit
by more than 400 square feet or will result in more than one additional
bedroom or an additional dwelling unit, the property owner is required to
provide parking consistent with the requirements of Section 16.46.040 and
Table 46-1 in particular. This allowance may only be utilized once on a
property; future enlargements after the initial 400 square foot allowance has
been used on a property must provide for parking consistent with the
requirements of Section 16.46.040 and Table 46-1 in particular.



   (B)   Duplex and multi-family residential uses. Whenever any
addition to or remodeling of an existing residential unit is proposed whereby
such addition or remodeling will result in an increase in the total floor
area of the unit by 25% or more or will result in an additional dwelling
unit, the property owner is required to provide parking consistent with the
requirements of Section 16.46.040 and Table 46-1 in particular.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.46.060  SHARED PARKING.



   (A)   Special study required.  Two or more uses may share parking
facilities, subject to minor modification in accordance with Chapter 16.222
of this Title 16, and the provisions of this section.  A parking demand
analysis for the uses proposed to share parking facilities must be prepared
by a registered traffic engineer or other appropriately licensed
professional.  When such analysis demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the
Director, that the uses have different peak parking requirements, then the
Director may reduce the parking space requirement.  In no event, however,
may the parking requirement be reduced below the highest peak-parking
requirement of the use demanding the most parking.



   (B)   Conditions.



      (1)   The uses sharing the parking facilities must be located
on the same or contiguous lots.



      (2)   A legal agreement must be signed by all parties sharing
parking facilities.  Such agreement must be approved by the City Attorney
and Planning Director, must be recorded with the Ventura County Recorder's
Office, and must continue to be valid upon change of ownership of any
property subject to the agreement or any lawfully existing building or
structure on said properties.



      (3)   Shared parking arrangements may be authorized by any
discretionary permit issued for the use for which the parking is provided. 
Where no discretionary permit is required, such shared parking arrangements
must meet all other requirements of this subsection (B).



 




TABLE 46-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements




Land Use(1)

 
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces


Resident/Guest/Employee Parking
 
Compact/Business Vehicle Parking


Residential


Single-Family
 
0-4 bedrooms: 2-car garage minimum

5+ bedrooms: 3-car garage minimum
 
N/A


Duplex
 
2 covered spaces per unit
 
N/A


Multi-Family
 
 
 
 


  * Efficiency/1-bedroom unit
 
1.5 spaces per unit, 1 of which must be covered, plus a minimum of 1 guest
space (covered or uncovered) per 4 units. 
 
Compact: Maximum 15% where 20+ spaces are provided


  * 2-bedroom unit
 
1.75 spaces per unit, 1 of which must be covered, plus a minimum of 1 guest
space (covered or uncovered) per 4 units. 
 
Compact: As above


  * 3-bedroom unit
 
2.0 spaces per unit, 1 of which must be covered, plus a minimum of 1 guest
space (covered or uncovered) per 4 units.
 
Compact: As above


  * 4-bedroom unit
 
2.25 spaces per unit, 1 of which must be covered, with minimum of 1 guest
space (covered or uncovered) per 4 units. 
 
Compact: As above


  * 5 or more bedroom unit
 
2.5 spaces per unit, 1 of which must be covered, plus a minimum of 1 guest
space (covered or uncovered) per 4 units. 
 
Compact: As above


Mobile Home Park
 
2 per mobile home (spaces may be in tandem), 1 of which must be covered, plus
1 guest space (covered or uncovered) per 4 units.
 
Compact: As above


Senior Citizen Housing
 
 
 
 


* Efficiency/1-bedroom unit for projects located within ¼ mile of shopping
center or Central Business District
 
1 covered space per 3 units, with minimum of 1 guest space (covered or
uncovered) per 4 units.
 
Compact: As above


* All other senior housing
 
1 covered space per 2 units, with minimum of 1 guest space (covered or
uncovered) per 4 units.
 
Compact: As above


Roominghouses, boarding houses, dormitories, SROs, farmworker housing/migrant
farmworker housing (group quarters)
 
1 space per each sleeping room (100 sf of floor area will be considered a
sleeping room)
 
Compact: As above


Community Care Facilities
 
1 space for every 2 beds, with 1 space per employee.
 
Compact: As above


Commercial


Assemblies (stadium, theaters; not to include cinema)
 
1 space per 5 permanent seats.  Where temporary seats are used, 1 space per
30 sf of assembly area.
 
Compact: Maximum 15% where 20+ spaces are provided


Banks and Other Financial Institutions
 
1 space per 150 sf gross floor area
 
Compact: As above


Bars and Nightclubs (not accessory to restaurant)
 
1 space per 50 sf gross floor area
 
Compact: As above


Car Wash, Automated
 
1 per employee on major shift and 1.5 per car space on conveyor.
 
Compact parking is not permitted


Car Washes, self- service
 
1 per employee on major shift,

1 space per washing bay and detail bay, plus 2 spaces. 
 
Compact parking is not permitted


Churches and Other Religious Institutions
 
1 space per 3 fixed seats.  Where no fixed seats are provided, 1 per 20
square feet of assembly area.
 
Compact: Maximum 15% where 20+ spaces are provided


Cinemas 

* Single Screen

 

 

* Multi Screen
 
 

1 space per 3 seats, plus 6 spaces for employees

 

1 space per 4 seats, plus 10 spaces for employees
 
 

Compact: Maximum 15% where 20+ spaces are provided

 

Compact: As above


Convenience Store/Minimart
 
1 space per 100 sf of gross floor area
 
Compact parking is not permitted


Day Care 

* Day care center 

 

* Large-family day care
 
 

1 space for every 5 children

 

1 space for each employee in addition to spaces required for the residential
use.
 
Compact parking is not permitted


Gasoline Service Stations
 
1 space per 200 sf gross floor area; plus 1 space per service bay; plus any
additional spaces required for accessory uses such as a mini-mart.
 
Compact parking is not permitted

Truck: 1 space per vehicle operated from site


General Retail/ Services
 
1 space per 250 sf gross floor area
 
Compact: Maximum 15% where 20+ spaces are provided

Truck: As required for service and delivery vehicles


Professional Offices, other than medical
 
1 space per 250 sf gross floor area.
 
Compact: As above


Health clubs, gymnasiums, dance studios, athletic facility
 
1 space per 200 sf of gross floor area.
 
Compact: As above


Hotels and Motels
 
1 space per guest room or unit; plus other spaces as required for auxiliary
uses such as banquet facilities, bars, and restaurants
 
Compact: As above


Laundromats
 
1 space per 3 washers
 
Compact: As above


Medical and Dental Offices
 
1 space per 200 sf gross floor area
 
Compact: As above


Restaurants, Fast Food
 
1 space for every 45 sf of gross floor area, but not less than 10 spaces
 
Compact: Maximum 15% where 20 spaces are provided


Restaurants - Delicatessens and similar take-out uses with no seating
 
1 space per 400 sf of gross floor area, but not less than 5 spaces
 
Compact: As above


Restaurants (Sit-Down), coffee shops, and similar eating establishments
 
0 - 4,000 sf: 1 space per 80 sf of gross floor area

>4,000 sf:  1 space per 80 sf of gross floor area for first 4,000 sf, then 1
space per 100 sf for area over 4,000 sf

Outdoor seating need not be included in the calculation of required spaces.
 
Compact: As above


Schools, Public & Private 

 

* Elementary and Junior high 

 

 

* High School 

 

 

* Trade or business school
 
 

 

1 space per classroom, plus 1 per 35 sf of assembly area

 

1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 10 students

 

1 space per 50 sf of gross classroom area, plus 1 space per employee on the
largest shift
 
 

 

Compact: As above


Industrial


General Industrial
 
1 space per 500 sf gross floor area
 
Compact: Maximum 15% where 20+ spaces are provided

Business Vehicle: 1 space per vehicle operated from site


Office, accessory to industrial use
 
1 space per 300 sf gross floor area of office space
 
Compact: As above

Business Vehicle: As above


Warehousing
 
1 space per 1,000 sf gross floor area, plus 1 space per each loading bay
 
Compact: As above

Business Vehicle: As above


Industrial


Outdoor storage
 
1 space per 2,000 sf gross floor area
 
Compact: As above

Business Vehicle: As above


Downtown (CBD Zone)


Uses permitted in CBD Zone (see Table 15-1)
 
Retain existing parking spaces.
 
 




 



Abbreviations:  sf=square feet



(1)    Parking for all uses not specified in this table will be determined
at the discretion of the Planning Director.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1249,
passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.46.070  DRIVEWAY AND ACCESS STANDARDS - RESIDENTIAL USES.



   The following standards and regulations apply to all driveways and
accesses provided for residential dwellings.



   (A)   Any driveway providing access to parking spaces serving one
single-family dwelling must have a minimum width of 10 feet, except that
driveways longer than 200 feet must have a minimum width of 20 feet.



   (B)   Any driveway serving more than one dwelling must have the
following minimum width, unless the City Engineer determines a wider width is
necessary, or the Fire Chief determines a lesser width is sufficient to
ensure public safety:



      (1)   Two-way driveway with parking permitted on both sides:
36 feet.



      (2)   Two-way driveway with parking permitted on one side: 28
feet.



      (3)   Two-way driveway with no parking permitted: 20 feet.



      (4)   One-way driveway serving 2 to 6 dwellings, on property
less than 150 feet deep: 12 feet.



      (5)   One-way driveway serving more than 6 dwellings, on
property less than 150 feet deep: 16 feet.



      (6)   One-way driveway serving more than 2 dwellings, on
property greater than 150 feet deep: 20 feet, with Fire Department turnaround.



   (C)   All driveways and access ways must be located a minimum of 20
feet from any curb return at a street intersection.



   (D)   Circular driveways are permitted, provided they are designed
in accordance with standard engineering and traffic safety standards, subject
to approval by the City Engineer.



   (E)   No front yards may be covered by more than 50% with
non-pervious surface (paving).



   (F)   The clear sight triangle area formed by the driveway must be
kept clear to allow for a safe sight distance for pedestrians and vehicles
(Figure 46-1).







Figure 46-1



Driveway Clear-Sight Area



   (G)   All driveway approaches from a public right-of-way must be
designed in accordance with city standards on file in the office of the City
Engineer.



   (H)   Any abandoned or nonfunctional driveway must be removed and
replaced with standard concrete curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.080  DRIVEWAY AND ACCESS STANDARDS - NONRESIDENTIAL USES.



   The following standards and regulations apply to all driveways and
accesses provided for nonresidential uses. 



   (A)   All driveways and access ways serving nonresidential uses must
be completely paved with asphaltic concrete (asphalt) or concrete paving per
standards established by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Any driveway serving a nonresidential use must have the
following minimum width, unless the City Engineer determines a wider width is
necessary, or the Fire Chief determines a lesser width is sufficient to
ensure public safety:



      (1)   Two-way driveway serving a commercial or similar use: 25
feet.



      (2)   Two-way driveway serving an industrial use: 28 feet.



      (3)   One-way driveway (exit only) serving a commercial or
industrial use: 20 feet.



   (C)   Driveways must be designed to allow vehicles to exit without
backing out onto a public street.  Design that allows backing into an alley
may be permitted if, in the opinion of the City Engineer, such a design is
acceptable in accordance with sound engineering and traffic safety practices.



   (D)   All driveways and access ways must be located a minimum of 20
feet from any curb return at a street intersection.



   (E)   Circular driveways are permitted, provided they are designed
in accordance with standard engineering and traffic safety standards, subject
to approval by the City Engineer.



   (F)   The clear-sight triangle area formed by the driveway must be
kept clear to allow for a safe sight distance for pedestrians and vehicles
(see Figure 46-1).



   (G)   All driveway approaches from a public right-of-way must be
designed in accordance with city standards on file in the office of the City
Engineer.



   (H)   Any abandoned or nonfunctional driveway must be removed and
replaced with standard concrete curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.090  DRIVEWAY SLOPE STANDARDS.



   (A)   The maximum permitted driveway slope will be 20%.



   (B)   No driveway, or portion thereof, may have a dip, hump, or
other surface irregularity that has an angle of approach or departure
exceeding 10%.



   (C)   All driveways must be designed and constructed to allow for
the passage of emergency vehicles with a wheelbase of at least 244 inches and
a clearance height of at least 11 inches, except as provided in subsection
(D) below.



   (D)   Any driveway rising up to a public right-of-way must have a
transition section at least 14 feet in length with a slope not exceeding 5%,
ending at the property line (or ultimate street line established in the
General Plan).



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.100  PARKING STANDARDS AND DIMENSIONS.



   (A)   Design standards.  Parking facilities must be designed to
conform to the following minimum standards:



      (1)   Parking spaces must be located on the same lot as the
use they serve, unless remote parking is permitted by the Planning Director
pursuant to the provisions of § 16.46.150 (Remote Parking).



      (2)   Access to parking stalls must not be taken directly from
a public or private street or alley.



      (3)   A 15-foot vertical clearance must be maintained over all
parking areas, driveways, and access points.



      (4)   Driveways serving a parking area with 20 or more spaces
must be designed with either one-way circulation or a double driveway system.



      (5)   Parking spaces must not be located within required
front-yard setback areas.



      (6)   All carpooling parking spaces and bicycle racks must be
located within 200 feet to the main entrance of the facility they are
intended to serve. 



   (B)   Parking space dimensions.  Table 46-2 identifies the minimum
required dimensions for parking stalls and aisles for uncovered standard and
compact parking spaces.



 




TABLE 46-2
Parking Space Dimensions




Type of Parking

 

Angle

 

Stall Depth

 

Aisle Width

 

Curb Length

 

Section Width



Standard Parking Spaces
 
0°
 
9'
 
10'
 
24'
 
28'


 
30°
 
17'-10"
 
11'
 
18'
 
46'-8"


 
40°
 
19'-9"
 
12'
 
14'
 
51'-6"


 
45°
 
20'-6"
 
13'6"
 
12'-9"
 
54'-6"


 
50°
 
21'-2"
 
15'
 
11'-9"
 
57'-4"


 
60°
 
21'-10"
 
18'-6"'
 
10'-5"
 
62-2"


 
70°
 
20'-2"
 
23'
 
9'-9"
 
63'-4"


 
80°
 
19'-4"
 
24'
 
9'-3"
 
62'-8"


 
90°
 
20'
 
25'
 
9'
 
65'


Compact Parking Spaces
 
0°
 
8'
 
10'
 
20'
 
25'


 
45°
 
16'
 
11'
 
10'-5"
 
43'


 
60°
 
16'-7"
 
14'
 
8'-7"
 
47'-2"


 
90°
 
15'
 
20'
 
7'-6"
 
50'




 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.110  RESIDENTIAL GARAGES AND CARPORTS.



   The following standards apply to all residential garages and carports.



   (A)   Dimensions.



      (1)   All parking spaces in a garage or carport must have a
minimum width of 10 feet and a minimum length of 20 feet.  The minimum width
and length must be measured from within the interior dimensions of the garage
or carport.



      (2)   Single garage doors must have a minimum clearance width
of 9 feet, and double garage doors must have a minimum clearance width of 16
feet.  No chain link doors or walls will be permitted.



   (B)   Location.



      (1)   Parking spaces for multi-family units must be located
within 200 feet of and readily accessible to the dwelling served.



      (2)   Detached garages and carports may be located on the side
and rear property lines of a lot, provided roof drainage is designed to
prevent runoff onto adjacent property.  The following exception applies:



         (a)   On a corner lot, no detached garage or carport
will be permitted within the street side yard.



      (3)   On lots where the slope of the front half of the lot is
greater than 25%, one detached garage may be located within the required
front yard, provided the garage is set back at least five feet from the front
lot line and any side lot line, and further provided the garage height does
not exceed ten feet.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)







Figure 46-2



Detached Garage and Carport Setbacks







Figure 46-3



Garages on Sloped Lots



§ 16.46.120  REQUIRED PARKING AREA IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   All parking spaces, maneuvering areas, turnarounds, and
driveways must be paved with asphaltic concrete, concrete cement or concrete
pavers in accordance with standards set by the City Engineer. 



   (B)   All parking spaces except those in garages or carports must be
marked with paint or other distinguishable material.  Compact and handicap
parking spaces must be identified to preclude use by other vehicles.



   (C)   Directional signs must mark one-way entrances and aisles and
must be visible to drivers of vehicles using the facility.  Additional
safety and direction signage must be provided as directed by the Planning
Director and City Engineer.



   (D)   Bumper guards, wheel stops, or curbing must be provided
whenever parking stalls are designed to allow vehicles to head into or abut
buildings, structures, fences, landscaping, and other vehicles.



   (F)   All parking and internal circulation areas must be designed to
drain adequately.  Driveways more than 75 feet in length must be improved
with 2-foot-wide concrete gutters or v-swales in accordance with standards
set by the City Engineer.



   (G)   Planter areas may be designed to allow parked vehicles to
overhang the planter area.  However, for any planter area less than six feet
wide, vehicles will be permitted to overhang only one side of the planter
area.



   (H)   Wherever parking spaces abut a building or structure, a
minimum 5-foot-wide landscaped buffer area must be provided.  This buffer
area may contain paved walkways and required handicapped access ramps and
pathways.



   (I)   The lighting of parking areas must be designed in accordance
with the standards for light and glare in § 16.42.050 (Light and Glare) of
this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.130  REQUIRED SCREENING.



   (A)   All surface parking lots that abut a public right-of-way must
be screened from view with a wall, fence, or dense planting of shrubs or
similar landscape material.  The height of the wall, fence, or landscaping
must be at least 3-½ feet, and plans for such screening materials must be
approved by the Planning Director.



   (B)   Where a wall or fence is to be used for screening, a minimum
5-foot-wide landscaped strip must be required between the wall or fence and
the property line.



   (C)   Recreational vehicles must be screened from view of the public
right-of-way with a wall, gate, fence, or dense planting of shrubs or similar
landscape material.



   (D)   Parking areas provided for commercial and industrial uses must
be separated from any adjoining residential zone, church, school, or park by
an 8-foot high masonry wall.







Figure 46-4



Landscape Strip for Parking Areas



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.140  REQUIRED LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Landscaping must be provided within all parking lots that
provide parking for ten or more vehicles to break up the monotony of asphalt
paving, provide shade, reduce reflected heat and encourage a unified site
design that provides continuity between the building areas and the parking
areas.



   (B)   A minimum of 5% of the total area of the parking lot must be
landscaped, exclusive of any required perimeter planting adjacent to a public
right-of-way but inclusive of any landscaped buffer area provided between
parking lots and buildings.



   (C)   A minimum of one tree must be provided for every eight parking
spaces.  In no case may fewer than two trees be provided.  All trees to be
installed must be a minimum 24-inch-box size. The trees must be distributed
throughout the parking area, using a combination of interior and perimeter
planters and must be located to achieve uniform shade coverage.



   (D)   All landscaped areas must be contained within concrete or
masonry curbing no less than six inches high.  No dimension of a landscaped
area may be less than five feet.



   (E)   All landscaped areas must be provided with an underground,
automated irrigation system.



   (F)   All landscaped areas must be maintained in a neat and healthy
condition.



   (G)   Any unused space resulting from the design of a parking area
must be landscaped.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.46.150  REMOTE PARKING.



   (A)   Remote parking may be permitted for any nonresidential use,
provided such parking facilities are located no more than 600 feet from the
use they are intended to serve.



   (B)   A covenant for the use of the remote parking lot will be
required between the owner(s) of the development site and the owner(s) of the
lot used for remote parking.  Said covenant must be in form approved by the
City Attorney and recorded with the County Recorder of Ventura County.  The
covenant may not be revoked, modified, or canceled without the consent of the
city.



   (C)   Such agreements for remote parking must be authorized by any
required discretionary permit issued for the proposed development project. 
Where no discretionary permit is involved, a Conditional Use Permit will be
required to authorize the remote parking.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.160  NONCONFORMING PARKING.



   Nonconforming parking must comply with the provisions of Chapter 16.112
(Nonconforming Parking) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.170  [RESERVED.]



DIVISION 2:  LOADING



§ 16.46.180  LOADING SPACES REQUIRED.



   (A)   C-G, C-H, C/LI, LI, and I Zones.  Every commercial and
industrial use in the C-G, C-H, C/LI, LI, and I zones must provide off-street
loading spaces consistent with the requirements of this Division 2. The
number of required loading spaces are as set forth in Table 46-3.



 




TABLE 46-3
Loading Spaces for C-G, C-H, C/LI, LI, and I Zones




Gross Floor Area of Use

 

Minimum Number of (Loading Spaces)



< 3,000 sf
 
1


3,001 to 30,000 sf
 
2


30,001 to 90,000 sf
 
3


90,001 to 150,00 sf
 
4


150,001 to 230,000 sf
 
5


> 230,000 sf
 
5, plus 1 space for each 80,000 sf or fraction thereof greater than 230,000 sf




               Abbreviation: sf=square foot



   (B)   Other uses.  All other uses of an institutional, assembly,
dining, or warehousing nature, including hotels, must provide off-street
loading



spaces consistent with the requirements of this Division 2. The number of
required loading spaces are as set forth in Table 46-4.



 


TABLE 46-4
Loading Spaces for Other Uses




Gross Floor Area of Use

 

Minimum Number of Loading Spaces



< 100,000 sf
 
1


100,001 to 350,000 sf
 
2


> 350,000 sf
 
2, plus 1 space for each 300,000 sf or fraction thereof greater than 350,000
sf



 



      Abbreviation: sf=square foot



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.190  LOADING SPACE DIMENSIONS.



   All loading spaces must have the minimum dimensions as set forth in
Table 46-5.



 


TABLE 46-5
Minimum Loading Space Dimensions




Land Use

 

Minimum Dimensions




Width

 

Length



Office
 

10 ft

 

20 ft



Commercial with  2,000 sf of gross floor area
 

12

 

25



Commercial with >2,000 sf of gross floor area
 

12

 

45



Industrial
 

12

 

45




 



   Abbreviation: sf=square foot



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.200  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   No loading dock or door may be visible from a public
right-of-way.  Loading doors must be designed or painted to blend
architecturally with the exterior walls of the structure.



   (B)   Loading spaces must be located to serve the site and buildings
without blocking movement to a driveway, parking stall, street, or alley. 
Adequate area must be provided on site to allow all maneuvering to occur on
the site.  Approaches must be designed to preclude access to a loading space
directly from a street.



   (C)   Adequate queuing space must be provided on site to ensure that
vehicles waiting to access loading spaces are not stopped on any public
right-of-way.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.46.210  PASSENGER LOADING.



   Passenger loading areas must be provided at schools, day care centers,
hospitals, clinics, and similar facilities where passengers are frequently
loaded and unloaded.  The loading area must consist, at a minimum, of a bay
or similar feature that allows vehicles to load and unload passengers without
impeding vehicle flow.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.48:  SIGN REGULATIONS



Section



   16.48.010   Purpose



   16.48.020   Application of this chapter




Division 1:  General Provisions




   16.48.030   Definitions



   16.48.040   Permit required



   16.48.050   Owner consent required



   16.48.060   Message substitution



   16.48.070   Compliance with applicable law



   16.48.080   Variances and conditional use permits



   16.48.090   Sign classification



   16.48.100   Sign maintenance




Division 2:  Prohibited Signs




   16.48.110   Offsite signs - General prohibition



   16.48.120   Movable and temporary signs - General prohibition



   16.48.130   Sign construction - General prohibitions



   16.48.140   Hazardous signs



   16.48.150   Signs in clear-sight triangle area



   16.48.160   Signs on public property



   16.48.170   Wind-activated signs



   16.48.180   Vehicle signs



   16.48.190   Animated signs and illuminated signs



   16.48.200   Roof signs



   16.48.210   Signs facing residential areas



   16.48.220   Solar energy collection devices




Division 3:  Exempt Signs




   16.48.230   Exempt signs




Division 4:  Sign Permits




   16.48.240   Sign permits



   16.48.250   Fees



   16.48.260   Additional permit requirements



   16.48.270   Single permit for multiple, related signs



   16.48.280   Subsequent permits




Division 5:  Permit Applications




   16.48.290   Application for permit - Form and content



   16.48.300   Supplemental information required by the Director




Division 6:  Action on Permit Applications




   16.48.310   Action on permit application - Time for review



   16.48.320   Action on permit application - Permit issuance



   16.48.330   Action on permit application - Permit denial



   16.48.340   Alternative place or manner



   16.48.350   Criteria for permit consideration




Division 7:  Permit Conditions




   16.48.360   General permit conditions - Indemnification agreement



   16.48.370   Time limit



   16.48.380   Display of sign permit number required



   16.48.390   Subsequent conditions



   16.48.400   Permit revocation




Division 8:  Appeals




   16.48.410   Right of administrative review



   16.48.420   Time for administrative review



   16.48.430   Commencement of administrative review



   16.48.440   Administrative review



   16.48.450   Additional appeals



   16.48.460   Expedited review




Division 9:  Master Sign Plan




   16.48.470   Master sign plan - When required



   16.48.480   Permit required



   16.48.490   Findings



   16.48.500   Revisions to master sign plans




Division 10:  Calculation of Sign Area and Height




   16.48.510   Calculation of sign area and height



   16.48.520   Design criteria




Division 11:  Temporary Signs




   16.48.530   Temporary signs - General requirements



   16.48.540   Temporary freestanding signs - Where permitted



   16.48.550   Temporary freestanding signs - Number and time limits



   16.48.560   Temporary freestanding signs - Height, area, location,
and illumination



   16.48.570   Temporary signs - Special events



   16.48.580   Temporary signs - Limited special event parking lot sales



   16.48.590   Temporary signs - Lot and sidewalk sales



   16.48.600   Temporary signs - Removal requirements




Division 12:  Dealership Signs




   16.48.610   Dealership signs




Division 13:  Regulations by Zone




   16.48.620   Transferability of signage rights



   16.48.630   Agricultural, open space, and residential-agriculture
zones



   16.48.640   Residential zones



   16.48.650   General prohibitions



   16.48.660   Commercial zones



   16.48.670   Industrial zones




Division 14:  Nonconforming Signs




   16.48.680   Abatement requirements



   16.48.690   Continuation and maintenance



   16.48.700   Restrictions on existing signs



   16.48.710   Abatement schedule



   16.48.720   Noncompliance unlawful



   16.48.730   Compliance required for building permit issuance



   16.48.740   Inventory




Division 15:  Sign Removal




   16.48.750   Unsafe signs



   16.48.760   Illegal signs



   16.48.770   Legal nonconforming signs - special circumstances



   16.48.780   Abatement of signs



§ 16.48.010  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers as set
forth in the California Constitution for the following purposes:



   (A)   To implement the Santa Paula General Plan;



   (B)   To maintain and improve the city's aesthetics to promote
public welfare;



   (C)   To protect public health and safety by improving vehicle and
pedestrian traffic safety;



   (D)   To establish objective standards for regulating and
controlling the design, construction, maintenance, number, and placement of
signs within the City of Santa Paula;



   (E)   To balance freedom of expression with reasonable time, place,
and manner restrictions for protecting public health, safety, and welfare;



   (F)   To establish, preserve, and promote specific areas within the
city in order to support economic development; and



   (G)   To avoid creation of public nuisances when temporary signs are
intentionally or unintentionally discarded.



   (H)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor does it, regulate
anything but the time, place, and manner that signs may be used within the
city's jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.020  APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER.



   This chapter regulates signs placed on private and public property
located within the City of Santa Paula. For signs on public property, this
chapter applies only to public property not owned or controlled by the City
of Santa Paula and over which the city may exert its land use regulations.
Signs on public property owned or controlled by the city are subject to
separate codes, regulations, or policies not set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 16.48.030  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this article.



   ABANDONED SIGN - Any sign that no longer advertises a business, tenant,
owner, product, service, or activity on the site where the sign is displayed.



   ACCESSORY SIGN - A permanently mounted sign that is designed to
facilitate the announcement of credit cards, hours of business, or other
incidental matters, and which does not announce or advertise the products,
goods, or services directly related to the business conducted on the premises.



   AGRICULTURAL SIGN - A sign which identifies any agricultural business,
farm, or ranch use on the property on which it is placed or which advertises
agricultural produce for sale on premises.



   ANIMATED SIGN - A sign with action or motion, flashing, or color
changes requiring electrical energy, but not including wind-actuated elements
such as flags, banners, or specialty items, and public service signs such as
time and temperature units.



   BANNER - A strip of cloth, thin plastic, or other flexible material on
which a sign is painted, printed, or otherwise displayed.



   CAMPAIGN SIGN - A temporary freestanding sign erected for candidates or
issues in an upcoming election.



   CANOPY - A permanent roofed structure that provides shelter and that
projects from a building wall or is supported by columns, such as false
mansards, projecting facade facings, service station pump island shelters,
and other architectural features which project from a building wall above a
height of eight feet.



   CANOPY SIGN - A sign attached to or constructed in a canopy. Those
signs suspended beneath the canopy and perpendicular to the building facade
are projecting signs.



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN - A sign that has changeable copy, regardless of
method of attachment or materials of construction.







Figure 48-4



Sign Types



   CITY MANAGER - The City Manager or designee.



   COMMERCIAL COPY or COMMERCIAL MESSAGE - A message displayed on a sign
which pertains primarily to the name, location, products, or services of a
for profit business or profession.



   CONSTRUCTION PROJECT SIGN - A temporary sign stating the names of
individuals or firms directly connected with the work on a building or
facility under construction or alteration; a temporary sign announcing the
future use of the property on which the sign is located.



   DEALERSHIP - means the use of any building, land area, or other
premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks,
vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles, including any repair service
conducted as an accessory service.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN - On-site incidental signs designed to guide or direct
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and which contain no matter specifying
products or services.



   DIRECTOR - the Planning Director, or designee.



   EXEMPT SIGN - An allowable sign not requiring a permit under this
chapter.



   EXPIRED SIGN - A sign with a commercial message promoting an event for
a certain date which passed by more than seven days.



   FLAG - A piece of fabric, thin plastic, or other piece of flexible
material, usually rectangular in shape, with a distinctive design used as a
symbol or signaling device and usually displayed hanging free from a staff or
pole to which it is attached by one side. FLAGS include, without limitation,
pennants and streamers.



   FREESTANDING SIGN - A sign not attached to a building but is instead
supported from the ground by one or more poles or posts and with or without
braces and is permanently mounted in a fixed location and greater than six
feet in height.



   FREEWAY ORIENTED SIGN - A sign that is located and oriented to be
primarily visible to motorists on a freeway or freeway ramp.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN - A sign designed to emit or reflect artificial light,
or a sign that uses a source of light to make characters or a message more
readable.



   INFLATABLE SIGN - An object made of an airtight material, generally
greater than 18 inches in diameter at its widest point, filled with air or
gas to form a three dimensional shape and used as a sign.



   MAIN BUILDING - A building which is used for the principal use of the
parcel upon which it is located or where a business' principal activity
occurs. More than one main building may be located on a parcel.



   MASTER SIGN PLAN - Plans and specifications establishing the design,
materials, and placement of signs within a subdivision. MASTER SIGN PLANS are
intended to help promote signs of superior quality and creativity in a
particular area within the city. MASTER SIGN PLANS do not include temporary
banners.



   MONUMENT SIGN - A freestanding sign with a solid base, where the bottom
of the sign is in contact with or close to the ground.  Not greater than six
feet in height.



   MOVING SIGN - Any sign that has any visible moving parts, visible
revolving parts, or visible mechanical movement. The definition includes
signs that emit smoke, steam or vapors and signs that create an illusion of
motion.



   MURAL PAINTING - A large-scale painting either painted directly on or
attached to the wall of a building such that it is an integral part of the
wall.



   NONCOMMERCIAL COPY - A message that pertains primarily to matters other
than commercial products, services or activities.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN - A sign that was legally erected before a change in
applicable law and fails to conform to applicable law because of such change.
A NONCONFORMING SIGN may fail to conform with current laws because of its
type, size, location, display of motion, type of lighting, or other factor
addressed in applicable law.



   OFFSITE SIGN - A sign that identifies, advertises, or directs attention
to businesses, buildings, occupancies, accommodations, goods, services, or
activities supplied or originated outside of the specific establishment,
property, or business or industrial complex where the sign is displayed. The
onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial copy.



   ON-SITE SIGN - A sign which identifies or promotes an establishment,
business or building, accommodations, goods, services, commodities, or
activities that are available or conducted within the specific establishment,
property, or business or industrial complex where the sign is displayed. The
onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial copy.



   PERMITTED - Indicates that an allowable sign may be legally displayed
only with a permit issued by the city. The definition includes alternative
forms of the word such as "permissible" and "permittable."



   PERMITTEE - A person or entity to which the city issues a permit
pursuant to this chapter.



   PORTABLE SIGN - A sign that by the nature of its construction or
mounting is easily moved. A PORTABLE SIGN includes, without limitation, signs
mounted on wheels, watercraft, and aircraft; signs that are leaned against
another structure; signs held in place by gravity that are easily dislodged;
signs easily detached from mounting devices; and signs that are held or
mounted upon humans or animals.



   PROJECTING SIGN - A sign that is attached to a wall and projects
horizontally from a structure by more than 12 inches and uses the building
wall as its primary source of support.



   ROOF SIGN - Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.



   SIGN - Any structure, device, or material, temporary or permanent,
fixed or portable, moving or stationary, whether located inside or outside a
building, that is visible from any property where the primary purpose of the
sign is to convey visual communication. SIGN does not include the following:



      (1)   Interior signs that are located entirely within an
enclosed structure and not visible from the exterior;



      (2)   Building features that are only decorative or
architectural and do not include lettering, trademarks, or moving parts;



      (3)   Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts
including, without limitation, religious or political symbols when they are
permanently integrated into the structure of a building;



      (4)   Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or
appearance including, without limitation, tattoos or makeup;



      (5)   Marks on tangible products that identify the maker,
seller, provider or product, and that customarily remain attached to the
product even after completion of a sale;



      (6)   Traffic, directional, emergency, warning or
informational signs required or authorized by a government agency having
jurisdiction;



      (7)   Public utility signs;



      (8)   Advertisements or banners mounted on duly licensed mass
transit vehicles including, without limitation, buses and trains, that
legally pass through the city;



      (9)   Grave stones or grave markers;



      (10)   Insignia located on legal vehicles and water craft
including, without limitation, license plates, registration insignia,
noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business for which the
vehicle is an instrument or tool, and messages relating to the proposed sale,
lease or exchange of vehicles or watercraft;



      (11)   Foundation stones and corner stones if cut into any
masonry surface or inlaid to be part of a building when constructed of bronze
or other incombustible material; and



      (12)   Newsracks and newsstands.



   SIGN AREA - The face or display area of a sign, including its border
only when the border carries or displays part of the message or copy.



   SPECIAL EVENT - An event that is outside the scope of normal operation
of an establishment. By way of example, not limitation, SPECIAL EVENTS may
include short term sales or promotional events, grand opening or remodeling
sales, and other, similar, types of events.



   TEMPORARY FREESTANDING SIGN - Any temporary sign not attached to a
building but is instead supported from the ground by one or more poles or
posts and with or without braces, and is within the dimensions outlined in
this Code (Temporary Freestanding Signs).



   TEMPORARY SIGN - Any portable sign, banner, pennant, valance, or
advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, paper,
cardboard, wallboard, or other light materials with or without frames mounted
in a nonpermanent manner.



   TOTAL FIRST FLOOR FRONTAGE GLASS AREA - Total glass area of the first
floor of a building or tenant bay. The glass area may include Plexiglas,
plastic window sheeting, glass block and other clear or translucent window
materials located on the front of the first floor of the building or tenant
bay.



   VEHICLES - All motorized, non-motorized, operable, non-operable,
registered, or unregistered vehicles within the city's jurisdiction
including, without limitation, wheeled vehicles, aircraft over which the city
has regulatory jurisdiction, and watercraft. A vehicle does not include
aircraft with a valid waiver from the Federal Aviation Administration for
towing aerial signs pursuant to 14 Code of Federal Regulations § 91.311.



   WALL SIGN - A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane
of said wall. Such a sign does not project more than 12 inches from the
building or structure wall, and any portion thereof above the building's roof
peak, parapet, or facade does not exceed 30% of the height of the sign.



   WINDOW SIGN - Any sign painted or affixed to the inside or outside of a
window surface, or otherwise located within a building so as to be visible
from the exterior of the building.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.48.040  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all signs displayed within
the city must have a valid permit issued in accordance with the procedures in
this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.050  OWNER CONSENT REQUIRED.



   Before the city issues any permit pursuant to this chapter for a
permanent sign, an applicant must provide written documentation that the
building or property owner of the area upon which a proposed sign would be
erected or displayed, consents to its placement. Signs that are exempt from
the permit requirements of this chapter may be erected or displayed only with
the building or property owner's consent.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.060  MESSAGE SUBSTITUTION.



   Noncommercial copy may be substituted for any commercial copy on any
sign that is allowed by this chapter, whether permitted or exempt.
Noncommercial copy of any kind may be substituted for any other type of
noncommercial copy on any sign that is allowed by this chapter whether by
permit or exemption. Message substitution may be made without any additional
city approval or permitting. This section prevails over any more specific
provision to the contrary within this chapter. The purpose of this section is
to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial
speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other
noncommercial message. This section does not create a right to increase the
total amount of signage on property, does not affect the permitting
requirements of this chapter, and does not override terms and conditions in
private contracts.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.070  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW.



   All signs must comply with all applicable law including, without
limitation, the uniform building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and
grading codes, at the time the sign is constructed and mounted for display.
Signs that are substantially rebuilt, remodeled, or refurbished, must conform
to all codes in effect at the time such work occurs.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.080  VARIANCES AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   Except as otherwise provided, all deviations from this chapter must
comply with the variance procedures set forth in this code. Unless otherwise
provided to the contrary, all sign regulations of planned development permits
and conditional use permits are controlled by this chapter and must be
processed without regard to the proposed message, content, or copy of
proposed signs.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.090  SIGN CLASSIFICATION.



   The Director may classify every sign proposed to be erected within the
city's jurisdiction in accordance with this chapter. Signs that do not
clearly fall within one of the definitions provided by this chapter must be
placed in a classification which the sign, based upon its design, location,
physical characteristics, and purpose, most closely approximates. Unless
appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to this code, the Planning
Director's decision is final.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.100  SIGN MAINTENANCE.



   All elements of signs including, without limitation, supports, poles,
lights, and temporary construction materials, must be maintained in good and
safe structural condition. Permittees, persons who erected or posted the
sign, persons owning the property or building who granted permission for the
sign to be erected or displayed, and the owner of the real property upon
which the sign was erected or posted, regardless of that owner's knowledge of
the sign, are all jointly responsible for sign maintenance. All successors in
interest to these persons are equally responsible for sign maintenance.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 2: PROHIBITED SIGNS



§ 16.48.110  OFFSITE SIGNS - GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   Unless otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, it is unlawful to
construct or use any permanent structure for displaying offsite commercial
messages.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.120  MOVABLE AND TEMPORARY SIGNS - GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   Unless otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, all exterior
signs must be permanently affixed to a building, permitted sign support, or
firmly attached to the ground. Portable or moving signs with commercial copy
are unlawful. Temporary signs are unlawful except as expressly allowed by
this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.130  SIGN CONSTRUCTION - GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for signs to be constructed, erected, or displayed as
follows:



   (A)   Sign supports - Signs may not be supported with exposed
bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables, or similar materials.



   (B)   Lighting - Signs may not include bare light bulbs over 15
watts that are visible from the front of the sign or beyond the property
line. Neon or argon lamps are permissible.



   (C)   Overhead power lines - Signs may not be connected to visible
overhead electrical power lines.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.140  HAZARDOUS SIGNS.



   It is unlawful to erect signs that are detrimental to public health or
safety. Such hazardous signs include those that, because of design,
construction lighting, or location:



   (A)   Could be reasonably mistaken for a traffic signal;



   (B)   Obstruct free and clear observation of any legal traffic sign,
signal or device;



   (C)   Obstruct any door, window, or fire escape of buildings or
impede pedestrian traffic over public rights-of-ways;



   (D)   Are attached to a standpipe or fire escape; or



   (E)   Otherwise poses a threat of death, damage, or injury to
persons or property.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.150  SIGNS IN CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE AREA.



   (A)   It is unlawful to erect a sign within the clear- sight
triangle area as described in this section. This prohibition is to ensure
visibility for operators of motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians on
intersecting roadways.



   (B)   Within a clear-sight triangle area, signs may not extend above
36 inches in height, measured from the adjacent street, alley, or sidewalk
grade (Figure 48-2). However, pole signs with a sign face that is at least
eight feet above grade may be placed within a clear-sight triangle area.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)







 



Figure 48-2



Clear-Sight Triangle Area



§ 16.48.160. SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   Unless otherwise provided by this chapter or by City Council
resolution, it is unlawful to display signs on public property owned by the
city.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.170  WIND-ACTIVATED SIGNS.



   Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, it is unlawful to erect,
allow, or maintain wind-activated signs such as spinner, pennants, streamers,
and balloons.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.180  VEHICLE SIGNS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, vehicle signs
are prohibited.



   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicle signs where the copy
relates only to the business or establishment of which the vehicle itself is
a part; pertains to the sale, rent, lease, or hiring of such vehicle; or is a
noncommercial message.



   (C)   Vehicles displaying signs may not be parked in such a manner
that they function primarily as commercial advertising devices. Vehicles may
not be used as mounting or holding devices for commercial signs.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.190  ANIMATED SIGNS AND ILLUMINATED SIGNS.



   Unless otherwise provided by this code, it is unlawful to erect, allow,
or maintain animated signs or illuminated signs that detrimentally affect
surrounding property. This prohibition does not apply to neon and argon lamps
designed for outdoor display.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.200  ROOF SIGNS.



   Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, it is unlawful to erect,
allow, or maintain a roof sign. However, roofs with a slope varying more than
45 degrees from the horizontal plane are considered wall space. However,
noncommercial temporary signs, whether using illumination or not, may be
mounted on roofs in residential zones between November 14 and January 14 each
year.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.210  SIGNS FACING RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to
erect, allow, or maintain signs with commercial messages that face any
residential area.



   (B)   This prohibition does not apply to commercial establishments
that face streets designated as arterial in the city's general plan.



   (C)   Businesses that face a residential area, are not located on an
arterial street, and do not have other street frontage for identification may
obtain a permit for a sign facing the residential area. Permits issued for
such signs, in addition to any other condition required by this chapter, are
conditioned upon such signs not being illuminated; only on-site directional
signs located on such businesses may be illuminated.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.220  SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION DEVICES.



   It is unlawful to erect, allow, or maintain a sign that blocks or
shadows solar energy collections devices from direct sun exposure in a manner
inconsistent with any state or city regulation.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 3:  EXEMPT SIGNS



§ 16.48.230  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   Unless otherwise provided, the following are exempt signs:



   (A)   Accessory signs. Accessory signs in commercial and industrial
zones. The total area of all such signs displayed by a single establishment
may not exceed two square feet without a permit.



   (B)   Barber poles. Traditional barber poles bearing no advertising
message.



   (C)   Construction project signs. Construction signs displayed on
the same parcel as the project being developed or built during the time
period beginning with the city's issuing a building permit and ending with
the city's issuing of a certificate of occupancy for the last unit or portion
of the building. Construction project signs must comply with the following:



      (1)   One sign in residential zones; two signs in all other
zones;



      (2)   Signs may not exceed six square feet in residential
zones; in all other zones, they may not exceed 16 square feet;



      (3)   Signs may not exceed more than three feet above where
the roof line of the completed structure is located;



      (4)   All signs must be removed before a certificate of
occupancy is granted for the last unit or portion of the project.



   (D)   Directional signs. Directional signs that do not include
commercial copy. Signs must comply with the following:



      (1)   Signs cannot exceed an area of two square feet or a
height of three feet;



      (2)   Not more than eight directional signs may be placed on a
lot or building;



   (E)   Flags and flagpoles. Flags or similar devices with
noncommercial images and symbols. Flags must comply with the following:



      (1)   Flags cannot exceed a maximum vertical dimension of five
feet;



      (2)   Flags cannot exceed a maximum horizontal dimension of
eight feet;



      (3)   All flags located on a lot cannot exceed a maximum
cumulative area of 40 square feet;



      (4)   When flags are mounted on a pole, the height of the pole
cannot exceed 30 feet above grade; and



      (5)   Not more than one flag pole may be placed on a lot.



   (F)   Historical site plaques. Plaques or signs designating a
building as a historical structure.



   (G)   Legally required or authorized signs. Signs and notices
required by or specifically authorized by law. Such signs must conform to the
requirements of the authorizing law. When the law states a minimum size for
such size, but no maximum size is stated, then the minimum size under the law
is also the maximum size permitted by this chapter.



   (H)   Noncommercial group signs. Signs displaying the name(s) or
message(s) of noncommercial organizations or groups may be displayed on
private land. Such signs must comply with the following:



      (1)   Signs must be freestanding;



      (2)   Signs cannot exceed a maximum area of six square feet
per display face;



      (3)   Signs cannot exceed a maximum number of two display
faces;



      (4)   Signs cannot exceed a maximum height of eight feet;



      (5)   Signs may be illuminated, however signs may not include
bare light bulbs over 15 watts that are visible from the front of the sign or
beyond the property line. Neon or argon lamps are permissible;



      (6)   Signs must be located near entrances to the city from an
arterial road or freeway and be oriented toward traffic as it enters the city;



   (I)   Noncommercial messages; residential uses. Noncommercial signs
displayed in legal dwelling units. Signs must comply with the following:



      (1)   Signs cannot exceed a maximum cumulative area of six
square feet;



      (2)   Signs cannot exceed a maximum height of eight feet;



      (3)   Not more than two noncommercial signs (except campaign
signs) may be placed on a lot.



      (4)   Freestanding signs must be placed at least five feet
back from the property line;



      (5)   Illuminated signs are prohibited.



   (J)   Professional and business shingles. Name plate signs for a
professional office or a professional office within another establishment, or
shingle type signs which announce the name and type of profession, business
or activity. Signs must comply with the following:



      (1)   Signs must be displayed on the ground or second floor of
a main building in all commercial and industrial zones;



      (2)   Signs cannot exceed three square feet in area;



      (3)   Signs must be fastened directly to the building or hang
from an awning, building overhang or canopy, and may not extend beyond the
property line; and



      (4)   Signs may not be displayed in a residential zone or on a
residential use.



      (5)   Signs must comply with any master sign plans in place
for the subject property.



   (K)   Public interest notices. Notices placed on bulletin boards or
kiosks maintained by the state or other public entity for the purpose of
displaying such notices.



   (L)   Public message signs. Signs displaying noncommercial messages
for public information, such as designation of restrooms, telephone
locations, smoking rules, and door openings. Such signs may not exceed three
square feet in area.



   (M)   Real estate signs. Real estate signs as defined in Cal. Civ.
Code § 713. Signs must comply with the following:



      (1)   Signs must be displayed on private real property;



      (2)   One sign may be placed on the real property to which it
pertains in residential zones; four signs may be placed on the real property
to which they pertain in all other zones;



      (3)   Signs cannot exceed six square feet in residential zones
or 16 square feet for all other zones;



      (4)   Signs must be removed within 15 days after the
advertised property is sold, rented or leased.



   (N)   Special events for charitable and other noncommercial groups
and establishments. Moving and portable signs held by humans for the special
events of charitable, nonprofit, and noncommercial organizations. Signs must
comply with the following:



      (1)   Signs may be displayed only on the day of the actual
special event;



      (2)   Signs cannot exceed six square feet in area;



      (3)   Not more than three such signs may be displayed for each
location at which the special event takes place.



   (O)   Temporary freestanding signs. Temporary freestanding signs as
regulated by this chapter.



   (P)   Temporary real estate directional signs. Signs that identify
and provide directional information to any residential property that is
offered for sale, or for rent for the first time. Signs must comply with the
following:



      (1)   Signs must be located only along the most direct single
route to the residential property along arterial streets;



      (2)   Not more than one sign is permitted at each intersection;



      (3)   Signs must be removed when the subject property is sold
or, for temporary signs, when the event ends;



      (4)   Signs cannot exceed nine square feet in area;



      (5)   Signs cannot exceed five feet in height;



      (6)   Signs must not be displayed on public property.



      (7)   Relationship to applicable law: temporary real estate
directional signs allowed under this section are in addition to those
specifically allowed by state law.



   (Q)   Temporary window signs. A maximum of two temporary window
signs are permitted for each single tenant building and one temporary window
sign is permitted for each tenant within a multiple tenant building or
complex.  Up to 20% of the total window area per business may be covered
with temporary window signs made of paper, cloth, plastic, cardboard, or
similar temporary materials. Any temporary window sign must be either
attached to the interior of the window, or of weatherproof paint affixed to
the exterior of the window, or both. A temporary window sign may be displayed
a maximum of 120 days per year, not to exceed 30 consecutive days. Signs may
not obscure views into the business by law enforcement personnel.



   (R)   Time and temperature signs. Signs in commercial and industrial
zones that indicate the time and temperature. Signs must comply with the
following:



      (1)   Signs must not exceed 50% of the area permitted for wall
signs;



      (2)   Signs may be illuminated signs.



   (S)   Warning signs. Signs displaying messages warning of danger are
allowable if they do not exceed three square feet in area.



   (T)   Vending machine signs. Permanent signs painted on or attached
to vending machines, gas pumps, ice containers or similar dispensing devices.
Signs must be oriented primarily to pedestrians on the property and not
toward the street. The sign message or copy must relate to the items vended
by such machine. Vending machine signs may not display offsite commercial
messages.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



DIVISION 4:  SIGN PERMITS



§ 16.48.240  SIGN PERMITS.



   Unless otherwise provided, sign permits are required for the following:



   (A)   For placing, erecting, moving, reconstructing, altering, or
displaying of any sign or advertising display in the city;



   (B)   Structural, design, color, or illumination alterations to
existing signs;



   (C)   Sign permits are not required for minor maintenance or minor
repairs to existing legally erected signs. However, some repairs may still
require building or electrical permits.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.250  FEES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by federal, state, or local laws,
or other City Council authorized restrictions, all fees applicable to this
chapter will be established by City Council resolution.



   (B)   Charges will be imposed for city services provided to a
permittee. Such charges will be determined by the applicable servicing city
department(s) and will be based on the actual cost incurred by the city in
providing such services. Such service charges will include, without
limitation, charges for labor, supervision, overhead, administration and
attorneys fees. Additional charges may be imposed to cover the cost of
extraordinary permit investigation and staff costs, if the director
determines this necessary.



   (C)   Fee waivers. Upon an applicant's request, the Director may,
but is not required to, seek a fee waiver from the City Council for a permit.
Fees may only be waived for the following applicants:



      (1)   Non-profit groups with current Internal Revenue Code
501(c)(3) status, government agencies, and public schools; or



      (2)   Community service groups or organizations without
current Internal Revenue Code 501(c)(3) status where the City Council, by
resolution, determines that the proposed sign provides services that meet
community needs and it is in the public interest to waive such fees.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.260  ADDITIONAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Uniform code permits. If required by the uniform codes adopted
by this code, for example, the building, electrical or plumbing codes,
persons seeking to erect, attach, or install signs, must obtain a building
permit, or other similar permit, before erecting, attaching, or installing
such signs.



   (B)   Encroachment permit. If a sign requires an encroachment permit
under this chapter, then the terms and conditions of the encroachment permit
may be incorporated into the sign permit.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.270  SINGLE PERMIT FOR MULTIPLE, RELATED SIGNS.



   Where multiple copies of the same temporary sign will be simultaneously
displayed, or when a series of temporary signs will change copy relating to
the same subject matter, the Director may issue one permit for the entire set
of temporary signs.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.280  SUBSEQUENT PERMITS.



   When an applicant seeks a sign permit for an illegal sign, the fee for
such a sign permit will be doubled to cover the city's additional
administrative expenses.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 5:  PERMIT APPLICATIONS



§ 16.48.290  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT - FORM AND CONTENT.



   Permit applications must be filed with the Director, in form prescribed
by the Director, and contain all of the following information:



   (A)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone
numbers of the person filing the application;



   (B)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone
numbers of the owner of the property upon which the sign will be located;



   (C)   The written consent of the legal owner for the property on
which the sign will be located and all lessees or persons having possession
of the property;



   (D)   Three copies of a sign plan that includes the following
information:



      (1)   A drawing of appropriate scale showing the entire
property upon which the proposed sign would be displayed. The drawing must
show property lines, abutting streets, and the location and dimensions of
existing and proposed buildings and signs;



      (2)   An illustration of appropriate scale showing the
proposed sign including its dimensions, area, materials, colors, and types of
illumination;



      (3)   Structural and electrical details; and



      (4)   The address of the property upon which the sign will be
displayed.



   (E)   With respect to any proposed sign that constitutes an
"advertising display" as defined by Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 5202, and is
intended to be placed or maintained within 660 feet from the edge of the
right-of-way of any interstate or primary highway and the copy of which is
visible from such interstate or primary highway, the applicant must submit
reasonable evidence demonstrating compliance with or exemption from the
regulations of the Outdoor Advertising Act (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 5200
et seq.).



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.300  SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIRECTOR.



   In addition to the information required in this chapter, applications
for all permits authorizing a sign will include such supplemental information
which the Director may find reasonably necessary, given the type of sign, in
order to determine whether to approve or deny a permit authorizing such sign
in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. Such additional
information may not include the sign copy or content, but must only be
related to non-communicative aspects of the proposed sign.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 6: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS



§ 16.48.310  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION - TIME FOR REVIEW.



   The Director must determine whether or not an application is complete
within 21 days after the application was first submitted. If deemed
incomplete, the Director must provide written notice of incompleteness to the
applicant and identify what is required to make the application complete. An
applicant must make corrections to the application within 21 days after
receiving notice to avoid paying a new application fee. If the Director fails
to provide a notice of incompleteness within 21 days, then the application is
deemed complete on the date of application.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.320  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Director must issue a permit if:



      (1)   The application was complete in accordance with this
chapter;



      (2)   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and



      (3)   Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional
approval in writing.



   (B)   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform
to the general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special
permit conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the Director to protect
public safety or welfare.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.330  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION - PERMIT DENIAL.



   A permit may be denied for the following reasons:



   (A)   The application is incomplete;



   (B)   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental
application information requested by the Director;



   (C)   The proposed sign does not conform with this code including,
without limitation, provisions of the uniform codes adopted by reference;



   (D)   The applicant failed to obtain such additional permits as may
be required by this code;



   (E)   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;



   (F)   The applicant installed a sign in violation of this chapter
and, at the time the permit application is submitted, such illegal sign was
not rendered legal, removed, or listed in the application;



   (G)   There is any other existing code violation located on the site
of the proposed sign(s) (other than an illegal sign that is not owned or
controlled by the applicant and is located at a different business location
on the site from that for which the approval is sought) at the time of the
application;



   (H)   The application is substantially the same as an application
previously denied, unless:



      (1)   Twelve months elapsed since the date of the last
application, or



      (2)   New evidence or proof of changed conditions is furnished
in the new application;



   (I)   The applicant has not obtained any applicable use permit.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.340  ALTERNATIVE PLACE OR MANNER.



   If the Director denies a permit for a sign that would be acceptable by
changing the sign's place or manner, then the Director will inform the
applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the alternative
place or manner, then the Director will issue a permit in accordance with
this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.350  CRITERIA FOR PERMIT CONSIDERATION.



   The Director's determination whether or not to issue a permit and, if
issued, what conditions are placed in a permit, must be guided solely by the
standards and criteria set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 7:  PERMIT CONDITIONS



§ 16.48.360  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS - INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.



   In addition to all other conditions, permittees must enter into a hold
harmless agreement with the city which will, in part, indemnify the city, its
officers, employees, and agents, from any liability arising from the
permittee's sign in a form approved by the City Attorney's office.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.370  TIME LIMIT.



   Signs authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter must be
erected within one year of the issuance of the permit. Otherwise, such
approval is null and void.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.380  DISPLAY OF SIGN PERMIT NUMBER REQUIRED.



   The sign permit number must be affixed to each approved sign so that
the approval of the sign can be verified by field inspection. The permit
number must be easily readable from ground level but does not have to be part
of the sign face.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.390  SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Grounds for special permit subsequent conditions. The Director
may condition previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts
not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   Notice of special permit subsequent conditions. Should
subsequent conditions be required, the Director will serve written notice on
the permittee of this decision.



   (C)   Except where otherwise provided, a permittee may seek review
of imposition of subsequent conditions to the Director as provided in this
chapter. The Director's decision is a final determination. There will be no
right of City Council appeal.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.400  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Director will revoke a sign permit upon learning or
discovering facts requiring permit denial not previously disclosed or
reasonably discoverable.



   (B)   The Director may revoke a sign permit when the permittee or
sign violates the permit’s terms and conditions; provided, however, that
the Director will not revoke a permit without warning the permittee and
allowing him/her to correct the violation(s) within a reasonable time.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 8:  APPEALS



§ 16.48.410  RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative
review of the Director's decision pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.420  TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be
commenced within five days from the date on which written notice of the
Director's decision is served on the applicant/permittee.



   (B)   If request is untimely, the Director may, nevertheless, extend
the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.430  COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   A request for administrative review will be on a form provided by the
Director and contain the following information:



   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the person making
the request;



   (B)   A description of the decision, determination or order which is
the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order
was made or issued;



   (C)   A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and



   (D)   Such other information as may be required by the Director.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.440  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the
Director will provide a copy of the notice to the City Manager within two
business days.



   (B)   Upon receiving a request for review from the Director, the
City Manager will review the request and, within ten days of receiving the
request notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:



      (1)   The Director's decision is affirmed;



      (2)   The Director's decision is modified;



      (3)   The Director's decision is reversed and a permit is
issued or issued without special conditions.



   (C)   The City Manager may, but is not required to, conduct a
hearing at a time and place determined at the City Manager's sole discretion.



   (D)   In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any
notification to the requestor must set forth any modifications of the
Director's decision.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.450  ADDITIONAL APPEALS.



   Unless otherwise provided, an applicant may appeal the City Manager's
decision to the Planning Commission within ten days of that decision as
provided elsewhere in this code or by city policy and procedure. Appeals to
the City Council may be accomplished as set forth in this code.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.460  EXPEDITED REVIEW.



   Pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.8(c), and any successor
statute or regulation, the permits under this chapter are designated for
expedited judicial review pursuant to the procedure set forth in Cal. Civ.
Proc. Code § 1094.8, or any successor statute or regulation.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 9:  MASTER SIGN PLAN



§ 16.48.470  MASTER SIGN PLAN - WHEN REQUIRED.



   A master sign plan is required whenever:



   (A)   Three or more separate nonresidential tenant spaces are
created on the same parcel;



   (B)   Four or more permanent non-exempt signs are proposed for a
single use; or



   (C)   The Director determines that a master sign plan is needed
because of special project characteristics (e.g., the size of proposed signs,
limited site visibility, a business within a business, the location of the
site relative to major transportation routes, etc.) or when unique,
creatively designed signs are being proposed and certain aspects of the
sign's design (e.g., animation) might not otherwise be allowed.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.480  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   As a part of any required Conditional Use Permit, Planned
Development permit, or other discretionary permit process involving three or
more separate nonresidential tenant spaces, a master sign plan must be
submitted.



   (B)   The master sign plan must show the size, location, number, and
design of all proposed signs, but need not show actual sign copy.



   (C)   A master sign plan does not exempt signs in the project from
building permits.



   (D)   All signs subsequently erected on a property for which a
master sign plan was approved must conform to that master sign plan.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.490  FINDINGS.



   To approve a master sign plan, the Planning Commission must find as
follows:



   (A)   The master sign plan complies with the purpose of this
chapter, including the sign design guidelines;



   (B)   Proposed signs enhance the overall development and are in
harmony with other signs included in the plan with the structures they
identify and with surrounding development;



   (C)   The master sign plan contains provisions to accommodate future
revisions that may be required because of changes in use or tenants; and



   (D)   The master sign plan complies with the standards of this
chapter, except that flexibility is allowed with regard to sign area, number,
location, and/or height to the extent that the master sign plan will enhance
the overall development, achieve superior quality design, and will more fully
accomplish the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.500  REVISIONS TO MASTER SIGN PLANS.



   Revisions to master sign plans may be approved by the Director if the
intent of the original approval is not affected. Revisions that would
substantially deviate from the original approval requires the Planning
Commission approval.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 10:  CALCULATION OF SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT



§ 16.48.510  CALCULATION OF SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT.



   Sign area is calculated as follows and depicted in Figure 48-1:







Figure 48-1



Calculation of Sign Area



   (A)   Single-faced signs.



      (1)   For signs having a distinct border or boundary, sign
area is calculated by multiplying the length times the width or the entire
surface contained within the border, boundary, sign board, or sign face.



      (2)   For signs without distinct border or boundary, sign area
is calculated by computing the area of a simple geometric figure consisting
of not more than eight perpendicular lines which contains all of the writing,
representation, emblem, or other display of the sign.



   (B)   Double-faced signs.  For signs with two identical faces,
arranged back to back in parallel planes, and where the sign faces are
separated by no more than 24 inches, the sign area must be calculated for one
side only.



   (C)   Multi-faced sign.  For a sign with more than one face, where
such sign does not meet the standard of a double-face sign described in this
section, the area must be calculated by adding together the area of all sign
faces visible from any one point.



   (D)   Measurement of sign height.  Sign height is determined by
measuring the distance from the base of the sign or sign pole at grade to the
top of the highest attached component of the sign. Grade must be construed to
be the lower of either:



      (1)   The existing grade before sign construction; or



      (2)   The newly established grade after construction,
exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the
purpose of locating the sign.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.520  DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Architectural context.  Sign design must be compatible with
the architectural design and details of the building the sign or signs serve,
with other signs in the building, and with the business or activity that the
sign or signs identify.



   (B)   Design elements. The following elements must be considered in
sign design:



      (1)   Materials - Creativity in the use of materials is
encouraged. Durable materials which are compatible in appearance to the
building identified by the sign must be used.



      (2)   Colors - Sign colors must complement the building
served, adjacent landscaping and buildings, and signs of adjacent businesses.



      (3)   Size - Sign size and height must be in scale with the
building served and with surrounding buildings. Size and height must also be
appropriate to the distance from which the sign is normally viewed.



      (4)   Letter style - Simple lettering styles must be used.
Legibility must take priority over complexity in the design of the sign face.



      (5)   Placement - Monument and building- mounted signs are
encouraged unless visibility, safety concerns, or site identification
considerations dictate the use of a freestanding sign.



      (6)   Illumination - Illuminated signs must meet the standards
specified in this chapter and the performance standards set forth in this
code.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 11:  TEMPORARY SIGNS



§ 16.48.530  TEMPORARY SIGNS - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except for non-commercial signs, and when otherwise allowed by
this chapter, temporary signs may be displayed only upon private property for
which the legal owner gave written consent to the display. Non-commercial
temporary signs may be displayed with the legal owner's oral consent unless
denied or revoked in writing by the owner.



   (B)   Persons placing temporary signs on display may not remove,
damage, or block the view of any other signs, whether competing or not, and
whether temporary or permanent which were placed on display at an earlier
time.



   (C)   Temporary signs must be constructed and mounted in a manner so
that they do not rip, shred, tear or blow away when exposed to normal weather
conditions.



   (D)   Temporary signs may be displayed on city owned property only
in accordance with City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.540  TEMPORARY FREESTANDING SIGNS - WHERE PERMITTED.



   Temporary freestanding signs are exempt signs and permitted in all
zones subject to the regulations in this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.550  TEMPORARY FREESTANDING SIGNS - NUMBER AND TIME LIMITS.



   (A)   Residential zones. Two temporary freestanding signs per lot
are permitted at all times. In addition, one temporary freestanding campaign
sign is allowed for each political candidate or issue on each street frontage
per lot. All campaign signs must be removed within seven days after the
election for which they are intended. Such signs are in addition to all other
signage allowed in this chapter.



   (B)   Commercial, industrial and open space zones. Two temporary
freestanding noncommercial signs per lot are permitted at all times. In
addition, one temporary freestanding campaign sign is allowed for each
political candidate or issue on each street frontage per lot. All campaign
signs must be removed within seven days after the election for which they are
intended. Such signs are in addition to all other signage allowed in this
chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.560  TEMPORARY FREESTANDING SIGNS - HEIGHT, AREA, LOCATION, AND
ILLUMINATION.



   (A)   Area. Each temporary freestanding sign in a residential zone
may not exceed six square feet in sign area. Temporary freestanding
noncommercial signs in all other zones may not exceed 12 square feet in sign
area.  Temporary freestanding campaign signs not exceeding 32 square feet in
sign area are allowed in all zones.



   (B)   Height. The maximum height of a temporary freestanding sign is
four feet.  Temporary freestanding campaign signs may not exceed ten feet in
height.



   (C)   Location. Signs may be placed in the front yard or side yard
of any property, provided that the signs do not encroach into any public
right-of-way.



   (D)   Lighting. Signs may not be illuminated.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.48.570  TEMPORARY SIGNS - SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   A business may obtain a temporary sign permit for special
events, such as promotional events, grand opening, indoor arts & crafts
shows, etc. Such a permit will allow the permittee to erect temporary signs,
including inflatable objects. A maximum of five signs are allowed per special
event. Permits for temporary signage related to a special event may be
granted for not more than 60 days in any one calendar year. The total area of
signage may not exceed the amount of wall signage that could be permitted for
such a business.



   (B)   For temporary signs displayed before obtaining a temporary
sign permit, the number of display days is calculated from the date on which
the earliest displayed sign first went on display.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.580  TEMPORARY SIGNS - LIMITED SPECIAL EVENT PARKING LOT SALES.



   A business may obtain a temporary sign permit for special event parking
lot sales such as outdoor promotional events, carnivals, etc. Commercially
zoned properties conducting limited special event parking lot sales, as
provided by this code, may display not more than five temporary signs, each
with a maximum area not exceeding 12 square feet. The temporary signs allowed
under this section may be displayed not more than four consecutive days.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.590  TEMPORARY SIGNS - LOT AND SIDEWALK SALES.



   Commercial establishments conducting lot and sidewalk commercial
activities, as provided by this code, may display not more than two temporary
signs. Signs may not exceed 12 square feet.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.600  TEMPORARY SIGNS - REMOVAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All temporary signs must be removed within two business days after the
use concludes or when the permit expires, which ever is first in time.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 12:  DEALERSHIP SIGNS



§ 16.48.610  DEALERSHIP SIGNS.



   In addition to signage otherwise allowed and upon approval of a sign
permit by the Director, dealerships located within the C-G, C-H, C/LI, LI and
I zones may display banners, flags, pennant, streamers and similar devices
pursuant to the following standards:



   (A)   Light poles.  Each light pole within the dealership may
display banners below the light fixtures having an area not greater than 40
square feet per side. If banners are mounted on more than two arms, the total
area of all sides of the banners cannot exceed 80 square feet per light pole.
A flag up to nine square feet may also be displayed atop each light pole.
Flags cannot project more than six feet above the top of the light poles.



   (B)   Wall and fence banners.  In addition to banners and flags
otherwise allowed by this chapter, banners are allowed on walls, fences and
between light poles. The total area of all such banners within a dealership
cannot exceed 1200 square feet. Banners must be oriented for viewing
primarily from arterial roads, freeways, or within the dealership, and not
from adjacent residential neighborhoods.



   (C)   Vehicle displays.  Each vehicle may have an inflatable sign
or flag attached to it so long as it does not extend more than eight feet
above the vehicle.



   (D)   Strings of flags.  A dealership may display strings of flags,
with material extending not more than 18 inches from the string. Strings of
pennants and streamers are limited to one linear foot per foot of street or
freeway frontage and cannot project more than 15 feet above the ground.



   (E)   All banners, inflatable signs, and flags must be kept clean
and in a state of good repair at all times.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 13:  REGULATIONS BY ZONE



§ 16.48.620  TRANSFERABILITY OF SIGNAGE RIGHTS.



   (A)   Wall signs and projecting signs for a single establishment.
Signs for one establishment may not be transferred from one establishment to
another even if both are located on the same property or share contiguous
street frontages or adjacent areas within a building. Any single
establishment may increase the otherwise allowable display area of any one
permanent sign by up to 10% by transferring the same amount of display area
from another sign which the establishment is allowed to display. This does
not, however, allow the sign area on any one wall to exceed the per wall area
limits set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Freestanding signs. By private agreement between
establishments, continuous street frontages may be combined to qualify for a
freestanding sign, the display face of which may be shared by establishments
contributing to the qualifying frontage.



   (C) Unusual signs. Unless specifically prohibited, signs that are
single, double, multi-faced, curved cylindrical, spherical, triangular or
oddly shaped, may be permitted, provided they satisfy all other provisions of
this code.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.630  AGRICULTURAL, OPEN SPACE, AND RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURE ZONES.



   Signs erected in the A-1 (Agricultural), R-A (Residential-Agriculture),
and O (Open Space) zones must be constructed or erected in conformance with
the standards specified in Table 48-2.



 


TABLE 48-2
Signs in Agricultural and Open Space Zones




Zone

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



A-1

(Agricultural)

and

R-A

(Residential- Agriculture)
 
1 sign per business
 
32 sf
 
10 ft.
 


2 temporary signs per business
 
6 sf
 
10 ft.
 
Each sign must be securely affixed to a structure produce stand and must not
be located within any public right-of-way or private road easement.

 


O

(Open Space)
 
Either 1 freestanding sign or 1 monument sign per street or parking lot
frontage
 
32 sf
 
Freestanding:

12 ft.

Monument:

6 ft.
 



 



Abbreviations: sf = square feet; ft. = feet



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.640  RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   Signs in the HR-PD (Hillside Residential Planned Development), R-1
(Single- family Residential), R-1a (Small Lot Single-family Residential), R-2
(Medium Density Multi-family Residential), R-3 (Medium-High Density
Multi-family Residential), R-4 (High Density Multi-family Residential) and
Mobile Home Park (MHP) zones may be constructed or erected in conformance
with the standards specified in Table 48-3.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.650  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Unless expressly allowed by this section, signs with
commercial copy are prohibited in residential zones. Onsite commercial
nonconforming signs may remain on display until the business ceases operation.



   (B)   Unless expressly allowed by this section, illuminated signs
are prohibited. Temporary noncommercial signs may be displayed in residential
neighborhoods during the time period between November 15 and January 5. Such
displays may be illuminated and do not require a permit.



 




TABLE 48-3
Signs in Residential Zones by Type of Use




Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



Single-family and Duplex Units

 
 
Residential Sign:

2 per lot
 
2 sf.
 
No higher than 5 ft. above the average finished grade level of the lot or
building site or 8 ft. above such level if mounted on a building wall.
 
Signs must not be constructed of reflective materials, but may be
illuminated.  However, the illumination source must not exceed 25 watts.


Single-family and Duplex Units

 
 
2 on-site directional signs (monument style only)

 
 
80 sf.
 
6 ft. above grade maximum
 
1. On-site signs must not be located or project beyond the building site nor
beyond the ultimate street line, if any.

 

2. No such sign may be located within 500 ft. of any freeway right-of-way.

 

3. The term of any permit for such signs is 18 months or when the last of the
units in the subdivision is have been sold, whichever occurs first.

 

4. As a condition for issuing a building permit for such sign, the sign owner
must provide the city with a written right of entry to the property.


Single-family and Duplex Units
 
2 off-site directional signs (monument only)
 
36 sf for any combination of signs at a single location
 
6 ft. above grade maximum
 
Off-site subdivision directional signs must be a minimum of 500 feet apart.


Apartment, Condominiums, Townhomes, and similar developments
 
1 wall sign per development for identification purposes only
 
12 sf
 
8 ft. maximum
 
1.Such signs must not contain any commercial or advertising copy, other than
the occupation of any occupant.

 

2.Signs may be constructed of reflective materials or illuminated.  However,
the illumination source must not exceed 25 watts.


1 monument sign per street or parking lot frontage
 
32 sf
 
6 ft. maximum
 


Public or

Semi-public Uses in Residential Zone
 
1 wall sign per development
 
12 sf
 
8 ft. maximum
 
Such signs must not contain any commercial or advertising copy.


1 monument sign per street or parking lot frontage
 
32 sf
 
6 ft. maximum
 




 



Abbreviations: sf = square feet; ft. = feet



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.660  COMMERCIAL ZONES.



   (A)   Provisions in this section apply to the Neighborhood
Commercial (C-N), Commercial Office (C-O), General Commercial (C-G), and
Highway Commercial (C-H) zones.



   (B)   Signs must be constructed or erected in conformance with the
standards specified in Table 48-4.



 




TABLE 48-4
Signs in Commercial Zones




Zone/Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



C-N (Neighborhood Commercial)

 
 
1 canopy or 1 under- canopy sign per building entrance

OR

 
 
Canopy: 0.5 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum of 50 sf

 

Under-canopy: 4 sf
 
Maximum of 2 ft. for sign face.

 

Maximum of 18 inches projection above canopy fascia.

 
 
Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway and 14 ft. minimum for roadway

 


1 freestanding pole sign per development

OR
 
20 sf
 
12 ft. maximum
 
A Conditional Use Permit is required


1 monument sign per parking lot or street frontage;

OR
 
24 sf
 
6 ft. maximum
 
None


1 projecting sign per development

 

OR
 
0.5 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum of 12 sf

 
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall, or facade of the
building.

 

No sign must project more than 6 ft. above floor level of the 2nd floor of
any multi- story building.

 
 
1. A projecting sign can only be used if no canopy, freestanding, or monument
sign exists for the development.

 

2. Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 

3. No sign must project outward from the face of the building wall or the
building facade more than 5 ft.


C-N
 
1 wall sign per building frontage
 
1.0 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum of 50 sf
 
No such sign must project above the roof peak, parapet, wall, or facade of
the building.
 
A total of 2 signs are permitted on corner lots or where 2 tenants occupy a
parcel, provided that each sign not exceed 50% of the total allowable maximum
wall sign area for the site.


C-N
 
2 permanent window signs
 
The total area of all window signs (temporary and permanent) must not cover
more than 20% of the total window area
 
 
 
Commercial copy for permanent signs limited to business identification


C-O
 
1 canopy or 1 under- canopy sign per building entrance

 

OR
 
Canopy: 0.5 sf. per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of
50 sf.

 

Under-canopy: 4 sf.
 
Maximum of 2 ft. for sign face. Maximum of 18 inches projection above canopy
fascia.
 
Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway and 14 ft. minimum for roadway


1 freestanding sign per development; OR
 
24 sf.
 
15 ft.
 
A Conditional Use Permit is required.


1 monument sign per parking lot or street frontage; OR
 
32 sf.
 
6 ft.
 
None


1 projecting sign per development

 

 

 

OR
 
0.5 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 12 sf.
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall or facade of the
building.

 

No sign must project more than 6 ft. above floor level of the 2nd floor of
any multi- story building.
 
1. A projecting sign can only be used if no canopy, free- standing, or
monument sign exists for the development.

 

2. Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 

3. No sign must project outward from the face of the building wall or the
building facade more than 5 ft.


 
 
1 wall sign per building frontage

 

 

AND
 
1.0 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 50 sf
 
No such sign must project above the roof peak, parapet, wall, or facade of
the building.
 
A total of 2 wall signs are permitted on corner lots or where 2 tenants
occupy a parcel, provided that each sign not exceed 50% of the total
allowable maximum wall sign area for the site.


C-O
 
2 permanent window signs
 
The total area of all window signs (temporary and permanent) must not cover
more than 20% of the total window area.
 
 
 
Commercial copy for permanent signs limited to business identification.


C-G (General Commercial)
 
1 canopy or 1 under- canopy sign per building entrance

 

OR
 
Canopy: 0.75 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of
50 sf.

 

Under-canopy: 4 sf.
 
Maximum of 2 ft. for sign face.

 

Maximum of 18 inches projection above canopy fascia.
 
Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway and 14 ft. minimum for roadway


 
 
1 projecting sign per development

 

 

AND
 
0.75 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum of 18 sf
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall or facade of the
building.

 

No sign must project more than 6 ft. above floor level of the 2nd floor of
any multi- story building.
 
1. A projecting sign can only be used if no canopy sign exists for the
development.

 

2. Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 

3. No sign must project outward from the face of the building wall or facade
more than 5 ft.


 
 
Either 1  freestanding sign per development or 1 monument sign per parking
lot or street frontage; AND
 
Freestanding: 24 sf

 

 

Monument: 32 sf
 
Freestanding: Height of building or 35 ft., whichever is less

 

Monument: 6 ft.
 
A Conditional Use Permit is required for a freestanding sign.


 
 
1 wall sign per building frontage
 
1.0 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 50 sf
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall or facade of the
building.
 
A total of 2 wall signs are permitted on corner lots or where 2 tenants
occupy a parcel, provided that each sign not exceed 50% of the total
allowable maximum wall sign area for the site.


C-G
 
2 permanent window signs
 
The total area of all window signs (temporary and permanent) must not cover
more than 20% of the total window area.
 
 
 
Commercial copy for permanent signs limited to business identification.


C-H (Highway Commercial)

 
 
1 canopy or 2 under- canopy signs per building entrance

 

OR
 
Canopy: 1.0 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of
75 sf

 

Under-canopy: 4 sf
 
Maximum of 2 ft. for sign face.

 

Maximum of 18 inches projection above canopy fascia.

 
 
Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 


 
 
1 projecting sign per development

 

 

AND

 
 
1.0 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 24 sf.

 
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall or facade of the
building.

 

No sign must project more than 6 ft. above floor level of the 2nd floor of
any multi- story building.

 
 
1. A projecting sign can only be used if no canopy sign exists for the
development.

 

2. Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 

3. No sign must project outward from the face of the building wall or the
building facade more than 5 ft.


 
 
Either 1 free- standing sign per development; OR
 
24 sf
 
Height of building or 45 ft., whichever is less
 
A Conditional Use Permit is required.


 
 
1 monument sign per parking lot or street frontage; AND
 
32 sf
 
6 ft.
 
None


C-H
 
1 wall sign per building frontage
 
1.5 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 150 sf
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall or facade of the
building.
 
A total of 2 wall signs are permitted on corner lots or where 2 tenants
occupy a parcel, provided that each sign not exceed 50% of the total
allowable maximum wall sign area for the site.




 



Central Business District



   (C)   Provisions in this section apply to the CBD (Central Business
District) zone.



   (D)   Unless otherwise provided, a maximum of two signs are
permitted for any one business.



   (E)   Signs must be constructed or erected in conformance with the
standards specified in Table 48-5.



 


TABLE 48-5
Signs in the Central Business District




Zone/Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



CBD (Central Business District)
 
Canopy sign: 2 per building frontage.
 
1 sf per linear foot of building frontage.

 

Sign area must not exceed 50% of the total fascia area
 
Maximum letter height of 8 inches.

 

Maximum of 18 inches projection above canopy fascia.
 
1. Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 

2. Internal or "back- lit" illumination is prohibited.

 

3. Sign must be integrated into the design of the awning or canopy.


Flush-mounted or painted wall sign:

1 per building frontage.
 
1 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum of 50 sf
 
Maximum letter height of 18 inches.
 
1. Sign must be located on the building face in area specifically intended
for signage, or where such signage will appear integral to the building
design.

 

2. Sign must not block or cover any significant architectural feature of the
building.

 

3. Total lettered space must not exceed 65% of total sign area.

 

4. "Can" or cabinet type wall signs are not permitted.



 


Zone/Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



CBD (Central Business District)

(Continued)
 
Projecting sign:

1 per building frontage.
 
24 sf.
 
6 ft.
 
1. If a single-tenant projecting sign exceeds a 2-ft. width, a minimum
height-to-width ratio of 2:1 must be maintained.

 

2. If a hanging sign is used below an awning or fixed canopy, a width-

to-height ratio of at least 2:1 must be maintained.

 

3. Overall height of multi-tenant projecting signs must not exceed 6 ft.
Individual signs must not exceed 18 inches in height.

 

4. The sign may be directly attached to the building face or suspended from
decorative brackets.

 

5. The sign and structural supports must be designed as a compatible unit and
be attached to the building in manner that will not damage or compromise the
building character.


 
 
2 permanent window signs
 
The total area of all window signs (temporary and permanent) must not cover
more than 20% of the total window area.
 
 
 
Commercial copy for permanent signs limited to business identification.



 


Zone/Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



 
 
Menu boards:

1 per table allowed under a sidewalk café permit.
 
A maximum of 2 ft x 2 ft per sign.
 
 
 
1. Permitted only as part of a sidewalk café permit.

 

2. Signage on the menu board is limited to the name of the business and the
items to be sold.

 

3. Sign location must not obstruct any doorway or be located within the 5 ft
pedestrian pathway identified in the sidewalk café permit.

 

4. Menu boards must not be included in the calculation of sign area.



 



Abbreviations: sf = square feet; ft = feet



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1172,
passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.48.670  INDUSTRIAL ZONES.



   Signs erected in the C/LI (Commercial/Light Industrial), LI (Light
Industrial) and I (Heavy Industrial) zones must be constructed or erected in
conformance with the standards specified in Table 48-6.



 


Table 48-6
Signs in Industrial Zones




Zone/Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



C/LI (Commercial/ Light Industrial)
 
1 canopy or 1 under- canopy sign per building entrance

 

OR
 
Canopy: 1 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 75
sf

 

Under-canopy: 4 sf
 
Maximum of 2 ft. for sign face.

 

Maximum of 18 inches projection above canopy fascia
 
Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.


 
1 projecting sign per development

 

 

AND
 
1.0 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 24 sf
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall or facade of the
building.

 

No sign must project more than 6 ft. above floor level of the 2nd floor of
any multi- story building.
 
1. A projecting sign can only be used if no canopy sign exists for the
development.

 

2. Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 

3. No sign must project outward from the face of the building wall or the
building facade more than 5 ft.


Either 1 freestanding sign per development

OR
 
24 sf
 
Height of building or 30 ft., whichever is less
 
A Conditional Use Permit is required.


1 monument sign per parking lot or street frontage

AND
 
32 sf
 
6 ft.
 
 



 




Zone/Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



C/LI
 
1 wall sign per building frontage
 
1.5 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 150 sf
 
Such signs must not project above the roof peak, parapet, wall, or facade of
the building.
 
A total of 2 wall signs are permitted on corner lots or where 2 tenants
occupy a parcel, provided that each sign not exceed 50% of the total
allowable maximum wall sign area for the site.


 
 
2 permanent window signs
 
The total area of all window signs (temporary and permanent) must not cover
more than 20% of the total window area.
 
 
 
Commercial copy for permanent signs limited to business identification.


LI (Light Industrial)
 
1 canopy or 1 under- canopy sign per building entrance

 

 

OR
 
Canopy: 0.75 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of
75 sf

 

Under-canopy: 4 sf.
 
Maximum of 2 ft. for sign face.

 

Maximum of 18 inches projection above canopy fascia.
 
Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.


1 projecting sign per development

 

 

AND
 
0.75 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 18 sf.
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall or facade of the
building.

 

No sign must project more than 6 ft. above floor level of the 2nd floor of
any multi- story building.
 
1. A projecting sign can only be used if no canopy sign exists for the
development.

 

2. Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 

3. No sign must project outward from the face of the building wall or the
building facade more than 5 ft.


Either 1 freestanding sign per development

OR
 
24 sf.
 
Height of building or 30 ft., whichever is less
 
A Conditional Use Permit is required.


1 monument sign per parking lot or street frontage;

AND
 
32 sf.
 
6 ft.
 
 




 


Zone/Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



 
 
1 wall sign per building frontage
 
1.0 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 100 sf.
 
Such signs must not project above the roof peak, parapet, wall, or facade of
the building.
 
A total of 2 wall signs are permitted on corner lots or where 2 tenants
occupy a parcel, provided that each sign not exceed 50% of the total
allowable maximum wall sign area for the site.


I (Industrial)

M-1 (Manufacturing)
 
1 canopy or 2 under- canopy signs per building entrance

 

 

 

OR
 
Canopy: 1.0 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of
100 sf

 

Under-canopy: 4 sf.
 
Maximum of 2 ft. for sign face.

 

Maximum of 18 inches projection above canopy fascia
 
Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 


1 projecting sign per development
 
1.0 sf per lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 24 sf.
 
No sign must project above the roof peak, parapet wall or facade of the
building.

 

No sign must project more than 6 ft. above floor level of the 2nd floor of
any multi- story building.
 
1.  A projecting sign can only be used if no canopy sign exists for the
development.

 

2.  Clearance: 8 ft. minimum for pedestrian walkway.

 

3.  No sign must project outward from the face of the building wall or the
building facade more than 5 ft.

 

4.  Where more than 1 sign is permitted per lot or site, the cumulative
total sign area must not exceed 1.0 sf per lineal foot of building frontage.


Either 1 freestanding sign per development

OR
 
24 sf.
 
Height of building or 30 ft.,

whichever is less
 
A Conditional Use Permit is required.



 


Zone/Use

 

Type of Sign and Number Permitted

 

Size Restrictions

 

Other Regulations




Maximum Area per Sign

 

Height Restrictions



I, M-1
 
1 monument sign per parking lot or street frontage

AND
 
32 sf.
 
6 ft.
 
None


1 wall sign per building frontage
 
1.0 sf per linear foot of building frontage, with a maximum area of 100 sf.
 
No such sign must project above the roof peak, parapet, wall or facade of the
building.
 
A total of 2 wall signs are permitted on corner lots or where 2 tenants
occupy a parcel, provided that each sign not exceed 50% of the total
allowable maximum wall sign area for the site.



 



Abbreviations: sf = square feet; ft - feet



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



DIVISION 14:  NONCONFORMING SIGNS



§ 16.48.680  ABATEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, all signs legally
and lawfully existing before the effective date of this chapter that do not
comply with its provisions are nonconforming. All nonconforming signs must be
removed or modified to comply with the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with the procedures established herein.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.690  CONTINUATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   A nonconforming sign may only be displayed and maintained as
set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Nonconforming signs must be maintained and repaired as set
forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.700  RESTRICTIONS ON EXISTING SIGNS.



   Any nonconforming sign may be continued in operation and maintained
after the effective date of this chapter. However, nonconforming signs must
not be:



   (A)   Replaced with another nonconforming sign;



   (B)   Moved to another location on the property or to another
property;



   (C)   Structurally altered as to extend the useful life of the sign;



   (D)   Expanded or enlarged; or



   (E)   Re-established after damage or destruction of more than 50% of
the sign value, as determined by the Director at the time of such damage or
destruction, unless required by law or unless such move, alteration,
enlargement, or re-establishment will result in the elimination of the
nonconformity.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.710  ABATEMENT SCHEDULE.



   All nonconforming signs must be discontinued, removed from their sites,
or altered to conform to the requirements of this chapter within the time
schedules specified in Table 48-7.



 


TABLE 48-7
Nonconforming Sign Abatement Schedule




Type of Nonconforming Sign

 

Abatement Schedule



1. Animated, illuminated, or moving signs
 
Within 1 year of the date that the sign becomes nonconforming


2. Wall signs
 
Within 2 years of the date that the sign becomes nonconforming


3. All other nonconforming signs
 
Within 5 years of the date that the sign becomes nonconforming



 



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.720  NONCOMPLIANCE UNLAWFUL.



   If at the expiration of the time specified for removal or modification,
such removal or modification has not been completed, such sign is declared to
be a public nuisance. Abatement, or other enforcement action, may proceed
using the procedures set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.730  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED FOR BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   No building permit may be issued with respect to any property for a use
conforming to the provisions of this code until any nonconforming sign or any
sign illegally maintained on the property is removed or modified to comply
with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.740  INVENTORY.



   All existing illegal on-premises signs and abandoned signs must be
inventoried and identified as required by Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 5491.1.
The inventory and identification must commence within six months from the
date this chapter becomes effective. Within 60 days after the six-month
period, the city may commence abatement of the identified preexisting illegal
and abandoned on-premises advertising displays.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



DIVISION 15:  SIGN REMOVAL



§ 16.48.750  UNSAFE SIGNS.



   Unsafe signs may be removed by the city without prior notice.
Alternatively, the Director may issue a notice of violation and give the
permittee, property owner or person in possession and control of the property
15 days to cure the violation. In the case of an unsafe sign removed by the
city, the costs of such removal and storage are borne by the permittee,
property owner, or person in possession and control of the property, as
applicable, and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it
collects any other debt or obligation. No unsafe sign that has been removed
and stored by the city may be released until the costs of removal and storage
are paid. If an unsafe sign remains unclaimed for a period of 30 days after
notice of removal is sent to the permittee, property owner, or person in
possession and control of the property, it is deemed to be unclaimed personal
property and disposed of in accordance with the law.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.760  ILLEGAL SIGNS.



   Any illegal sign must be removed or brought into conformity by the
permittee, property owner, or person in possession and control of the
property following written notice from the Director. Such notice must specify
the nature of the violation, order the cessation thereof and require either
the removal of the sign or performance of remedial work in the time and
manner specified by the notice. The time for removal or repair may not be
less than 15 days from the date of mailing the notice. The Director's order
may be appealed to the Planning Commission in the manner provided by this
code. Should the order be appealed to the Planning Commission, which,
following a hearing, upholds the Director's order, the city need not follow
the abatement procedures set forth below to abate the sign.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.770  LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS - SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.



   The city cannot require any legal nonconforming sign to be removed on
the sole basis of its height or size if special topographic circumstances
would result in a material impairment of visibility of the sign or the
owner's or user's ability to adequately and effectively continue to
communicate to the public through the use of the sign. The owner or user may
maintain the sign at the business premises and at a location necessary for
continued public visibility at the height or size at which the sign was
previously erected pursuant to all applicable codes, regulations and permits.
Such signs are deemed to be in conformance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



§ 16.48.780  ABATEMENT OF SIGNS.



   Whenever the permittee, property owner, or person in possession or
control of the property fails to comply with a director's order requiring
compliance with this chapter, the city may abate any such sign in the
following manner:



   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The City Council may declare, by
resolution, as public nuisances and abate all illegal signs within its
jurisdiction. The resolution must describe the property upon which or in
front of which the nuisance exists by stating the lot and block number
according to the County Assessor's map and street address, if known. Any
number of parcels of private property may be included in one resolution.



   (B)   Notice of hearing. Before the City Council adopts the
resolution, the City Clerk must mail not less than ten days' written notice
to all persons owning the property described in the proposed resolution as
determined by the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the
notice is prepared. In addition, the notice must be sent to all known
persons, if any, in possession or control of such property if their names are
different from those appearing on the assessment roll, and to the permittee,
if any. The notice must state the date, time and place of the hearing and
generally describe the purpose of the hearing and the nature of the illegal
sign.



   (C)   Posting of notice.



      (1)   After a resolution is adopted, the enforcement officer
must cause notices to be conspicuously posted on or in front of the property
on or in front of which the illegal sign exists.



      (2)   Notice must be substantially in the following form:



NOTICE TO REMOVE ILLEGAL SIGN



Take Notice that on the           day of                     ,
20    , the Santa Paula City Council adopted a resolution declaring that an
illegal sign is located on or in front of this property which constitutes a
public nuisance. The sign must be abated by being removed. Failure to remove
the sign will result in the City taking action to remove it. The cost of such
removal will be assessed upon the property from or in front of which the sign
is removed and will constitute a lien upon the property until paid. Refer to
the resolution for further particulars. A copy of this resolution is on file
in the office of the City Clerk. All property owners having any objection to
the proposed removal of the sign are notified to attend a meeting of the City
Council of the City of Santa Paula to be held on                  
  at           a.m./p.m. at (     location     ), when their
objections will be heard and given due consideration.



Dated this             day of                     , 20    .



                                                   
             



City Clerk



City of Santa Paula



      (3)   This notice must be posted at least ten days before the
time for hearing objections by the City Council.



   (D)   Written notice of proposed abatement.



      (1)   In addition to posting notice of the resolution and
notice of the meeting when objections will be heard, the City Council must
direct the City Clerk to mail written notice of the proposed abatement to the
all persons owning the property described in the resolution. The City Clerk
must cause the written notice to be mailed to each person on whom the
described property is assessed in the last equalized assessment roll
available on the date the City Council adopted its resolution.



      (2)   The City Clerk must confirm with the County Assessor the
names and addresses of all the persons owning the property described in the
resolution. The address of a property owner shown on the assessment roll is
conclusively deemed to be the proper address for the purpose of mailing the
notice. If the County of Ventura poses any charges upon the city for the
actual costs of furnishing the list, the city will reimburse the county and
such costs shall be a part of the cost of abatement assessed against the
property owner.



      (3)   The notices mailed by the City Clerk must be mailed at
least ten days before the time for hearing objections by the City Council.
The notices mailed by the Clerk must be substantially in the form of notice
set forth above.



   (E)   Hearing--Continuances--Objections--Finality of decision--Order
to abate.



      (1)   At the time stated in the notices, the City Council will
hear and consider all objections to the proposed removal of the sign. It may
continue the hearing from time to time. By motion or resolution at the
conclusion of the hearing, the City Council will allow or overrule any
objections. At that time, the city acquires jurisdiction to proceed and
perform the work of removal.



      (2)   The City Council's decision is final. If objections have
not been made, or after the City Council has disposed of those made, the
Council will order the enforcement officer to abate the nuisance by having
the sign removed. The order must be made by motion or resolution.



   (F)   Entry upon private property. The enforcement officer or city
contractor may enter private property to abate the nuisance.



   (G)   Removal by owner--Special assessment and lien for costs. 
Before the enforcement officer takes action, the property owner or person in
possession or control of the property may remove the illegal sign at the
owner's own cost and expense. Notwithstanding such action, in any matter in
which an order to abate was issued, the City Council may, by motion or
resolution, further order that a special assessment and lien be limited to
the costs incurred by the city in enforcing abatement upon the property,
including investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical, legal
and other related costs.



   (H)   Cost of abatement; itemization.



      (1)   The enforcement officer will keep an account of the cost
of abatement of an illegal sign. Such officer must submit to the City
Council, for confirmation, an itemized written report showing that cost.



      (2)   A copy of the report must be posted at least three days
before being submitted to the City Council, on or near the City Council
chambers door, with notice of the time of submission.



      (3)   At the time fixed for receiving and considering the
report, the City Council will hear it with any objections of the property
owners liable to be assessed for the abatement. The City Council may modify
the report if it is deemed necessary. The City Council may then confirm the
report by motion or resolution.



   (I)   Abatement by contract. The nuisance may, in the sole
discretion of the City Council, be abated by performance on a contract
awarded by the City Council on the basis of competitive bids let to the
lowest responsible bidder. The contractor performing the contract must keep
an itemized account and submit such itemized written report for each separate
parcel of property required by this section.



   (J)   Special assessment and lien.



      (1)   The cost incurred by the city in enforcing abatement
upon the parcel or parcels, including investigation, boundary determination,
measurement, clerical, legal or other related costs, are a special assessment
against that parcel. After the assessment is made and conformed, a lien
attaches on the parcel upon recordation of the order confirming the
assessment in the office of the Ventura County Recorder. In the event any
real property to which a lien would attach was transferred or conveyed to a
bona fide purchaser for value, or if the lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for
value was created and attaches thereon, before the date on which the first
installment of the assessment would become delinquent, the lien which would
otherwise be imposed by this section will not attach to the real property and
the costs of abatement and the costs of enforcing abatement, as confirmed,
relating to the property will be transferred to the unsecured roll for
collection.



      (2)   Upon confirmation of the report, a copy must be given to
the County Assessor and Tax Collector, who will add the amount of the
assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for
municipal purposes.



      (3)   The city must file a certified copy of the report with
the County Assessor, Tax Collector and County Auditor on or before August
10th of each calendar year. The description of the parcels reported must be
those used for the same parcels on the Ventura County Assessor's map books
for the current year.



      (4)   The city may request the County Auditor to enter each
assessment on the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land.



      (5)   The city will further request the County Auditor to
collect the amount of the assessment at the time and in the manner of
ordinary municipal taxes. Any delinquencies in the amount due are subject to
the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure provided for ordinary
municipal taxes.



      (6)   The city acknowledges that the County Tax Collector may
collect assessments without reference to the general taxes by issuing
separate bills and receipts for the assessments. It is further acknowledged
that the lien of assessment has the priority of the taxes with which it is
collected, and further, that all laws relating to levy, collection and
enforcement of county taxes apply to these special assessments.



   (K)   Issuance of receipts for abatement costs. The enforcement
officer may receive the amount due on the abatements costs and issue receipts
at any time after the confirmation of the report and until ten days before a
copy is given to the Assessor and Tax Collector or, where a certified copy is
filed with the County Auditor, until August 1 following the confirmation of
the report.



   (L)   Refund of assessments. The City Council may order a refund of
all or part of an assessment pursuant to this section if it finds that all or
part of the assessment was erroneously levied. An assessment, or part
thereof, will not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the City Clerk on
or before November 1 after the assessment has become due and payable. The
claim must be verified by the person who paid the assessment or by the
person's guardian, conservator, executor or administrator.



(Ord. 1122, passed 10-18-04)



CHAPTER 16.50:  ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES



Section



   16.50.010   Purpose



   16.50.020   Definitions



   16.50.030   Applicability



   16.50.040   Distances



   16.50.050   Regulations for both major and minor wireless
communications facilities



   16.50.060   Application requirements and procedures



   16.50.070   General development requirements



   16.50.080   Setback requirements and guidelines



   16.50.090   Required findings for all wireless facilities



   16.50.100   Additional regulations for minor facilities



   16.50.110   Additional regulations for major facilities



   16.50.120   Additional design requirements



   16.50.130   Public property facilities



   16.50.140   Appeal or review and notices



   16.50.150   Reservation of right to review permits



   16.50.160   Facility removal



§ 16.50.010  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of these requirements and guidelines is to
regulate the location and design of antennas and wireless communications
facilities, as defined herein, to facilitate the orderly deployment and
development of wireless communications services in the City of Santa Paula,
to ensure that the design and location of wireless communications facilities
are consistent with policies of the city previously adopted to guide the
orderly development of the City of Santa Paula to promote the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience, quality of life and general welfare of the
city's residents, to protect property values and enhance aesthetic appearance
of the city by maintaining architectural and structural integrity, and by
protecting views from obtrusive and unsightly accessory uses and facilities.



   (B)   In adopting and implementing the regulatory provisions of this
chapter, it is the intent of the Santa Paula City Council to further the
objectives specified above, and to create reasonable regulations in
conformance with the provisions of the Telecommunication Act of 1996 without
unnecessarily burdening the federal interests in ensuring access to
telecommunication services, in promoting fair and effective competition among
competing communication service providers, and in eliminating local
restrictions and regulations that, with regard to antennas, may preclude
reception of an acceptable signal quality or may unreasonably delay, prevent,
or increase the cost of installation, maintenance, or use of such antennas.



   (C)   The Santa Paula City Council has found and determined that
these requirements and guidelines for antennas and wireless communications
facilities are necessary to attain such purposes.



   (D)   These regulations are intended to supersede any applicable
provisions of the Santa Paula Municipal Code pertaining to such antenna
structures and appurtenant communication equipment and to establish minimum
requirements and flexible guidelines for the governance of antennas and
wireless communications facilities, taking into consideration the rapid
technological advances and the proliferation in use of radio communication
services.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.020  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING  means a subordinate building located on a building
site, the use of which is customarily ancillary to that of a main building or
to the use of the land.



   ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT  means any equipment installed, mounted, operated
or maintained in close proximity to an antenna structure to provide power to
the antenna structure or to receive, transmit, or store signals or
information received by or sent from an antenna.



   ANTENNA STRUCTURE  means an antenna, any structure designed
specifically to support an antenna, and/or any appurtenances mounted on such
structure or antenna.



   COLOCATION  or COLOCATED  means the location of multiple antennas
which are either owned or operated by more than one service provider at a
single location and mounted to a common supporting structure, wall or
building.



   COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICE  means any mobile service that (1) is
offered in return for monetary compensation, (2) is available to the public
or a substantial portion of the public and (3) provides subscribers with the
ability to access or receive communication from the public switched telephone
network. COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICE  includes, but is not limited to, paging
service, wireless data transmission, cellular telephone service, specialized
mobile radio service (SMR), and personal communications service (PCS).



   DISGUISED FACILITY  means any wireless communications facility which
is designed to blend into the surrounding land, architecturally integrated
into a building or other concealing structure, or disguised to appear as
another natural or artificial object that is prevalent in the surrounding
environment.



   FIXED WIRELESS SERVICE  means any service providing radio
communication to or from antenna structures at fixed and specified locations
which are not designed to be moved during operation and which offers the
ability to access or receive communication from the public switched telephone
network.



   GROUND MOUNTED  means a wireless communications facility that is
mounted to a pole, lattice tower or other freestanding structure that is
specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna.



   LATTICE TOWER  means a tower-like structure used to support antennae
and comprised of up to two or more steel support legs.



   MAJOR FACILITY  means a wireless communications facility that is
either ground mounted or roof mounted; provided that the roof mounted
facility is not screened on all four sides by solid material that is
architecturally compatible with the surrounding land uses or exceeds the
maximum height of the applicable zoning district in which the major facility
is located.



   MICROWAVE COMMUNICATION  means the transmission or reception of radio
communication at frequencies of a microwave signal (generally, in the 3GHz to
300GHz frequency spectrum).



   MINOR FACILITY  means a wireless communications facility that is
either (1) wall mounted, (2) utility mounted, or (3) roof mounted in such a
manner that the entire facility is screened by solid material on four sides,
is architecturally compatible with the surrounding land uses, and does not
exceed the maximum height of the applicable zoning district in which the
minor facility is located.



   MOBILE SERVICE  means any temporary service providing radio
communication to or from at least one antenna that is designed to be moved
during operation or used during halts at unspecified locations; or as
otherwise defined in 47 USCS Section 153 and interpreted by the Code of
Federal Regulations and the Federal Register.



   MOUNTED  means any manner of attachment, support, or connection,
whether on ground or on a structure.



   MULTIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICE  means a microwave communication
service that delivers video programming directly to subscribers, including
multichannel multipoint distribution services, instructional television fixed
services, and local multipoint distribution services, or as otherwise defined
by the Section 207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Section 1.4000 of
Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and any interpretive decisions
thereof issued by the Federal Communications Commission.



   RADIO COMMUNICATION  means the transmission and/or reception of
impulses, writing, signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds through
space by means of electromagnetic waves.



   ROOF MOUNTED  means a facility that is mounted on any structure that
is not specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting antennae, in
any manner that does not satisfy either the definition of wall mounted or
utility mounted, and is typically mounted on the roof of a building.



   SATELLITE ANTENNA  means a device used to transmit and/or receive
radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and orbitally-based
uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what are
commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVRO's (Satellite
Television Receiving Antenna), and satellite microwave antennas.



   UTILITY MOUNTED means a facility that is mounted to an existing
above-ground structure that is specifically designed and originally installed
to support electrical power lines, cable television lines, street lighting,
traffic signal equipment, park lighting or a structure on public or private
property deemed by the city to be similar in nature.



   WALL MOUNTED  means a facility that is mounted on any vertical surface
or nearly vertical surface of a building or other existing structure that is
not specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna, i.e.,
the exterior walls of a building, an existing parapet, the side of a water
tank, the face of a church steeple, or the side of a freestanding sign such
that the highest point of the antenna structure is at an elevation equal to
or lower than the highest point of the surface on which it is mounted.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or FACILITY  means an antenna
structure and any appurtenant facilities or accessory equipment located
within city limits and that is used in connection with the provision of
wireless service.



   WIRELESS SERVICE  means any type of wireless service providing radio
communication that satisfies the definition of commercial mobile service,
fixed wireless service, or wireless video service.



   WIRELESS VIDEO SERVICE  means any service providing radio
communication which delivers video programming.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.030  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   All wireless communications facilities which are erected,
located, mounted or modified within the City of Santa Paula on or following
the effective date of this ordinance must comply with this chapter, subject
to the categorical exemptions under paragraph (D) of this section, provided
that:



      (1)   All facilities for which applications were determined
complete by the Planning Department before the effective date of this
ordinance are exempt from the regulations and guidelines of this chapter and
are subject to the regulations and guidelines of the Santa Paula Municipal
Code regulating nonconforming buildings and uses.



      (2)   All facilities for which building permits were issued by
the City of Santa Paula before the effective date of this ordinance are
exempt from the regulations and guidelines of this chapter, and are subject
to the regulations and guidelines of the Santa Paula Municipal Code
regulating nonconforming buildings and uses, unless and until such time as
paragraph (A) of this section applies.



   (B)   All facilities for which building permits and any extension
thereof have expired must comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   All facilities constructed or erected before the effective
date of this ordinance that are in violation of applicable laws, ordinances,
or other regulations are considered an illegal nonconforming facility and are
subject to abatement as a nonconforming use pursuant to the Santa Paula
Municipal Code.



   (D)   The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter until such time as federal regulations are repealed or amended to
eliminate the necessity of the exemption:



      (1)   Any antenna structure that is one meter (39.37 inches)
or less in diameter and is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite
service, including direct-to-home satellite service, as defined by Section
207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Title 47 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, and any interpretive decisions thereof issued by the Federal
Communications Commission;



      (2)   Any antenna structure that is two meters (78.74 inches)
or less in diameter located in a commercial or industrial zone and is
designed to transmit or receive radio communication by satellite antenna;



      (3)   Any antenna structure that is one meter (39.37 inches)
or less in diameter or diagonal



measurement and is designed to receive multipoint distribution service,
provided that no part of the antenna structure extends more than 12 feet
above the principal building on the same lot.



   (E)   The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter, so long as the antenna structure complies with all other zoning
requirements:



      (1)   Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely
to receive UHF, VHF, AM, and FM broadcast signals from licensed radio and
television stations.



      (2)   Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely
in connection with authorized operations of an amateur radio station licensed
by the FCC (i.e., a "HAM" radio transmission).



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.040  DISTANCES.



   For the purpose of this chapter, all distances must be measured in a
straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest
point of the proposed Major Facility to the relevant property line at a point
five feet above ground level.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.050  REGULATIONS FOR BOTH MAJOR AND MINOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES.



   (A)   Both major and minor facilities must be erected, located,
mounted, operated and maintained at all times in compliance with this chapter
and all applicable laws and regulations of the city, the State of California,
and the United States of America.



   (B)   Both major and minor facilities are conditionally permitted in
the applicable zoning district as set forth in the following table:



 

Zoning District
 
Major
 
Minor


All except R-1, R-1(a), R-2, R-3, R-4, R-A, HR1-PD, and HR2-PD
 
CUP
 
CUP


R-1, R-1(a), R-2, R-3, R-4, R-A, HR1-PD, and HR2-PD
 
Not permitted
 
CUP



 



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.060  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Both major and minor facilities proposed to be erected,
located, mounted, operated and maintained at all times require a Conditional
Use Permit (CUP). Each applicant applying for a CUP must submit a completed
CUP application in accordance with the requirements of the Santa Paula
Municipal Code, and such additional or different requirements as are made
applicable by this chapter.



   (B)   In addition to the city submittal requirements, a scaled site
plan must be provided to the city which shows the following information:



      (1)   The proposed location of the wireless communications
facility;



      (2)   Elevations of the wireless communications facility with
dimensions identified;



      (3)   The height of any existing or proposed structure(s);



      (4)   Location of any accessory equipment;



      (5)   Locations of all guy-wires;



      (6)   Location of all above and below ground wiring and
connection cables;



      (7)   Location of existing or proposed easements on the
property;



      (8)   The height of any panels, microwave dishes, or whip
antennas, above ground level;



      (9)   The distance between the antenna structure and any
existing or proposed accessory equipment; and



      (10)   Any other necessary information as may be required by
the Department of Development Services.



   (C)   Any application that is improperly submitted or fails to
contain all of the information as required by this chapter will be deemed
incomplete.



   (D)   Each application must contain a letter of justification
accompanied by written documentation that explains and validates the
applicant's efforts to locate the facility in accordance with the screening
and site selection guidelines set forth in this section.



   (E)   Each application must contain a narrative and map that
discloses the exact location and nature of any and all existing facilities
that are owned, operated or used by the applicant within the City of Santa
Paula, or within five miles of its geographic borders, as well as any
proposed or planned sites that may reasonably be known to the applicant at
the time the application is made.



   (F)    Each application must contain a narrative and appropriate
maps that disclose the geographic area(s) within the City of Santa Paula that
will be serviced by the proposed facility, the geographic area(s) bordering
the City of Santa Paula, if any, that will be serviced by the proposed
facility, the nature of the service to be provided or purpose of the
facility, the reasons, if any, why the applicant cannot locate the facility
outside the City of Santa Paula, and the efforts, if any, that applicant has
made to locate the facility outside the City of Santa Paula.



   (G)   A radio-frequency (RF) report prepared by a qualified RF
engineer acceptable to the city to demonstrate that the proposed facility, as
well as any colocated facilities, complies with current federal RF emission
standards. This RF report must also include signal strength exhibits.



   (H)   Computerized visual assessments or other exhibits equivalent
in a form and manner acceptable to the Planning Director showing the before
and after visual appearances of the proposed facility.



   (I)   A preliminary environmental review in accordance with the city
submittal requirements, with special emphasis placed upon the nature and
extent of visual, public, health, and safety impacts.



   (J)   Evidence of any required licenses and approvals to provide
wireless services in the city.



   (K)   Notwithstanding any permit that may be granted in accordance
with this chapter, the facility must be erected, located, mounted, operated
and maintained at all times in compliance with this chapter and all
applicable laws, regulations and requirements of the Building Code, and every
other code and regulation imposed or enforced by the City of Santa Paula, the
State of California, and the United States Federal Government. Applicants are
separately required to obtain all applicable building and construction
permits that may be required before erecting or installing the facility.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.070  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   The facility must comply with each of the following requirements:



   (A)   A facility must not bear any signs or advertising devices
other than certification, public safety, warning, or other required seals or
required signage.



   (B)   Any and all accessory equipment, or other equipment associated
with the operation of the facility, including but not limited to transmission
cables, must be located within a building, an enclosure, or underground vault
in a manner that complies with the development standards of the zoning
district in which such equipment is located. In addition, if equipment is
located above ground, it must be visually compatible with the surrounding
buildings and either shrouded by sufficient landscaping to screen the
equipment from view, or designed to match the architecture of adjacent
buildings. If accessory equipment will be visible from a residential area or
an arterial street, the applicant must provide a solid masonry block wall
that will screen the equipment from the residential area or another material
that is acceptable to the Planning Director. If no recent and/or reasonable
architectural theme is present, the Planning Director may require a
particular design that is deemed suitable to the subject location.



   (C)   The facility's exterior finish must be comprised of
non-reflective material(s) and painted, screened, or camouflaged to blend
with the materials and colors of surrounding buildings or structures.



   (D)   All screening used in connection with a wall mounted and/or
roof mounted facility must be compatible with the architecture, color,
texture, and materials of the building or structure to which it is attached.



   (E)   Facilities may not be illuminated unless specifically required
by the Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental agencies.



   (F)   The applicant and the property owner if different from the
applicant must consent to future colocation of other facilities on or with
the applicant's facility, unless technological requirements preclude that
colocation.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.080  SETBACK REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES.



   (A)   A facility is considered an accessory building. If the
facility is located in a R1, R2, R3 zones or within 200 feet of a residential
use, then the facility must comply with the setback requirements for such
zone. In all other instances, the extent of compliance with the setback
requirements for the zone in which the facility is located must be considered
by the city in connection with the processing of the CUP.



   (B)   Screening and site selection guidelines. In addition to the
above requirements, the city must consider the following factors in
conjunction with the processing of a CUP.



      (1)   The proposed facility must be designed as a disguised
facility, taking into consideration alternate sites that are available,
including colocation.



      (2)   The proposed facility should be screened or camouflaged
by existing or proposed new topography, vegetation, buildings, or other
structures. Any such improvements must be appropriate for and compatible with
the site and surrounding area.



      (3)   The total size of the proposed facility should be
compatible with surrounding and supporting structures.



   (C)   If feasible, the location of the proposed facility should
conform to the following in order of preference:



      (1)   Colocated with an existing facility or located at a
pre-approved location;



      (2)   Attached to an existing structure such as an existing
building, communication tower, church steeple or utility;



      (3)   Located in an industrial zoning district;



      (4)   Located in a commercial zoning district;



      (5)   Proximity of the proposed facility to residential
structures and to boundaries of residentially zoned districts.



      (6)   The availability of suitable alternative locations for
the facility.



      (7)   The nature of existing uses on adjacent and nearby
properties.



      (8)   Proposed ingress and egress to the facility.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.090  REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR ALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.



   (A)   Wireless communications facilities findings. In addition to
the required findings for Conditional Use Permits contained in § 16.218.040
of the City of Santa Paula Municipal Code, the following findings are
required for every major and minor Conditional Use Permit (CUP) for wireless
communications facilities:



      (1)   That the proposed facility will not create any
significant blockage to public views; and



      (2)   That the proposed facility will be an enhancement to the
city due to its ability to provide additional communication capabilities; and



      (3)   That the proposed facility will be aesthetically
integrated into its surrounding land uses; and



      (4)   That the proposed facility will comply with FCC
regulations regarding interference with the reception or transmission of
other wireless service signals within the city and surrounding community; and



      (5)   That the proposed facility will operate in compliance
with all other applicable Federal regulations for such facilities, including
safety regulations; and



      (6)   That the public need for the use of the facility has
been documented.



   (B)   If the Planning Commission does not approve an application for
such Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Commission must make a written
determination supported by findings as required by 47 U.S.C. §
332(c)(7)(B)(iii).



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.100  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR MINOR FACILITIES.



   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the following
requirements will apply to the following types of facilities:



   (A)   Minor facility height requirements. Notwithstanding any other
provision in the Santa Paula Municipal Code, no minor facility may exceed the
maximum building height for the applicable zoning district unless such
facility receives Planning Commission approval and:



      (1)   The applicant demonstrates that exceeding the height
limitation is necessary for operation of the facility; or



      (2)   The facility is colocated, or contains adequate space
suitable for future colocation, and the height in excess of zoning
requirements is necessary to the proposed shared use.



   (B)   Utility mounted facilities - vertical extensions. A utility
mounted facility may, if approved by the Planning Commission, exceed the
maximum building height limit for the applicable zoning district. The extent
that the utility mounted facility exceeds the height of the existing utility
pole or structure and the need for such height increase must be taken into
consideration by the city in conjunction with the processing of the CUP for
the utility mounted facility.



   (C)   Utility mounted facilities - horizontal extension. The extent
that the utility mounted facility protrudes or extends horizontally from the
existing utility pole or structure must be taken into account by the city in
conjunction with its processing of a CUP for a utility mounted facility. A
utility mounted facility may not protrude or extend horizontally more than 36
inches from the existing utility pole or structure unless the applicant
demonstrates a need for such extension.



   (D)   Additional requirement for all utility mounted facilities. Any
accessory equipment accompanying or that forms part of the utility mounted
facility, and is located on the ground in the area surrounding the utility
pole or structure, must be visually compatible with the surrounding
environment and either shrouded by sufficient landscaping to screen the
accessory equipment from view, or designed to match the architecture of
adjacent buildings. If accessory equipment will be visible from a residential
area or an arterial street, the applicant must provide a solid masonry block
wall that will screen the equipment from the residential area or another
material that is acceptable to the city.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.110  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR MAJOR FACILITIES.



   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the following
requirements will apply to the following types of facilities:



   (A)   Location requirements.



      (1)   No portion or extension of a major facility may protrude
beyond property lines or extend into any portion of property where such
facility is not itself permitted; provided, however, that the city may
approve the location of guy wires in a required setback if such approval is
consistent with the guidelines and requirements set forth in this chapter.



      (2)   Latticed towers must not be located in any R-1, R-1(a),
R-2, R-3, R-4, R-A, HR1-PD zone. In all zones where they may be located, they
must not be located within 100 feet of any property containing a residential
structure.



      (3)   A ground mounted facility must not be located in a
required parking area, vehicle maneuvering area, vehicle/pedestrian
circulation area or area of landscaping such that it interferes with, or in
any way impairs, the utility or intended function of such area.



   (B)   A ground mounted facility may not be permitted unless the
reviewing authority makes the additional finding that, based upon evidence
submitted by the applicant, no existing building or support structure can
reasonably accommodate the proposed facility. Evidence supporting this
finding will be reviewed by the reviewing authority and may consist of any of
the following:



      (1)   No existing buildings or support structures are located
within the geographic area proposed to be served by the applicant's facility.



      (2)   Existing buildings or support structures are not of
sufficient height or structural strength to satisfy the applicant's
operational or engineering requirements.



      (3)   The applicant's proposed facility would create
electromagnetic interference with another facility on an existing structure,
or the existing facility on a building or support structure would create
interference with the applicant's proposed facility.



      (4)   The costs, fees, or contractual provisions required by a
property owner, or by an incumbent wireless service provider, in order to
colocate a new facility on an existing building or structure, or to adapt an
existing building or structure for the location of the new facility, are
unreasonable.



      (5)   There are other limiting factors that render existing
buildings and structures unsuitable for use by the applicant.



   (C)   If the proposed major facility cannot be colocated, it must be
sited at least 1,500 feet from any existing major facility unless the
reviewing authority determines that a shorter distance is required for
technological reasons, or that it would result in less visual obtrusiveness
in the surrounding area.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.120  ADDITIONAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A ground mounted facility must be secured from access by the
general public with a fence of a type or other form or screening approved by
the Planning Commission.



   (B)   A ground mounted facility must be covered with a clear
anti-graffiti material of a type approved by the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission may grant an exception to this requirement if the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that
there is adequate security around the facility to prevent graffiti.



   (C)   Height requirements. Notwithstanding any other provision in
the Santa Paula Municipal Code, no major facility may exceed the maximum
building height for the applicable zoning district in which the facility is
proposed to be located, nor may a roof mounted facility exceed the height of
the structure on which it is mounted by more than the minimum amount
necessary for operation and safety, not to exceed 15 feet. Any application
for a permit exceeding these height limits may not be approved unless:



      (1)   The applicant demonstrates that exceeding the height
limitation is reasonably necessary for operation of the facility; or



      (2)   The facility is colocated, or contains adequate space
suitable for future colocation, and the excess in height is reasonably
necessary to the proposed shared use.



   (D)   Additional screening and site selection guidelines. The
following screening and site selection guidelines must be considered by the
city in conjunction with the processing of all major facility CUPs:



      (1)   A major facility should not be located within 200 feet
of any property containing a residential use.



      (2)   If technical reasons require the placement of a major
facility within 1,500 feet of an existing major facility, under subsection
(a)(5) of § 16.50.080, the new major facility should be located at least 500
feet from the existing major facility.



   (E)   A ground mounted facility should be located in close proximity
to existing above ground utilities, such as electrical tower or utility poles
(not scheduled for removal or undergrounding in the next 18 months), light
poles, trees of comparable height, water tanks and other areas where the
facility will not detract from the image or appearance of the city.



   (F)   A roof mounted facility that extends above the existing
parapet of the building on which it is mounted must be screened by a material
and in a manner that is compatible with the existing design and architecture
of the building.



   (G)   A roof mounted facility, requiring the placement of any guy
wires, supporting structures, or accessory equipment must be located and
designed so as to minimize the visual impact as viewed from surrounding
properties and public streets, including any pertinent public views from
higher elevations.



   (H)   No part of a ground mounted facility should be located in any
required setback.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.130  PUBLIC PROPERTY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Pre-approved locations.



      (1)   The city may approve by resolution, following a duly
noticed public hearing, a list of sites located on public property or within
the public right- of-way and which are approved for major facilities. Each
site must include a description of permissible development and design
characteristics, including but not limited to maximum height requirements.
The city must make said resolution available to all persons upon request. The
approved list of locations may be subsequently amended by resolution from
time to time.



      (2)   All facilities located on a public property site which
is pre-approved in accordance with this section following the effective date
of this ordinance must obtain approval of a CUP in accordance with the Santa
Paula Municipal Code, and any additional or different requirements made
applicable by this chapter.



      (3)   All leases of public property that is pre- approved in
accordance with this section must be non- exclusive. The operator of a
facility located on such public property must make the supporting structure
of the facility available to any other applicant wishing to colocate, to the
extent technically feasible.



      (4)   Requirement for separate lease agreement. Any lease of
city-owned property for the purpose of erecting a wireless communications
facility requires a negotiated lease agreement or other written license
granted by the City of Santa Paula. The existence of a lease agreement or
license does not relieve an applicant of any obligations to obtain
appropriate permits hereunder or otherwise comply with the Santa Paula
Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.140  APPEAL OR REVIEW AND NOTICES.



   Any applicant or the operator and/or owner of a facility may appeal a
final decision of the Planning Director or the Planning Commission. All
appeals must be processed in accordance with the Santa Paula Municipal Code,
including required fees.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.150  RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO REVIEW PERMITS.



   (A)   Changed circumstance. Any Conditional Use Permit granted or
approved pursuant to this chapter must be granted or approved by the city and
its Planning Commission with the reservation of the right and jurisdiction to
review and modify the permit (including the conditions of approval) based on
changed circumstances. Changed circumstances include, but are not limited to,
the following in relation to the approved facility as described and diagramed
in the related site plan: increased height or size of the facility;
additional impairment of the views from surrounding properties; change in the
type of antenna or supporting structure; changed color or materials;
substantial change in location on the site; and an effective increase in
signal output above or near the Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE) limits
imposed by the revised radio frequency emissions guidelines by the Federal
Communications Commission.



   (B)   Additional right to revoke for violation. This reservation of
right to review any permit granted or approved hereunder by the city, its
Planning Commission and/or City Council is in addition to, and not in lieu
of, the right of the city, its Planning Commission and/or City Council to
review and revoke or modify any permit granted or approved hereunder for any
violations of the conditions imposed on such permit.



   (C)   Modification of permit/colocation. Upon review, any changed
circumstance as determined by the Planning Director requires the application
and approval of a modification to the original Conditional Use Permit,
provided that any modification to accommodate colocated facilities may be
approved administratively without the approval of the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



§ 16.50.160  FACILITY REMOVAL.



   (A)   Discontinued use. The operator of a lawfully erected facility,
and the owner of the premises upon which it is located, must promptly notify
the Planning Director in writing in the event that use of the facility is
discontinued for any reason. In the event that discontinued use is permanent,
then the owner(s) and/or operator(s) must promptly remove the facility,
repair any damage to the premises caused by such removal, and restore the
premises as appropriate so as to be in conformance with applicable zoning
codes. All such removal, repair and restoration must be completed within 90
days after the use is discontinued, and must be performed in accordance with
all applicable health and safety requirements. For purposes of this
paragraph, a discontinued use is permanent unless the facility is likely to
be operative and used within the immediately following three- month period.



   (B)   Abandonment. A facility that is inoperative or unused for a
period of six continuous months is deemed abandoned. An abandoned facility is
a nuisance, subject to abatement pursuant to the provisions of the Santa
Paula Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.52:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   16.52.010   Purpose and intent



   16.52.020   Permitted location



   16.52.030   Fences, walls and gates



   16.52.040   Decks



   16.52.050   Other applicable regulations



§ 16.52.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to
protect neighborhood aesthetics and to guard against impacts to adjoining
properties.



   (B)   Any property owner wishing to construct a swimming pool must
submit plans for the swimming pool to the Planning Department, and must have
received written approval of such plans prior to obtaining building permits,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.52.020  PERMITTED LOCATION.



   No swimming pool, hot tub, spa, or similar body of water, or pool
equipment, may be located within three feet of any property line, or within
any front or side yard setbacks.







Figure 52-1



Allowable Area for Pools & Spas



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.52.030  FENCES, WALLS AND GATES.



   All fences, walls and gates required by the Building Code must also
meet the requirements of Chapter 16.44 (Fences, Walls & Hedges).



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.52.040  DECKS.



   (A)   Above ground decks must comply with all setback requirements
of the applicable zone.



   (B)   Ground level decks may be constructed to the property line,
provided adequate drainage features are available to prevent overflow or
splash water from the pool from draining onto the adjacent property.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.52.050  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this chapter, any
applicable requirements in the following chapter(s) apply:



Chapter 154:   Swimming Pools



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.56:  AMUSEMENT ARCADES



Section



   16.56.010   Development standards and use conditions



   16.56.020   Existing businesses



§ 16.56.010  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND USE CONDITIONS.



   All amusement centers or arcades will be subject to the following
restrictions and requirements:



   (A)   No arcade will be permitted within 200 feet of any school,
church, hospital, convalescent hospital, retirement home, residence, or
public playground.  The 200-foot distance will be measured from the front
entrance of the arcade building to the nearest property line of the use
listed in this division.



   (B)   All windows must be kept clear of any item or tint that
obscures full view from the exterior to inside the business. 



   (C)   All arcades must obtain a Conditional Use Permit.  In
deliberating the granting of a Conditional Use Permit, the following factors
will be considered:



      (1)   Possible requirements for parking of vehicles, bikes and
mopeds;



      (2)   Possible requirements for restroom facilities;



      (3)   Possible restrictions on food and alcohol consumption on
the premises;



      (4)   Possible restriction of operating hours and use of the
premises by school children during school hours;



      (5)   Possible requirements for adult supervision and/or
security;



      (6)   Possible requirements for outdoor lighting and trash
receptacles;



      (7)   Possible limitation on the number of machines allowed
per square footage of public floor space;



      (8)   Possible requirement for change machine or insurance of
availability of change;



      (9)   Possible requirement for indoor lighting and
noise-attenuation devices;



      (10)   Possible requirement for a camera/video surveillance
system;



      (11)   Possible requirement for "no loitering" signs;



      (12)   Any other factors which could cause a detrimental
atmosphere to the community so as to limit disturbances to the residents of
the city; and



      (13)   The proximity of the arcade to any residential uses.



   (D)   The Planning Commission will have the authority to deny a
Conditional Use Permit for an amusement arcade if the Commission determines
that the arcade cannot be operated in a given location in a manner that will
not generate problems or incompatibilities with neighboring uses.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.56.020  EXISTING BUSINESSES.



   Any person, upon the effective date of this section, operating an
arcade and holding a valid business license for such operation, is exempt
from the provisions of this section; provided, however, that no expansion of
the use will be permitted without the facility complying with the provisions
of this section.  Expansion will include any increase in the number of
machines or in floor area after the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.58:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES



Section



   16.58.010   Development standards and use conditions



   16.58.020   Existing businesses



   16.58.030   Temporary sales of alcoholic beverages



§ 16.58.010  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND USE CONDITIONS.



   Any use providing alcohol beverage sales for either on-site or off-site
consumption is subject to the following standards and conditions on use:



   (A)   All new sales of alcohol, with the exception of temporary
sales as specified in § 16.58.030 of this chapter, must obtain a Conditional
Use Permit.



   (B)   A new alcohol sales use may only be established in a location
such that the proposed use will not contribute to undue concentration of such
uses in an area where additional such uses would be undesirable, with
consideration to be given to the area's function and character, problems of
crime and loitering, traffic problems and capacity.



   (C)   Except for temporary sales of alcohol, sale of alcoholic
beverages within 300 feet of a public or private school is prohibited on
weekdays between the hours or 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;



   (D)   The proposed use must not adversely affect adjacent or nearby
properties.



   (E)   Adequate litter receptacles must be provided.



   (F)   Where the proposed use is near residential uses, it must be
limited in hours of operation, or



designed and operated, so as to avoid disruption of residents' sleep between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (G)   No signs advertising any kind of alcoholic beverage, including
beer, which will be easily visible from the exterior of the business will be
permitted.



   (H)   Windows must be kept free of signs and other obstructions to
allow visual inspection from the outside.



   (I)   The property owner/operator/applicant and the city must enter
into an enforcement agreement to facilitate the control of the sale of
alcohol, inclusive of spirits, distilled liquor, beer and wine at this site
before selling alcohol on the subject property. This agreement will be
subject to review and approval of the City Council. The agreement must also
obligate any heirs, assigns, and other future owners/operators of the
establishment, or must be replaced by a new similar agreement.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1194, passed 7-7-08)



§ 16.58.020  EXISTING BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Any establishment, upon the effective date of this chapter,
currently holding an active alcohol sales license from the State of
California Bureau of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) to sell alcoholic
beverages, is exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that no expansion of the use will be permitted without the facility complying
with the provisions of this chapter, including the securing of a Conditional
Use Permit.  Expansion includes any increase in square footage of a
business, or request for increase in license privileges after the effective
date of this chapter.



   (B)   All sales of alcohol legally established prior to the city's
requirement for a Conditional Use Permit will expire in the event that the
licensee or owner closes the establishment for more than 30 days, except in
the case of a remodeling, fire, natural disaster, or other physical calamity
beyond the control of the owner.  In such cases, the use will expire within
one year.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.58.030  TEMPORARY SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 16.15 (Commercial
Zones), sales of alcoholic beverages may take place for a maximum of one day
without the necessity of obtaining a conditional use permit.  Such one-day
events are prohibited within 1,000 feet of community street fairs, carnivals,
festivals and parades which have been approved by the City Council. 
However, this prohibition does not preclude the sale of alcohol at these
community events if approved by the City Council.



   (B)   Temporary sales lasting not more than three days, or any
portion thereof over one, must be approved in advance by the City Council. 
The Council may establish conditions regarding such sales to assure
compliance with city codes and the health, safety and welfare of the
public.  The City Council may deny such requests if it finds that the prior
history of the organization or individual requesting the sale warrants such a
denial or if the potential impacts of traffic congestion, loitering, crime,
public drunkenness or other problems appear to be of a magnitude that cannot
be overcome through the imposition of conditions.  Such events are
prohibited within 1,000 feet of community street fairs, carnivals, festivals
and parades that have been approved by the City Council.  However, this
prohibition will not preclude the sale of alcohol at the site of these
community events if approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.60:  CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES



Section



   16.60.010   Development standards and use conditions



   16.60.020   Child day care centers



   16.60.030   Small family day care homes



   16.60.040   Large family day care homes



§ 16.60.010  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND USE CONDITIONS.



   (A)   All child day care facilities must comply with all applicable
state licensing laws at all times.



   (B)   Required parking spaces must be provided for all child day
care facilities in accordance with Chapter 16.46 (Off-street Parking and
Loading) of this Title 16.



   (C)   Outdoor play areas must be provided consistent with state
requirements, based on maximum capacity.  Outdoor play areas must not be
located within required front yards or street facing side yards of
residential properties, or within 20 feet of the ultimate public right-of-way
for commercial or industrial properties.



   (D)   All child day care facilities must comply with noise standards
for the underlying zone, as outlined in Chapter 93 of the Santa Paula
Municipal Code and the Noise Element of the City of Santa Paula General Plan.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.60.020  CHILD DAY CARE CENTERS.



   Child day care centers as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code §
1596.76 are permitted in the C-G General Commercial zones, subject to design
review as outlined in Chapter 16.226 of this Title 16, and conditionally in
all residential, commercial and light industrial zones, pursuant to Chapter
16.218 (Conditional Use Permits).



   (A)   Operating standards.  The following operating standards apply
for day care centers.



      (1)   The hours of operation for any child day care center
must be compatible with the permitted uses in the surrounding area.



      (2)   Outdoor activities may only be conducted between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in residential zones and 6:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. in all other zones.



      (3)   No outdoor play area may be located within ten feet of a
residentially zoned property.



      (4)   Where a child day care center abuts a property in a
residential zone, a masonry wall of minimum height six feet, with screen
landscaping, must be erected and maintained between the two uses.



      (5)   In addition to the parking requirements outlined in
Chapter 16.46 (Off-street Parking), three parking spaces must be provided for
the loading and unloading of children.  Where on-street parking is available
along the street frontage of the day care center, only two of these spaces
are required on site.



      (6)   Loading and unloading areas must be located so that
children do not cross traffic to reach the facility.  The loading and
unloading areas must be designed to minimize interference with traffic and
promote safety of the children.



      (7)   The provider must secure the appropriate child day care
license, as required by the State of California Department of Social
Services.  Proof of such license must be submitted to the Planning Director
prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued to the day care center. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.60.030  SMALL FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES.



   Small family day care homes as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code §
1597.44 are permitted by right in all residential zones in the city, pursuant
to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1597.45.  The provider must secure a small
family day care home license from the State of California Department of
Social Services.  In accordance with Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1597.45,
small family daycares homes are not required to obtain a City of Santa Paula
business license or home occupation permit.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.60.040  LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES.



   The purpose of this section is to set forth the standards,
restrictions, and requirements for the operation of large family day care
homes, as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1597.465, on properties
zoned for single-family dwellings.  Large family day care homes are
permitted as an accessory use for a dwelling located in a residential zone,
subject to design review as outlined in Chapter 16.226 of this Title 16, and
pursuant to the Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1597.46(a)(2). 



   (A)   Operating standards.  The following operating standards apply
for large family day care homes.



      (1)   Parking.



         (a)   One parking space for each employee not residing
in the Large Family Day Care Home dwelling, plus the two parking spaces
required for the occupants of the single family residence as required in
Chapter 16.46  (Off-Street Parking).



         (b)   Three parking spaces for the loading and unloading
of children.  Where on-street parking is available along the street frontage
of the Large Family Day Care Home site, only one of these spaces is required
on site.



         (c)   Not more than three of the parking spaces required
herein, located side by side, will be permitted within the required front
yard setback area, provided that such parking space does not block a public
sidewalk or right-of-way.



         (d)   Up to two of the required on-site parking spaces
may be located in tandem behind the required parking spaces for the occupants
of the dwelling or for employees.  However, in no instance will such tandem
parking result in more than one parking space behind each required occupant
or employee parking space.



      (2)   Traffic control.



         (a)   Residences located on major arterial streets must
provide a child drop-off/pick-up area designed to prevent vehicles from
backing onto the major arterial roadway.



         (b)   The width of the street fronting the Large Family
Day Care may not be less than the State of California standard minimum street
width, which is 40 feet.



      (3)   Noise.  Noise from outdoor play areas must be kept to a
level consistent with residential neighborhoods.  To reduce possible noise
impacts, outdoor play/activity areas must only be used between the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.  The operation of the facility must comply with
residential noise standards contained in § 16.42.070 (Performance Standards,
Noise) and the Noise Element of the City of Santa Paula general plan.



      (4)   Separation.  As a means to maintain the integrity of
residential neighborhoods, new large family day care homes must not be
located within 300 feet of an existing state licensed Large Family Day Care
Home or within 300 feet of any other child day care center licensed to care
for 13 or more children.



      (5)   Residential use.  In accordance with Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 1597.43(a), the Large Family Day Care Home must not
fundamentally alter the nature of the underlying residential use. 
Accordingly, the following standards apply to large family day care homes:



         (a)   The residence must be in compliance with the
development standards for the zone, including, but not limited to, minimum
lot size, lot coverage, parking, fencing, and screening of trash receptacles.



         (b)   The proposed use must comply with all State Fire
Marshal requirements for building and safety that apply to large family
daycare homes, and with all local building and fire codes which apply to
single-family residences.



         (c)   The day care home must be the principal residence
of the provider, and its use as a daycare home must be clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes.



         (d)   The facility must be operated in a manner so as
not to appear as a commercial operation, and the property must be maintained
to preserve the general appearance and character of the residential
neighborhood.  Play equipment must not be located within the required front
yard setback of the property so as to appear as a commercial child-care
center.



         (e)   No structural changes may be proposed that will
alter the character of the building as a residence.



         (f)   The facility will be operated in a manner that
will not adversely affect adjoining residences nor be detrimental to the
character of the residential neighborhood.



         (g)   Signs for the day care home must comply with
Chapter 16.48 for signs in residential zones.



         (h)   The provider must secure a large family day care
home license, as required by the State of California Department of Social
Services.



   (B)   Application procedures.  An application for Design Review
must be filed with the Planning Department pursuant to Chapter 16.226. 
Operation of a large family daycare is not subject to a home occupation
permit; however, such facilities must secure a business license with the City
of Santa Paula.



   (C)   Pre-existing Large Family Day Care Homes.



      (1)   Those Large Family Day Care Homes that exist on the
effective date of this title, and on that date have a valid Large Family Day
Care Home license issued by the State of California, are considered legal
non-conforming uses.  Such non-conforming use may continue until the renewal
date required for State of California licensing of the provider's large
family day care home.  If the provider does not apply for approval of
his/her large family day care home pursuant to this chapter by the date
required for state licensing renewal, then the legal non-conforming use will
be deemed to terminate.



      (2)   In those instances where an application has been filed
in a timely manner, and the Director finds that numerous conditions must be
applied to make the non-conforming large family day care home consistent with
this chapter, the Director may extend the valid non-conforming use status up
to five years.  This extension by the Director would be granted only as a
means to give the applicant adequate time to satisfy the operating standards
provided in this section.  If the operating standards are not satisfied
within the extension period granted by the Director, the legal non-conforming
use will terminate.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.62:  ASSEMBLY HALLS



Section



   16.62.010   Definitions



   16.62.020   Compliance with permit requirements



   16.62.030   Parking requirements



   16.62.040   Compatibility with surrounding uses



§ 16.62.010  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter:



   ASSEMBLY HALL means a building, or portion of a building, used for
large scale public or private gatherings of people. For example, and without
limitation, assembly halls include private educational facilities; religious
institutions; clubs; lodges; and similar kinds of facilities whether
available for public or private use.



(Ord. 1106, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.62.020  COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   Any ancillary uses affiliated with an assembly hall must be
specifically identified and permitted by a validly issued conditional use
permit pursuant to this chapter or be separately permitted in accordance with
the requirements for that zone. For example, and without limitation, a day
care center or private school associated with an assembly hall must be
identified as an authorized use in the conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1106, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.62.030  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Off-street parking must be provided in accordance with the
requirements set forth in this title including, without limitation,
landscaping requirements.



   (B)   Where an assembly hall is established in a residential zone,
the required front yard may not be used for parking vehicles.



(Ord. 1106, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.62.040  COMPATIBILITY WITH SURROUNDING USES.



   (A)   All buildings, structures, and landscaping must be developed
and maintained in a manner compatible with development on surrounding
properties.



   (B)   For assembly halls located within or adjacent to a residential
zone, the Planning Commission may condition hours of operation to ensure
compatibility with adjacent residential uses.



(Ord. 1106, passed 6-21-04)



CHAPTER 16.64:  COMMUNITY CARE FACILITIES



Section



   16.64.010   Definitions



   16.64.020   CUP required



   16.64.030   Findings required



§ 16.64.010  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter. Words and phrases not given a meaning by this section have
the meaning set forth in this title and as set forth in Cal. Health & Safety
Code § 1502.



   COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY or GROUP HOME  has the same meaning as set
forth in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1502 where six or more persons live
together.



   OVERCONCENTRATION  means the presence of one or more community care
facilities, or similar uses, located within 300 feet of a proposed community
care facility site.



(Ord. 1107, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.64.020  CUP REQUIRED.



   Community care facilities require a conditional use permit issued
pursuant to this title and may only be located in general commercial,
residential, and mixed-use residential/commercial zones.



(Ord. 1107, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.64.030  FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   A conditional use permit may be issued if the Planning Commission, or,
if applicable, the City Council finds as follows:



   (A)   Permitting the use would not result in an overconcentration of
community care facilities within the area where the facility is proposed to
be operated;



   (B)   The proposed community care facility would not be located
within one mile of an elementary school if a person convicted of a sex
offense against a minor pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1564 would
reside at the community care facility;



   (C)   The proposed community care facility can be developed and
maintained in a manner compatible with surrounding land uses;



   (D)   Permitting the use would not otherwise be detrimental to
public health, safety, or welfare, subject to the limitations of applicable
law.



(Ord. 1107, passed 6-21-04)



CHAPTER 16.66:  DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES



Section



   16.66.010   Intent and purpose



   16.66.020   Development standards and conditions



§ 16.66.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to ensure that drive-through facilities
do not result in adverse impacts on adjacent properties and residents or on
surrounding neighborhoods due to customer and employee parking demand,
traffic generation, noise, light, litter, or cumulative impact of such
demands in one area, consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of
the General Plan.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.66.020  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS.



   Drive-through facilities may be permitted only with approval of a
Conditional Use Permit.  The use must comply with the property development
standards of the underlying district, as well as the provisions of this
section. 



   (A)   The minimum lot size of any drive-through facility must be
20,000 square feet.



   (B)   The following standards apply:



      (1)   Drive-through facilities must have two-way driveways.



 



      (2)   Minimum queuing distances must be provided as
illustrated in Figure 66-1.



   



      (3)   A parking and vehicular circulation plan encompassing
adjoining streets and alleys must be submitted for review and approval by the
City Engineer Services prior to approval of a Conditional Use Permit.



      (4)   A minimum of one outdoor trash receptacle must be
provided on-site adjacent to each driveway exit.  At least one additional
on-site outdoor trash receptacle must be provided for every ten required
parking spaces.



      (5)   Employees must collect on-site and off-site litter
including food wrappers, containers, and packaging from restaurant products
generated by customers within a radius of 300 feet of the property at least
once per business day.



      (6)   No noise-generating compressors or other such equipment
must be placed on or near any property line adjoining any residential
district or any property used for residential purposes.



      (7)   Drive-up or drive-through speaker systems must not emit
more than 50 decibels 4 feet between the vehicle and the speaker and must not
be audible above the daytime ambient noise levels beyond the property
boundaries.  The system must be designed to compensate for ambient noise
levels in the immediate area.



      (8)   On any lot where a drive aisle or driveway is located
such that vehicle headlights will shine onto an adjacent property zoned for
residential



 



   231



2013 S-18




232   Santa Paula - Development Code



use, a screen wall must be provided to the satisfaction of the Planning
Director.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 1245, passed 9-4-12)







Figure 66-1




Drive-through Facilities




CHAPTER 16.68:  NEWSRACKS



Section



   16.68.020   Purpose




Division 1:  General Provisions




   16.68.030   Definitions



   16.68.040   Administration



   16.68.050   Prohibitions



   16.68.060   Encroachment permits



   16.68.070   Notices



   16.68.080   Fees




Division 2:  Permits




   16.68.090   Application form and content



   16.68.100   Change in application information



   16.68.110   Time for reviewing application



   16.68.120   Permit issuance



   16.68.130   Permit denial



   16.68.140   Notice of denial



   16.68.150   Expedited review



   16.68.160   Term; renewal



   16.68.170   Uniform newsracks




Division 3:  Permit Conditions; Newsrack Regulations




   16.68.180   Permit conditions



   16.68.190   Installation requirements



   16.68.200   Prohibited areas



   16.68.210   Maintenance



   16.68.220   Harmful matter




Division 4:  Appeal




   16.68.230   Right of administrative review



   16.68.240   Time for administrative review



   16.68.250   Commencement of administrative review



   16.68.260   Administrative review



   16.68.270   City Manager decision final




Division 5:  Enforcement




   16.68.280   Minor violations



   16.68.290   Notice of hearing for newsrack removal



   16.68.300   Hearing procedure



   16.68.310   Compliance with removal order



   16.68.320   Recovering city expenses



   16.68.330   Emergency removal



   16.68.340   Abandonment; disposal



   16.68.350   Enforcement



   16.68.360   Liability for fines




Division 6:  Preexisting Newsracks




   16.68.370   Existing newsracks



§ 16.68.020  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with California Constitution
Article XI, § 7, for the purpose of establishing uniform regulations for
allowing newsracks to be placed within the public right-of-way. The city's
intent in adopting this chapter is to establish reasonable time, place, and
manner restrictions on the commercial use of public right-of- ways in order
to preserve public health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



DIVISION 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 16.68.030  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter.



   ADMINISTRATOR  means the City Manager or designee.



   BLINDER RACK  means any opaque material placed in front of the harmful
matter and within the publication vending machine which prevents exposure to
public view.



   DRIVEWAY  means a surfaced area which is designed or used for
vehicular access between a lot and a public street.



   HARMFUL MATTER  means matter which when taken as a whole,
predominantly appeals to the prurient interests of the average person,
applying contemporary statewide standards, meaning a shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and which is patently offensive to the
prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what
is suitable material for minors, and lacks significant literary, artistic,
political, educational, or scientific value for minors. When it appears from
the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination,
distribution or exhibition that it is designed for clearly defined deviant
sexual groups, the predominant appeal of the matter must be judged with
reference to its intended recipient group.



   LOT  has the same meaning as set forth in the zoning regulations of
this Code.



   NEWSRACK  means any self-service coin- operated box, container,
storage unit or other dispenser designed, used or maintained for the display
or sale of any written or printed material, including, without limitation,
newspapers, news periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and
records.



   PERMIT  means a permit issued to a person pursuant to this chapter
allowing a newsrack to be installed within a specifically designated portion
of a public right-of-way.  PERMIT  may also include a uniform newsrack
permit issued in accordance with this chapter.



   PERMITTEE  means a person or entity to whom a permit was issued
pursuant to this chapter.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY  means any city street, sidewalk, pedestrian path,
bike path or any other "public way," as defined by Cal. Sts. & High. Code §
18609, and any successor statute.



   PUBLIC STREET  means any city street or public right-of-way including,
without limitation, the curb and gutter.



   UNIFORM NEWSRACK  means a newsrack of a style, size and color
designated by Council by resolution for permanent installation.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.040  ADMINISTRATION.



   The administrator is authorized to receive applications, issue and
revoke permits, and otherwise administer and implement this chapter.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.050  PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to install, place or maintain a newsrack
or uniform newsrack in any public right-of-way that violates any provision of
this chapter including, without limitation, failing to obtain a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.060  ENCROACHMENT PERMITS.



   Persons who obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter are not required
to also obtain an encroachment permit under this code to install newsracks.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.070  NOTICES.



   (A)   Where the provisions of this chapter require that an
applicant/permittee be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when
personally delivered to the applicant/permittee; when deposited in first
class United States Mail, addressed to the applicant/permittee's last known
address; or when sent via facsimile to the applicant/permittee's last known
facsimile number.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a
permittee/applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the
basis for such decision.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.080  FEES.



   All fees applicable to this chapter are established by City Council
resolution.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



DIVISION 2:  PERMITS



§ 16.68.090  APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENT.



   (A)   Permit applications must be filed by a natural person in the
name of each applicant proposing to obtain a permit.



   (B)   Every application must be signed by the applicant, or the
applicant's authorized representative, under penalty of perjury.



   (C)   Permit applications, and permits, will be in a form prescribed
by the administrator and contain all of the following information:



      (1)   The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening
telephone numbers of the person filing the application;



      (2)   The proposed location for the newsrack; and



      (3)   Such additional information as the administrator may
reasonably require to process the application.



   (D)   Applications must be accompanied by a permit fee.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.100  CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Whenever any change occurs in the information contained in the
permit, the permittee must give the administrator written notice of the
change within 30 days of the date that the change becomes effective.



   (B)   If a permittee fails to give the administrator timely written
notice of a change in the information contained in the application, the
administrator may charge the permittee an additional administrative fee.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.110  TIME FOR REVIEWING APPLICATION.



   After receiving a completed application, the administrator must review
the application and either issue or deny a permit within 30 days.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.120  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The administrator must issue a permit if:



      (1)   The application was complete in accordance with this
chapter;



      (2)   There are no grounds for denying the permit; and



      (3)   The applicant accepts the permit in writing.



   (B)   Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform
to the permit conditions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.130  PERMIT DENIAL.



   A permit can be denied for the following reasons:



   (A)   The application is incomplete;



   (B)   The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental
application information requested by the administrator;



   (C)   Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;



   (D)   The application is submitted by a person with a suspended
permit or whose permit was revoked; or



   (E)   The application seeks authorization for a newsrack that is
prohibited by this code or unlawful under any other local, state, or federal
law.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.140  NOTICE OF DENIAL.



   Where the administrator denies a permit, the administrator must serve
notice to the applicant.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.150  EXPEDITED REVIEW.



   Pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.8(c), and any successor
statute or regulation, the permits under this chapter are designated for
expedited judicial review pursuant to the procedure set forth in Cal. Civ.
Proc. Code § 1094.8, or any successor statute or regulation.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.160  TERM; RENEWAL.



   Unless suspended or revoked, permits issued pursuant to this chapter
have a term of one year. Permits must be renewed not later than 30 days
before they expire in order to be maintained. Should a permit expire, the
permittee must comply with this chapter to obtain a new permit.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.170  UNIFORM NEWSRACKS.



   (A)   By resolution, the Council may from time to time establish
uniform newsrack locations. The Council must first hold a public hearing, for
which notice must be sent at least 15 days in advance to all persons
requesting notice, or whose name and address appears on an existing newsrack
in the subject location, and after such hearing must find that the location
carries a substantial volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, that uniform
newsracks are feasible at the location, and that it is in the public interest
for such newsracks.



   (B)   The resolution must describe the location; designate the
particular point(s) at that location where uniform newsracks may be
installed; specify the maximum number of uniform newsracks to be allowed at
the location; and specify the style, size, color or other attributes required
of uniform newsracks at the location. Such specification should not require
uniform newsracks made by any particular manufacturer. The resolution may
direct the administrator to install a kiosk(s), pedestal(s), or other support
structure to accommodate a stated number of newsracks.



   (C)   No person may install a uniform newsrack at a uniform newsrack
location without first obtaining a uniform newsrack permit from the
administrator.



   (D)   Upon the adoption of a resolution by Council establishing a
uniform newsrack location, interested persons may apply for such permit. The
administrator must hold all such applications for 30 days after the date the
resolution was adopted and may then issue all permits applied for up to the
maximum number established, if any, in the resolution.



   (E)   Permits are determined by a random selection process. The
first application identified by random selection will be issued a permit for
the most favorable location, and so on until the maximum number, if any, is
reached. Applicants seeking permits for more than one newsrack in a single
location will be allotted adjacent spaces. The remaining applications must be
denied and the applicants notified. Where fewer applications are received
than the maximum number of positions allowed by the resolution, permits for
the remaining positions may be allotted on a first-come, first-served basis.



   (F)   Each year, during the month of December, the administrator
must draw lots in the above manner for permits for the next calendar year
from among those holding permits and any new applications received by
December 1.



   (G)   The Council may at any time, on its own motion or upon request
of any person, by resolution, increase the maximum number of available
positions. In the event of such increase, or in the event a position becomes
available by abandonment or otherwise, such position(s) must be allotted by
the above procedure.



   (H)   Upon being granted a permit, the applicant may permanently
install a uniform newsrack as described in the resolution, either affixing it
to the pavement or ground, or in the event the resolution directs the
administrator to install support structures, then to such support structure.



   (I)   A uniform newsrack permit will, in addition to all other
provisions of this section, be conditioned with all other requirements of
this chapter.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



DIVISION 3:  PERMIT CONDITIONS; NEWSRACK REGULATIONS



§ 16.68.180  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter have the following general
conditions:



   (A)   Permittees must maintain a valid business license issued
pursuant to this code;



   (B)   Permittees must pay all fees required by this chapter.



   (C)   Newsracks cannot unreasonably:



      (1)   Interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.



      (2)   Interfere with or impede ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business located adjacent to a public right-of-way.



      (3)   Interfere with any public utility facility located
within the public right-of-way or in close proximity thereto.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided, newsracks must be placed within
the public right-of-way.



   (E)    Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the
city which will, in part, indemnify the city, its officers, employees, and
agents, from any liability arising from a permittee's activities in a form
approved by the City Attorney's office.



   (F)   Permits are not transferable to another person or to another
location.



   (G)   The name, address, and telephone number of the permittee must
be permanently affixed to newsracks.



   (H)   Each newsrack must have affixed to it in a readily visible
place a notice setting forth the name and address of the person responsible
for maintaining the newsrack and a working telephone number to call to report
a malfunction, or to obtain a refund in the event of a malfunction of the
coin-return mechanism.



   (I)   Each newsrack must be maintained in accordance with this Code.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.190  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Each newsrack must comply with each of the following requirements:



   (A)   Size.  No newsrack may exceed five feet in height, 30 inches
in width, or two feet in depth.



   (B)   Placement.  Newsracks may only be placed in a public
right-of-way near a curb or adjacent to a wall of a building. The rear of
newsracks placed near a curb must be placed not less than 18 inches nor more
than 24 inches from the face of the curb. The rear of newsracks placed
parallel to a wall or building must be placed not more than six inches from
the wall or building. No newsrack may be placed or maintained in a public
right-of-way opposite one or more newsracks.



   (C)   Groups of newsracks.  Newsracks may be placed next to each
other, provided that no group of newsracks must extend more than ten feet six
inches along a curb or wall and a space of no more or less than three feet
must separate each group of newsracks from another group of newsracks. There
may be no more than three of the above described groups of newsracks located
on a public right-of-way within a block.



   (D)   Anchoring.  Each newsrack must be securely anchored to the
ground or sidewalk.



   (E)   Each newsrack that require patrons to pay for a newspaper must
be equipped with a working coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the
machine to obtain an immediate refund in the event a person is unable to
receive the publication paid for. The coin-return mechanisms must be
maintained in good working order.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.200  PROHIBITED AREAS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no newsrack may be
placed, installed, used or maintained as follows:



   (A)   Within one foot of any area improved with lawn, flowers,
shrubs or trees;



   (B)   Within three feet of:



      (1)   The entrance or exit to any building;



      (2)   Any display window in any building abutting a sidewalk
or public right-of-way. No newsrack may be located directly in front of any
display window of any building abutting a public right- of-way without the
written consent of the person or entity legally in occupancy or otherwise in
control of the premises on which the display window is located. Proof of such
consent must be included in the permit application. If such consent is
withdrawn, any newsrack placed in front of a display window must be removed
within 14 days of the date of written notice from the city to the owner of
such newsrack.



   (C)   Within five feet of:



      (1)   Any marked crosswalk;



      (2)   The curb return of any intersecting public streets;



      (3)   Any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or any
other emergency facility;



      (4)   Any designated bus stop area or any sign marking a
designated bus stop;



      (5)   Bus bench; or



      (6)   Any curb painted blue, pursuant to the provisions of
Cal. Veh. Code § 21458;



   (D)   Within ten feet of any driveway;



   (E)   In any location whereby the clear passage on a sidewalk for
pedestrian traffic is reduced to less than five feet;



   (F)   Within any public street;



   (G)   Within 100 feet of a newsrack containing the same edition of
the same publication, except where bulk of a particular edition is such that
more than one rack is required, in which case said newsracks must be placed
side-by-side;



   (H)   Within 300 feet of a uniform newsrack location, except for any
period, not to exceed 30 days, during which a uniform newsrack permit has
been granted at the location but the applicant has been unable to obtain a
uniform newsrack;



   (I)   Chained or otherwise attached to any fixture. All newsracks
must be permanently affixed to the pavement or otherwise anchored to a
concrete base. Newsracks anchored to concrete bases must have a minimum
weight of 100 pounds empty. Uniform newsracks which have been established and
permitted pursuant to this chapter may be permanently affixed to the pavement
or authorized support structures as established by City Council resolution.



   (J)   Be used for advertising, selling or storing material other
than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publication sold
therein.



   (K)   No newsrack may remain empty for a period of 30 consecutive
days.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.210  MAINTENANCE.



   Each newsrack must be maintained in a clean and attractive condition
and in good repair at all times, and no issue or edition of any publication
may be allowed to remain in any such newsrack for a period exceeding the
publication period of the material offered for sale therein or 30 consecutive
calendar days after the date of the initial issuance or publication of such
material, whichever is lesser. Specifically, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, each newsrack must be reasonably free of dirt
and grease; be reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint;
be reasonably free of rust and corrosion; have no broken cracked, dented,
blemished or discolored plastic or glass parts; have no torn, peeling or
fading paper or cardboard parts or inserts; and have no broken or misshapen
structural parts.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.220  HARMFUL MATTER.



   Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 313.1(d), any harmful matter displayed
in a public place from which minors are not excluded must be concealed with
blinder racks, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to
view.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



DIVISION 4:  APPEALS



§ 16.68.230  RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative
review of the administrator's decisions pursuant to this chapter including,
without limitation, decisions regarding permit denial.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.240  TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be
commenced within five days from the date on which written notice of the
administrator's decision is served on the applicant/permittee.



   (B)   If a request is untimely, the administrator may, nevertheless,
extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown, but in no
event may a request be filed more than 30 days after notice was served.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.250  COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   A request for administrative review must be on a form provided
by the administrator and contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
making the request;



      (2)   A description of the decision, determination or order
which is the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination
or order was made or issued;



      (3)   A brief description of all grounds for making the
request; and



      (4)   Such other information as may be required by the
administrator.



   (B)   A request for administrative review must be accompanied by a
fee in an amount determined by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.260  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon request for administrative review being filed, the
administrator will provide a copy of the notice to the City Manager within
two business days.



   (B)   Upon receiving a request for review from the administrator,
the City Manager will review the request and, within ten business days of
receiving the request notice, provide the appellant with a written
notification that:



      (1)   The administrator's decision is affirmed;



      (2)   The administrator's decision is modified;



      (3)   The administrator's decision is reversed and a permit is
issued. Under such circumstances, the fee collected for an appeal must be
returned to the permittee within 30 days of the City Manager's decision.



   (C)   The City Manager may, but is not required to, conduct a
hearing at a time and place determined at the City Manager's sole discretion.
In the event of a hearing, the rules of evidence will not apply. The City
Manager may consider such evidence as the City Manager may deem reliable. The
City Manager may adopt such additional reasonable rules of procedure that may
facilitate the progression of such a hearing.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.270  CITY MANAGER DECISION FINAL.



   The City Manager's decision is final. There is no right to appeal a
decision to the City Council. Any court challenge must be filed within 90
calendar days of the City Manager's decision in accordance with Cal. Civ.
Proc. Code § 1094.6.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



DIVISION 5:  ENFORCEMENT



§ 16.68.280  MINOR VIOLATIONS.



   In the case of minor violations of this chapter that can be corrected
at the site, any city employee, as an alternative to removing the newsrack,
is authorized to correct the violation summarily. The permittee will bear the
cost of any such correction.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.290  NOTICE OF HEARING FOR NEWSRACK REMOVAL.



   (A)   Upon discovering a newsrack that lacks a permit or otherwise
violates this chapter, the administrator may take action to remove such a
newsrack in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   To initiate proceedings for removing newsracks, the
administrator will cause written notice to be mailed and conspicuously posted
on the newsrack. Notice must be titled in letters at least one inch in height
and read substantially as follows:




Removal Hearing Notice




On                           , 20   , the City of Santa Paula
will determine whether this Newsrack should be removed in accordance with the
Santa Paula Municipal Code ("SPMC"). If the Newsrack is found to violate the
SPMC and is not promptly removed by the owner, then the City may remove it
and impound it at the owner's expense. If the City removes the Newsrack, all
costs associated with such removal, impoundment, and storage, must be paid by
the owner before the Newsrack is returned. The alleged violations consist of
the following:



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                           



All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters should
attend a hearing to be conducted by the City, to be held at            
                      on                 ,          
                  at the hour of                        
.m., when their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due
consideration.



Dated:



                                                   
           



Administrator



   (C)   Mailing/posting. Notice of the hearing will be served by
posting the newsrack and by registered or certified mail (postage fully
prepaid) addressed to the newsrack owner. The notice must be posted on the
newsrack and mailed at least ten days before the hearing date. Proof of
posting and mailing will be by declaration. Failure of any person to receive
the notice will not affect the validity of any set forth in this chapter.



   (D)   The administrator is not required to wait ten days to proceed
if the intent to permanently abandon or vacate a newsrack or uniform newsrack
location is confirmed in writing by the owner of such newsrack.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.300  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The hearing must be conducted by a hearing officer selected by
the administrator. At the time set for such hearing, the hearing officer will
conduct a hearing to determine, based upon the evidence presented, whether
the newsrack violates this chapter. At the hearing, the hearing officer will
accept reliable evidence from any person if such evidence bears on the issue
of whether the newsrack violates this chapter. The hearing officer is
authorized to take testimony and is authorized to administer oaths or
affirmations under the Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 2093(a). Based upon the
evidence submitted including, without limitation, any written staff reports
regarding alleged violations, the hearing officer will determine whether or
not the newsrack violates this chapter and should be removed.



   (B)   As soon as is practicable following the close of such hearing,
the hearing officer will render a decision on the matter. If the newsrack is
found to violate this chapter, the hearing officer will issue an order
requiring the newsrack to be removed within a reasonable time and manner as
set forth in the order. The hearing officer will promptly give written notice
to the responsible person and any other interested person who requests, in
writing, notice of such decision, including a copy of the order. The order
issued by the hearing officer will be deemed a final order and may be
judicially reviewed pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.6. There is no
right to a City Council appeal.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.310  COMPLIANCE WITH REMOVAL ORDER.



   At no cost to the city, the newsrack will comply with all of the
provisions of a removal order. If the newsrack owner fails, for any reason,
to comply with a removal order within the time required in the order, the
administrator will cause the newsrack to be removed and impounded by city
forces or by private contractor.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.320  RECOVERING CITY EXPENSES.



   The administrator will keep an account of the costs, including
incidental expenses, of removing, impounding, and storing such newsracks.
Newsrack owners must pay the city all reasonable costs associated with the
noticing, removal, and storage of the newsrack before regaining possession of
such newsracks.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.330  EMERGENCY REMOVAL.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever the
administrator determines that a newsrack constitutes an immediate threat or
hazard or danger to persons or property, the administrator, without observing
procedures set forth in this chapter with reference to newsrack removals,
will immediately cause such a newsrack to be removed in such manner as the
administrator determines is reasonably required. If the administrator deems
it feasible, the administrator may attempt to give the newsrack owner verbal
notice of the danger and the proposed timing and removal of the newsrack.
Where such removal is ordered, the administrator will, after completing the
removal of the newsrack, comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.340  ABANDONMENT; DISPOSAL.



   The owner of any impounded newsrack who fails to obtain the release of
the newsrack within 30 days after impoundment, is deemed to have abandoned
the newsrack, and the newsrack may be disposed of by the administrator in the
time and manner prescribed by law, for the disposal of abandoned personal
property.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.350  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter,
violations of a permit may be enforced as follows:



      (1)   Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the City
Attorney's discretion;



      (2)   Abated as a public nuisance; or



      (3)   Enjoined as unfair business practices that are presumed
to nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the
permittee operates.



   (B)   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to any other criminal or civil remedies.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.68.360  LIABILITY FOR FINES.



   All fines, fees, penalties, and interest imposed pursuant to this
chapter are civil debts owed to the city by the person fined. In the event
that judicial action is necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the
city, the person or persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs
of suit and attorney's fees incurred by the city to collect the fine.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



DIVISION 6:  PREEXISTING NEWSRACKS



§ 16.68.370  EXISTING NEWSRACKS.



   (A)   Any person who owns or is entitled to possession of any
newsrack located within a public right-of-way upon the effective date of this
chapter must either remove the newsrack or obtain a permit pursuant to this
chapter within one calendar year after the effective date of this chapter.



   (B)   If any such newsrack remains in place without a permit after
this time period, the administrator may begin removal proceedings as provided
in this chapter.



   (C)   If the newsrack owner does not comply with the administrator's
notice of removal, or does not appeal it, within the time set in such notice,
the administrator may remove and impound the newsrack. The owner or other
persons entitled to possession of the newsrack may obtain possession of such
impounded newsrack in the time and manner set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1101, passed 6-21-04)



CHAPTER 16.70:  RECYCLING FACILITIES



Section



   16.70.010   Permits required



   16.70.020   Permits for multiple sites



   16.70.030   Criteria and standards - Small collection facilities



   16.70.040   Criteria and standards - Reverse vending machines



   16.70.050   Criteria and standards - Large collection facilities



   16.70.060   Criteria and standards - Processing facilities



§ 16.70.010  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Recycling facilities as defined in § 16.05.190 of this Title 16 must
obtain permits for operation as set forth in Table 70-1 and as subject to the
land use regulations for specific zone districts set forth in Chapters 16.07
through 16.33 (Zoning Districts, Land Use Regulations and Development
Standards) of this Title 16. 



 


TABLE 70-1
Permits for Recycling Facilities




Type of Facility

 

Permit Required



Reverse Vending Machines
 
Design Review, unless within a fully enclosed building, whereby no permit is
required


Collection Facility - Small
 
Design Review


Collection Facility - Large
 
Conditional Use Permit


Processing Facility - Light
 
Conditional Use Permit


Processing Facility - Heavy
 
Conditional Use Permit



 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.70.020  PERMITS FOR MULTIPLE SITES.



   A single Design Review application may be filed to allow more than one
reverse vending machine(s) and/or small collection facility located on
different sites under the following condition:



   (A)   The operator of each of the proposed facilities is the same;



   (B)   The proposed facilities are determined by the Planning
Director to be similar in nature, size, and intensity of activity; and



   (C)   All applicable criteria and standards set forth in §§
16.70.030 and 16.70.040 below are met for each proposed facility.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.70.030  CRITERIA AND STANDARDS - SMALL COLLECTION FACILITIES.



   Small collection facilities must comply with the following conditions:



   (A)   All such facilities must be established in conjunction with an
existing commercial use or community service facility that is in compliance
with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city.



   (B)   All such facilities must be no larger than 500 square feet and
provide no more than five parking spaces, not including any space that will
be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers.



   (C)   All such facilities must be set back at least ten feet from
any street line and must not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.



   (D)   All such facilities must accept only glass, metals, plastic
containers, papers and reusable items.  Used motor oil may be accepted with
permission of the city.



   (E)   No power-driven processing equipment may be used except by
reverse vending machines.



   (F)   All such facilities must use containers that are constructed
and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when
site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material,
and of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and
collection schedule.



   (G)   All recyclable materials must be stored in containers or in
the mobile unit vehicle.  No materials may be left outside of containers
when the attendant is not present.



   (H)   All such facilities must be maintained free of litter and any
other undesirable materials.  Mobile facilities, at which truck or
containers are removed at the end of each collection day, must be swept at
the end of each collection day.



   (I)   Attended facilities located within 100 feet of a property
zoned or occupied for residential use may operate only between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



   (J)   Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials must be at
least 30 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless
there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the
containers and the residential use. 



   (K)   Containers must be clearly marked to identify the type of
material that may be deposited.



   (L)   The facility must be clearly marked to identify the name and
telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and
display a notice stating that material must not be left outside the recycling
enclosure or containers.



   (M)   Mobile recycling units must have an area clearly marked to
prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is
scheduled to be present.



   (N)   If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility
must be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.70.040  CRITERIA AND STANDARDS - REVERSE VENDING MACHINES.



   Reverse vending machine(s) must comply with the following standards:



   (A)   Reverse vending machines must be established in conjunction
with a commercial use or community service facility that is in compliance
with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city.



   (B)   Reverse vending machines must be located within 30 feet of the
entrance to the commercial structure and must not obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular circulation.



   (C)   Reverse vending machines must not occupy parking spaces
required for the primary use.



   (D)   Reverse vending machines must not occupy more than 50 square
feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and
must be not more than 8 feet in height.



   (E)   Reverse vending machines must be constructed and maintained
with durable waterproof and rustproof material.



   (F)   Reverse vending machines must be clearly marked to identify
the type of material to be deposited, operating instruction, and the identity
and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine
is inoperative.



   (G)   Reverse vending machines must accept only glass, metals,
plastic containers, papers or reusable items. 



   (H)   Reverse vending machines will be permitted to have up to four
square feet of sign area per machine, exclusive of operating instructions.



   (I)   All reverse vending machines must be maintained in a clean,
litter-free condition on a daily basis.



   (J)   Operating hours must be at least the operating hours of the
host use.



   (K)   Reverse vending machines must be illuminated to ensure
comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.70.050  CRITERIA AND STANDARDS - LARGE COLLECTION FACILITIES.



   All large collection facilities must comply with the following
standards:



   (A)   The facility must be screened from the public right-of-way by
operating in an enclosed building or:



      (1)   Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six
feet high with landscaping to the satisfaction of the Planning Director;



      (2)   At least 150 feet from property zoned or planned for
residential use; and



      (3)   Meets all applicable noise standards in this Title 16. 



   (B)   Setbacks and landscape requirements will be those provided for
the zoning district in which the facility is located.



   (C)   All exterior storage of material must be in sturdy containers
that are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition or baled or
palletized.  Storage containers for flammable material must be constructed
of nonflammable material.  Oil storage must be in containers approved by the
Fire Marshal.  No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers,
will be visible above the height of the fencing.



   (D)   The site must be maintained free of litter and any other
undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis.



   (E)   If the facility is located within 500 feet of property zoned,
planned, or occupied for residential use, it must not be in operation between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (F)   Any container provided for after-hours donation of recyclable
materials will be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for
residential use, must be of sturdy, rustproof construction, must have
sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and must be secure
from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.



   (G)   Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other
undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify
the type of material that may be deposited.  The facility must display a
notice stating that material must not be left outside the recycling
containers.



   (H)   Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number
of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and
informational signs will meet the standards of the zone; and directional
signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of
the Planning Director, if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if
the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way.



   (I)   Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can
compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities
necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be
approved through the Conditional Use Permit process.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.70.060  CRITERIA AND STANDARDS - PROCESSING FACILITIES.



   Processing facilities must comply with the following conditions:



   (A)   Processors must be operated only within a wholly enclosed
building except for incidental storage.



   (B)   Power-driven processing will be permitted, provided all noise
level requirements are met. 



   (C)   A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling
from the generator in accordance with Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25250.11.



   (D)   Setbacks and landscaping requirements will be those provided
for the zoning district in which the facility is located.



   (E)   All exterior storage of material must be in sturdy containers
or enclosures that are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition,
baled or palletized.  Storage must be in containers approved by the Fire
Marshal.  No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will
be visible above the height of the fencing.



   (F)   The site must be maintained free of litter and any other
undesirable materials, will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis, and
will be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when
attendants are not present.



   (G)   One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle
operated by the processing center.  Parking requirements will otherwise be
as mandated by the zone in which the facility is located.



   (H)   If the facility is located within 500 feet of property zoned
or planned for residential use, the facility must not be in operation between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.  The facility will be administered by
on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open.



   (I)   Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable
materials will be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for
residential use; must be of sturdy, rustproof construction; must have
sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and must be secure
from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.



   (J)   Donation areas must be kept free of litter and any other
undesirable material.  The containers must be clearly marked to identify the
type of material that may be deposited.  The facility must display a notice
stating that material must not be left outside the recycling containers.



   (K)   Sign requirements will be those provided for the zoning
district in which the facility is located.  In addition, the facility will
be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and
the hours of operation.



   (L)   Dust, fumes, smoke, vibration, and odor control must comply
with the requirements of Chapter 16.42 (Performance Standards) of this Title
16. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.72:  SERVICE STATIONS



Section



   16.72.010   Purpose and intent



   16.72.020   Conditional Use Permit applicability and requirements



   16.72.030   Permitted uses, activities, and services



   16.72.040   Location



   16.72.050   Development standards



   16.72.060   Signage



   16.72.070   Conflict of development standard provisions



§ 16.72.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   These regulations are established to promote and preserve the public
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare by ensuring that automobile
service stations are located and operated so as not to create increased
pedestrian and vehicular traffic hazards and not be detrimental to the
ordinary maintenance, development, and redevelopment of the surrounding area.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.72.020  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICABILITY AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A Conditional Use Permit will be required for automobile
service stations under the following conditions:



      (1)   Construction of new service stations.



      (2)   Reopening of a service station that has been vacant for
a period of at least six months.



      (3)   Renovation, alteration or additions to existing service
stations when such change exceeds 50% of the value of the existing building
or structure as officially established by the latest records of the County
Assessor of the County;



   (B)   Service stations on properties annexed to the city which do
not comply with permitted activity and services, or the requirement regarding
trash enclosure, storage space and landscaping, will be considered
nonconforming and subject to nonconforming provisions as set forth in
Chapters 16.110 through 16.118 (Nonconformities) of this Title 16.



   (C)   All new, reopened, renovated, or annexed service stations, or
those requesting any substantial change in services rendered, will be
required to meet all of the requirements of this chapter unless this chapter
specifically states that the Planning Commission may modify that particular
requirement.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.72.030  PERMITTED USES, ACTIVITIES, AND SERVICES.



   In addition to the sale of motor fuels, activities and services will be
permitted, limited or precluded as set forth in this section.



   (A)   Rental of vehicles.



      (1)   The rental of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and similar
vehicles may be permitted, provided the site contains adequate space for
display and/or parking and further provided such rentals are displayed and/or
parked in only an area so designated as part of the conditional use permit.



      (2)   Unless expressly stated otherwise as part of the
conditional use permit, displaying and/or parking of rentals must not occur
within 20 feet of any street frontage property line.



   (B)   Storage and display of merchandise.



      (1)   All new and used merchandise must be stored and
displayed only within the service station building, except new and
reconditioned tires, batteries, accessories, and lubrication items which are
maintained in movable or enclosed cabinets or racks designed for the display
and sale of said merchandise may be displayed outside.



      (2)   The location of enclosed cabinets and racks must be
designated on the conditional use permit.



      (3)   Products which render an express convenience of service
to the customer, such as pump island racks containing oil cans and additives,
may be displayed under the pump island canopy when maintained in a cabinet or
display rack.  Such cabinets or racks must not obstruct vehicular access to
the pump island.



   (C)   Body work, tire recapping and rental of heavy equipment
prohibited.  All painting, welding, body and fender repair, tire recapping
and the rental of other heavy equipment and the sale and rental of other
merchandise, other than that specified in this division, is expressly
prohibited.



   (D)   Vending machines.  Vending machines will be permitted only
per the standards set forth in Chapter 16.74 of this Title 16.



   (E)   Temporary promotions.



      (1)   The sale and storage of merchandise not customarily
related to the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles will be permitted
with a Temporary Use Permit and subject to the requirements set forth in
Chapter 16.228 (Temporary Use Permits) of this Title 16.



      (2)   Subparagraph (1) above does not apply to items which are
provided free or at a reduced price to the customers with purchase of
products from the service station.



   (F)   Public telephones.  Public telephones are permitted, provided
they will not be within 20 feet of any street frontage property line and are
located to be visible from the public right-of-way and accessible on a
24-hour basis.



   (G)   Restriction on merchandise sale and rental.  The sales and
rental of any type of merchandise not related to the motoring public is
prohibited.



   (H)   Tow truck and service vehicles.  Tow trucks and similar
service vehicles may be allowed if approved as part of the conditional use
permit.  Such vehicles must be parked only in an area expressly provided and
approved as part of the conditional use permit.



   (I)   Use as commercial parking lot.  The use of a service station
as a commercial parking lot is prohibited, unless expressly approved as part
of the conditional use permit.



   (J)   Storage and trash.



      (1)   Storage and trash must be kept only in areas approved as
part of the conditional use permit, and must not be placed higher than the
walls enclosing such areas.



      (2)   Trash may be collected in containers at the pump islands
or inside buildings and service bays.



   (K)   Hours of operation.  Hours of operation may be designated as
part of the conditional use permit if exceptional circumstances exist, such
as proximity to residential zones.



   (L)   Removal, overhaul and replacement of engines.



      (1)   The removal, overhaul, and replacement of motors,
differentials, and transmissions is permitted, provided these activities
occur within a completely enclosed building and on vehicles with a rated
capacity not to exceed 1-1/2 tons.



      (2)   These activities will constitute only an accessory and
incidental use of the service station operation and must not create obnoxious
odors, smoke, noise, vibration, or otherwise create a nuisance.



   (M)   Recreational vehicle dumping stations.  Recreational vehicle
dumping stations are permitted, subject to applicable requirements of the
Ventura County Health Department.



   (N)   Enclosure of used or discarded automobile parts.  No used or
discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junk or
wrecked vehicles may be located outside the service station building, except
within an enclosed trash storage area screened from public view.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.72.040  LOCATION.



   Automobile service stations must be located only at intersections of
streets and highways designated on the city's adopted circulation element of
the general plan or in commercial shopping centers, as follows:



   (A)   Arterial having a right-of-way width of 100 feet.



   (B)   Collector streets having a right-of-way width of 80 or 84 feet.



   (C)   Properties fronting on a primary thoroughfare and siding on a
freeway right-of-way.



   (D)   Within commercial developments with a land area of 2 acres or
more under one ownership.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.72.050  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Design.  The architectural design of service station
developments must be compatible with the character of development of the area
in which it is to be located.  However, innovative architectural design and
site layout which would contribute to the efficiency and appearance of the
station and minimize adverse effects on adjacent property is encouraged.



   (B)   Site size.



      (1)   The minimum area of a corner site must be 22,500 square
feet, with a minimum frontage of 150 feet on one street. 



      (2)   When a service station on a corner site is developed as
a part of a commercial shopping center on a development site greater than two
acres in size, the service station site may be reduced to 15,000 square feet,
provided the additional required area is provided within the mutual parking
and access areas.



   (C)   Access.



      (1)   Two driveways on each street frontage may be permitted
with the approval of the City Engineer.  Access driveways must be no closer
than 35 feet from the point of intersection of the ultimate right-of-way
lines of the adjoining streets, but in no case closer than five feet to the
point of curb return.  Such driveways must be at least 25 feet apart and
they may be no closer than five feet to the side property line.



      (2)   Where a service station is part of a commercial
development site, a combined driveway for both the service station and
adjacent shopping center or commercial property must be designated and
provided.



   (D)   Lot grading and drainage.  Grading of service station sites
must provide a minimum rise, in order to insure required fall for drainage,
and must be engineered in a compatible manner with the surrounding
properties.  All drainage to the street must be by underground structures to
avoid drainage across city sidewalks or drive aprons, and will be subject to
the approval of the Public Works Director.



   (E)   Setbacks.  Notwithstanding the setback requirements for the
zone district in which the service station is located, all buildings must be
set back from interior and street frontage property lines a minimum of 30
feet.  Pump islands parallel to the adjacent street must be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from all property lines.  Pump islands perpendicular to
the adjacent street must be set back a minimum of 24 feet from all property
lines.



   (F)   Canopy structure.



      (1)   Every pump island must be covered by a canopy structure
designed and constructed of material to blend with the main building.



      (2)   Where design permits, the pump island canopy structure
must be attached to and made an integral part of the main building structure.



      (3)   Canopies must be a minimum of 10 feet from any street
frontage property line.



   (G)   Storage area.  Each service station must have a storage
area.  The required storage area may be constructed outside of the main
building, provided that it is enclosed by a six-foot high solid masonry wall
with a view-obscuring gate made of a durable metal material, and is roofed
and contiguous to the main building, unless approved otherwise as a part of
the conditional use permit.



   (H)   Trash enclosure.



      (1)   Each service station must have at least one trash
enclosure constructed to the standards described in § 16.40.110 (Solid
Waste/Recycling Receptacles and Enclosures) of this Title 16. 



      (2)   No trash, including discarded oil cans, batteries,
signs, tires, and the like, must be stored or deposited on any section of the
site, except in the trash area. 



   (I)   Restrooms.



      (1)   All service stations must contain restroom facilities
for use by employees and patrons.



      (2)   All restroom entrances must be situated either to the
side, to the rear, or within the main building.



      (3)   The restroom area may be situated in a location other
than above if approved by the Planning Commission as part of the Conditional
Use Permit.



   (J)   Perimeter walls.



      (1)   Whenever a service station abuts property in a
residential zone, a solid masonry wall not less than six feet high must be
constructed along the property line abutting the residential zone.  However,
front yard walls must not exceed 3.5 feet in height.  The wall must be
constructed in accordance with wall standards outlined in Chapter 16.44
(Fences, Walls and Hedges) of this Title 16.  A wall need not be installed
when building walls or other acceptable walls already exist on such property
lines, or if the service station is part of a shopping center development. 
The wall requirements may be modified as part of the conditional use permit.



      (2)   A wall constructed on the interior property lines must
make provisions for tree wells or landscaped planting areas not less than 16
square feet in area.  When included as part of the wall design, the wells or
planting should be spaced not less than eight feet nor more than 16 feet
apart.  Continuous planters or planters of uneven length may satisfy this
requirement if they are at least one-third of the length of the wall, and
include trees planted not more than 16 feet apart.



   (K)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Notwithstanding the landscaping requirements for the
zone district in which the service station is located, at least 10% of the
site must be landscaped with live plant materials.  Planting areas must
include but are not limited to the following:



         (a)   All landscaped planters must be enclosed with a
masonry curb not less than six inches high above the finished grade of the
site.



         (b)   A minimum five-foot-wide (inside dimension) raised
planter, with a six-inch curb face made of concrete, brick or other masonry
materials, must be provided along all street property lines between street
access points for purpose of separating pump islands from the sidewalk. 
Landscaped planters may be rounded at driveway entrances utilizing a minimum
ten-foot radius.



         (c)   A minimum of 150 square feet of raised planter
with curb, minimum six inches in height, must be provided at the street
frontage of the intersecting corner of the site, from curb cut to curb cut.



         (d)   All planting other than trees must be so
maintained so as not to exceed a height greater than 30 inches, must not be
thorny or spiked, and must not extend over the sidewalk or public
right-of-way.



         (e)   Trees of minimum size 15 gallons must be placed in
the parkway area (between curb face and back of sidewalk) with spacing and
variety of trees to be determined by the Planning and Building Directors.



         (f)   Except for common traffic movement drives, service
stations within shopping centers must be delineated from the remainder of the
property by a landscaped buffer with minimum inside dimensions of four feet
enclosed by a six-inch curb made of concrete, brick or other masonry
material.  Common and integrated traffic movement drives between the service
station and the remainder of the property will be encouraged.



         (g)   All planting areas must be provided with a
permanent irrigation system of a design suitable for the type and arrangement
of the plant material selected.



      (2)   All planted areas must be maintained so as not to
constitute a health or fire hazard.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.72.060  SIGNAGE.



   (A)   All service stations are subject to the sign regulations of
Chapter 16.48 (Signs) of this Title 16.



   (B)   If additional signs are proposed or if modifications to the
sign regulations are necessary or desirable for the service station, they may
be requested and considered concurrently with the conditional use permit for
the service station.



   (C)   Signs requested at a later date must be considered as
modifications to the conditional use permit. 



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.72.070  CONFLICT OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARD PROVISIONS.



   In the event of conflicting provisions between these development
standards and any development standards required by the zone district where
development will occur, the development standards required by this chapter
will take precedence.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.74:  VENDING MACHINES



Section



   16.74.010   Conditional Use Permit required



   16.74.020   Number permitted



   16.74.030   Restrictions on location



   16.74.040   Other conditions



§ 16.74.010  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A Conditional Use Permit, obtained pursuant to the requirements of
Chapter 16.218 of this Title 16, will be required for the establishment of
any vending machine.  This requirement will not apply to any vending machine
established prior to the effective date of this section, or that will be
located within a completely enclosed building.  (Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.74.020  NUMBER PERMITTED.



   One outdoor vending machine will be permitted for each 4,000 square
feet of site area, up to a maximum of six vending machines on any one site.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.74.030  RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION.



   (A)   Vending machines must be attached or located immediately
adjacent to a building.



   (B)   Vending machines will not be permitted to be placed on or
project into any public right-of-way, nor will any vending machine be located
in a manner that requires a person to be on a public right-of-way to operate
the machine.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



§ 16.74.040  OTHER CONDITIONS.



   (A)   No vending machine may have bright lights or garish colors,
emit sounds, or have any other characteristics that distract motorists or
adversely impact adjacent properties. 



   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit for any new
vending machine, the owner/operator must provide the city with evidence that
they have complied with all applicable Ventura County Health Department
requirements.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.76:  YARD AND GARAGE SALES



Section



   16.76.010   Chapter 123 of Municipal Code applies



§ 16.76.010  CHAPTER 123 OF MUNICIPAL CODE APPLIES.



   Chapter 123 (Sale of Personal Property) of the Santa Paula Municipal
Code will govern all garage and yard sales.



(Ord. 1100, passed 7-6-04)



CHAPTER 16.77:  ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS



Section



   16.77.010   Purpose



   16.77.020   Definitions



   16.77.030   Administrative permit requirements



   16.77.040   Technical review



   16.77.050   Electric vehicle charging station installation



§ 16.77.010  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted to provide an expedited, streamlined permitting
process for electric vehicle charging stations that will encourage the timely
and cost effective installations of electric vehicle charging stations, in
compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7. This chapter is intended to
achieve these goals while protecting public health and safety.



(Ord. 1271, passed 9-18-17)



§ 16.77.020  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.



   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL means the utilization of one or more of the
following:



      (1)   Electronic mail or email;



      (2)   The internet; or



      (3)   Facsimile.



   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION or CHARGING STATION means any level
of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in
compliance with Article 625 of the Cal. Electrical Code; as it reads on the
effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.



   SPECIFIC ADVERSE IMPACT means significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.



(Ord. 1271, passed 9-8-17)



§ 16.77.030  ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   Electric vehicle charging stations shall be subject to the following
requirements:



   (A)   Expedited permitting processes. Consistent with Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65850.7, the Director shall implement an expedited, streamlined
permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a
checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations
shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. This expedited,
streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations
contained in the most current version of the "Plug-in Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emissions Vehicles in
California: Community Readiness Guidebook" as published by the Governor's
Office of Planning and Research. The city's adopted checklist shall be
published on the city's website.



   (B)   Permit application processing. Prior to submitting an
application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation
of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse
impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by
the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and
loads; electrical systems wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection;
building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated
conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.



      (1)   A permit application that satisfies the information
requirements in the city's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be
promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the
permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the
city adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health
and safety standards, the Director shall, consistent with the Cal Gov’t
Code §  65850.7, approve the application and issue necessary permits. Such
approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric
vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the city. If the
Director determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she
shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be
eligible for expedited permit issuance.



      (2)   Consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7, the
Director shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered
by this chapter and associated supporting documentation. In accepting such
permit applications, the Director shall also accept electronic signatures on
all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature
by any applicant.



(Ord. 1271, passed 9-18-17)



§ 16.77.040  TECHNICAL REVIEW.



   (A)   If the Director makes a finding based on substantial evidence
that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse
impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city
may require a conditional use permit. If the Director determines that a
conditional use permit is required, such permit shall not be denied unless
the Director makes written findings based on substantial evidence in the
record that the proposed systems would have a specific, adverse impact upon
the public health and safety and there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid that impact.



   (B)   In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with
Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7, the Director shall not condition the approval
for an electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a
system by an association, as the term is defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4080.



(Ord. 1271, passed 9-18-17)



§ 16.77.050  ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the
requirements of the Cal. Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive
Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited
testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the
Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electrical Utility Company
regarding safety and reliability.



   (B)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and
associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective
devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable
provisions of the Cal. Electrical Code.



   (C)   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the Cal. Electrical Code.
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.



   (D)   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric
vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the Cal. Building
Code or Cal. Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions
of the manufacturer's installations instructions. Mounting of charging
stations shall not adversely affect building elements.



(Ord. 1271, passed 9-18-17)



CHAPTER 16.78:  EMERGENCY SHELTERS



Section



   16.78.010   Definitions



   16.78.020   Development standards



§ 16.78.010  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   EMERGENCY SHELTER - Means housing with minimal supportive
services for homeless persons; victims of domestic violence; persons
requiring temporary housing; and other individuals and households made
temporarily homeless due to natural disasters (e.g., fires and earthquakes)
that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person and
operated by a government agency or private non-profit organization.



   (B)   HOMELESS PERSON - Has the same definition as set forth in 42
USC § 11302.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



§ 16.78.020  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In addition to the standards specified in Chapter 16.21, emergency
shelters are also subject to the following development standards:



   (A)   Each resident must be provided a minimum of 50 gross square
feet of personal living space, not including space for common areas.  In no
case can occupancy exceed 30 residents at any one time.



   (B)   Off-street parking spaces must provided in the ratio of one
parking space per ten adult beds, plus one parking space per employee on the
largest shift.  However, the required number of off-street parking spaces
cannot exceed the spaces required for similar uses of the same size in the
Commercial/Light Industrial (C/LI) zone.



   (C)   Outdoor activities such as recreation, drop-off and pick-up of
residents, or similar activities may be conducted at the facility.  Staging
for drop-off, intake, and pick-up should take place inside a building, at a
rear or side entrance, or inner courtyard.  Emergency shelter plans must
show the size and location of any proposed waiting or resident intake areas,
interior or exterior.



   (D)   Before commencing operation, the emergency shelter provider
must have a written management plan, which must be approved by the Planning
Director.  The management plan must at a minimum include: requirements for
staff training; resident selection; process for identifying residents;
neighborhood outreach; pet policies; scheduling outdoor activities; temporary
storage of residents’ personal belongings; safety and security; management
of outdoor areas; and counseling and social service programs for residents.



   (E)   Not more than one emergency shelter is permitted within a
radius of 300 feet from another emergency shelter.



   (F)   Individual occupancy in an emergency shelter is limited to six
months during any 12 consecutive month period.



   (G)   Exterior lighting must be provided at all building entrances
and outdoor activity areas, and must be activated between sunset and sunrise
of each day.  All exterior lighting must comply with this code.



   (H)   Each emergency shelter must have an on-site management
office.  At least one employee must be present in the on-site management
office at all times that the emergency shelter is operating.



   (I)   Each emergency shelter must have on-site security, with at
least one person present at the emergency shelter while it is operating.



   (J)   Facilities must provide a storage area for refuse and
recyclables that is enclosed by a six-foot high landscape screen, solid wall
or fence, which is accessible to collection vehicles on one side.  It must
be large enough to accommodate the number of bins that are required to
provide the facility with sufficient service so as to avoid the overflow of
material outside of the bins provided.



   (K)   The emergency shelter facility may provide one or more of the
following specific facilities and services including, without limitation:



      (1)   Commercial kitchen facilities designed and operated in
compliance with applicable law;



      (2)   Dining area;



      (3)   Laundry;



      (4)   Recreation room;



      (5)   Support services (e.g., training, counseling); and



      (6)   Child care facilities.



   (L)   Applications for emergency shelters must be submitted to the
Planning Director for consideration.  Within 30 days after finding an
application complete, the Director must issue an emergency shelter permit
upon finding that the proposal complies with all applicable law including,
without limitation, this code.



(Ord. 1249, passed 5-6-13)



CHAPTER 16.79:  REGULATION OF CANNABIS ACTVITIES



Section



   16.79.010   Purpose



   16.79.020   Definitions



   16.79.030   Prohibition



   16.79.040   Personal cultivation



   16.79.050   Violations



   16.79.060   Administrative regulations



   16.79.070   Public nuisance



§ 16.79.010  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to expressly prohibit the establishment
of commercial cannabis uses in the city. The City Council finds that
prohibitions on commercial cannabis activity are necessary for the
preservation and protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
city. The prohibition of such uses is within the authority conferred upon the
City Council by state law and is an exercise of its police powers to enact
and enforce regulations for the public health, safety and welfare of the
city. This chapter is also intended to apply reasonable regulations to the
personal cultivation of cannabis that is authorized under state law. Nothing
in this chapter shall be interpreted to conflict with state law, including
without limitation the Compassionate Use Act, the Control, Regulate, and Tax
Adult Use of Marijuana Act (AUMA) and the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis
Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA), as may be amended.



(Ord. 1272, passed 12-4-17)



§ 16.79.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (A)   “CANNABIS” or “MARIJUANA” shall mean all parts of the
plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or
purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its
seeds, or resin. “CANNABIS” or “MARIJUANA” also means the separated
resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from Cannabis. “CANNABIS” or
“MARIJUANA” also includes cannabis that is used for medical, non-medical,
or other purposes. “CANNABIS” or “MARIJUANA” does not include the
mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made
from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or case, or the sterilized seed of the
plant which is incapable of germination. “CANNABIS” or “MARIJUANA”
also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California and has the
same definition as Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11018.5.



   (B)   "CANNABIS/MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES" means any equipment, products
or materials of any kind which is intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or
containing Cannabis, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
Cannabis or Cannabis products into the human body.



   (C)   "CANNABIS/MARIJUANA PRODUCT" means Cannabis that has undergone
a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate,
including, but not limited to, concentrated Cannabis, or an edible or topical
product containing Cannabis or concentrated Cannabis and other ingredients.



   (D)   "CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY" means a laboratory, facility, or
entity that offers or performs tests of both adult use and medical cannabis
or cannabis products and that is both of the following: (1) accredited by an
accrediting body (i.e. International Organization for Standardization (ISO))
that is independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis
activity in the state, and (2) is licensed by the Bureau of Cannabis Control.



   (E)   “COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY” means cultivation,
manufacture, processing, storing, labeling, transporting, distribution,
delivery or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product for medical, non- medical,
or any other purpose and includes the activities of any business licensed by
the state or other government entity under Division 10 of the Cal. Bus. and
Prof. Code, or any provision of state law that regulates the licensing of
cannabis businesses. This definition includes operation of a dispensary,
mobile marijuana dispensary and cannabis delivery activities. This definition
does not include Cannabis testing laboratories.



   (F)   "CONCENTRATED CANNABIS" means manufactured cannabis that has
undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby
increasing the product's potency. "CONCENTRATE" includes resin from granular
trichomes from a Cannabis plant.



   (G)   "CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS" or "CANNABIS CULTIVATION" means any
activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing,
grading, or trimming of cannabis.



   (H)   “DELIVERY” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or
cannabis products to a customer. “DELIVERY” also includes the use by a
retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer. The
term “DELIVERY” does not include the distribution of cannabis from a
mobile marijuana dispensary.



   (I)   “DISPENSARY” means a facility where Cannabis, Cannabis
products, or devices for the use of Cannabis or Cannabis products are
offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale,
including an establishment that delivers Cannabis and Cannabis products as
part of a retail sale.



   (J)   "DISTRIBUTION" means the procurement, sale, and transport of
cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed under Division 10 of
the Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code, as they may be amended from time to time.



   (K)   "FULLY-ENCLOSED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE" means a structure or part
of a structure not exceeding 12 feet in height, which is physically detached
from the main building on the lot and the use of which is incidental to that
of the main building or use on the same lot. A structure that is incorporated
within the continuous roofline of the primary structure is part of the
primary structure and is therefore exempt from this definition.



   (L)   "MANUFACTURE CANNABIS" means to compound, blend, extract,
infuse, or otherwise prepare a Cannabis product.



   (M)   "MAUCRSA" means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis
Regulation and Safety Act as codified in Division 10 of the Cal. Bus. and
Prof. Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.



   (N)   "MOBILE MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES" means any dispensary, clinic,
cooperative, association, club, business, or group which transports or
delivers, or arranges the transportation or delivery, of medical Cannabis to
a person or conducts sales of Cannabis from a non-fixed location.



   (O)   "PERSON" means any individual, firm, corporation, association,
club, society, or other organization. The term person shall include any
owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson.



   (P)   "PERSONAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION" means Cannabis cultivation of
six or fewer live Cannabis plants within a single private residence or a
fully-enclosed accessory structure that is accessory to a private residence
in accordance with Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11362.2.



   (Q)   "PRIVATE RESIDENCE" means a house, an apartment unit,
condominium, or other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence.



(Ord. 1262, passed 2-1-16; Am. Ord. 1272, passed 12-4-17)



§ 16.79.030  PROHIBITION.



   (A)   Commercial cannabis activities of all types are expressly
prohibited in all zones in the city. No person shall establish, operate,
conduct, or allow, a commercial cannabis activity anywhere in the city. To
the extent that this prohibition conflicts with any other provision of this
code, this prohibition shall control.



   (B)   Mobile marijuana dispensaries are prohibited in all zones
within the city. No person shall:



      (1)   Locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or
abide, abet or assist in the operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary
within the city;



      (2)   Deliver marijuana to any location within the city from a
mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana
dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose; or



      (3)    Deliver any medical cannabis product, including, but
not limited to: tinctures, baked goods, or other consumable products, to any
location within the city from a mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of
where the mobile marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation
for this purpose.



   (C)   This section is meant to prohibit all activities for which a
state license is required. Accordingly, the city shall not issue any permit,
license, or other entitlement for any activity for which a state license is
required under the MAUCRSA. The city shall also not issue any local license
for any activity for which a state license is required under the MAUCRSA to a
non-profit entity pursuant to Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code § 26070.5.



   (D)   To the extent not already prohibited above, all deliveries of
Cannabis or Cannabis products, to or from any location in the city are
expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any delivery of any
Cannabis or Cannabis products which delivery either originates or terminates
within the city. This section shall not prohibit any person from transporting
Cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the city for delivery or
distribution to a person located outside the city, where such transport does
not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the
city.



   (E)   To the extent not already prohibited above, cultivation of
Cannabis for noncommercial purposes, including cultivation by a qualified
patient or primary caregiver as those terms are defined in state law, is
expressly prohibited in all zones in the city. No person shall cultivate any
amount of Cannabis in the city, even for medicinal purposes, except for
personal Cannabis cultivation in accordance with § 16.79.040 below, and
where the city is preempted by federal or state law from enacting a
prohibition on such activity.



   (F)   This section does not prohibit Cannabis testing laboratories,
which are laboratories and permitted in all zones where laboratories are
permitted.



(Ord. 1262, passed 2-1-16; Am. Ord. 1272, passed 12-4-17)



§ 16.79.040  PERSONAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required. Prior to commencing any personal Cannabis
cultivation, the person(s) owning, leasing, renting, occupying, or having
charge or possession of any legal parcel or premises where personal Cannabis
cultivation is proposed to occur must register for a personal Cannabis
cultivation permit with the city. No person shall engage in personal
marijuana cultivation unless that person has a current valid personal
Cannabis cultivation permit from the city, pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Personal Cannabis cultivation application. An applicant shall
submit a complete personal Cannabis cultivation application to the Director
on a form provided by the city, and proof of payment of the permit fee, in an
amount set by resolution of the City Council. Within 30 calendar days of
receiving the application, the Director shall either accept the application
for processing, or return the application to the applicant with a written
description of the reasons for rejection of the application. The cultivation
application shall include the following information:



      (1)   The property address where the Cannabis will be
cultivated;



      (2)   The name and age of each person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge of any legal parcel or premises where Cannabis
will be cultivated;



      (3)   The name and age of each person who will participate in
the Cannabis cultivation;



      (4)   Property owner acknowledgment of personal Cannabis
cultivation at the subject property, affirmed under penalty of perjury, if
the property owner is different from the applicant;



      (5)   A cultivation plan which includes a scaled property site
plan and a scaled diagram of the floor plan within the residence or
fully-enclosed accessory structure to be used for personal cultivation at the
personal Cannabis cultivation site, and an itemized list of measures taken to
comply with the provisions of this section including, but not limited to,
odor control, security, electrical and building and safety provisions, as
well as any Cannabis accessories that will be used for personal Cannabis
cultivation; and



      (6)   A signed consent form authorizing city staff, including
the Fire and Police Department, the authority to conduct an inspection of the
site used for the personal cultivation of Cannabis, upon 24-hours' notice for
the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter.



   (C)   Application approval. Upon verification of the information
described in division (B), above, the Director shall issue a notice of
decision of a personal marijuana cultivation permit within 60 calendar days,
pursuant to the following findings:



      (1)   The applicant meets all the requirements of this
section, and any regulations promulgated under this chapter.



      (2)   The applicant for the permit and the personal Cannabis
cultivation site are both in compliance with state law, including but not
limited to, Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.1, 11362.2 and 11362.3, as
may be amended.



   (D)   Permits not transferable. A personal Cannabis cultivation
permit issued pursuant to this chapter is non-transferable and is specific to
the permit holder and the private residence or fully-enclosed accessory
structure for which it is issued.



   (E)   Permit renewal. A personal Cannabis cultivation permit issued
under this chapter shall automatically expire one year after the notice of
decision. Permit renewal shall be requested through compliance with the
procedures for issuance of a permit as provided in this section. An applicant
for a permit renewal shall be required to pay a permit renewal fee in an
amount to be set by resolution of the City Council. However, an applicant for
permit renewal shall not be required to submit a new cultivation plan
(pursuant to division (B)(5) above), provided the personal Cannabis
cultivation site follows the original cultivation plan and the permit holder
is not engaged in additional or expanded Cannabis cultivation, as affirmed in
the renewal form. Renewal applications must be received at least 30 calendar
days prior to such expiration.



   (F)   Permit revocation. Permits issued under this section may be
revoked by the Director, following notice to the permit holder and an
opportunity to submit written comments on the proposed revocation, upon
making any of the following findings:



      (1)   The permit was issued in error or the cultivation plan
(pursuant to division (B)(5) above) included incorrect information;



      (2)   The Cannabis cultivated at the personal cultivation site
has been sold or used for any commercial activity which is prohibited under
this chapter, or any other use or activity has occurred that is prohibited by
Cal. Health and Safety Code  §§ 11362.1, 11362.2 or 11362.3, as may be
amended;



      (3)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has
occurred at the Cannabis cultivation site;



      (4)   The personal Cannabis cultivation site has become a
public nuisance or has been operated in a manner constituting a public
nuisance;



      (5)   The Cannabis cultivation is not in compliance with the
conditions of the permit; or



      (6)   (a)   The permit holder has engaged in an activity
for which the personal Cannabis cultivation permit could have been denied
originally.



         (b)   Appeals. The applicant may appeal the Director's
decision on an application, renewal or revocation of a personal Cannabis
cultivation permit to the Planning Commission and the Planning Commission's
decision to the City Council, pursuant to Chapter 16.206 of the code. An
appeal of a decision on a personal Cannabis cultivation permit is not timely
if not filed within 15 days of the date of the notice of the Director's (or
Planning Commission's) decision.



   (G)   (1)   Personal Cannabis cultivation is only permitted when
all of the following conditions and standards are met:



      (2)   Generally:



         (a)   Residence. Personal Cannabis cultivation is
permitted only on parcels with residential units where the personal Cannabis
cultivation permit holder resides full-time. Personal Cannabis cultivation
permit holders shall not participate in personal Cannabis cultivation in more
than one location within the city. Personal Cannabis cultivation activities
may only occur within a residential unit, garage or fully-enclosed accessory
structure.



         (b)   Visibility. From the public right-of-way, there
shall be no exterior evidence of personal Cannabis cultivation. All personal
Cannabis cultivation authorized by this section shall be conducted inside a
private residence or within a fully-enclosed accessory structure.



         (c)   Security. Any structure used for personal Cannabis
cultivation shall be secured with locks to prevent unauthorized entry and/or
theft, and remain secure at all times.



         (d)   Code compliance. The personal Cannabis cultivation
area shall not adversely affect the health or safety of the nearby residents
by creating dust, glare, excessive light, heat, noise, noxious gases, odors,
smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, and shall not be hazardous due
to the use of storage of materials, processes, products or waste. The
cultivation area shall be in full compliance with the city Building Code,
Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, and Fire Code.



         (e)   Number of plants. Cultivation shall not exceed six
living marijuana plants of any size per private residence.



         (f)   Cultivation area. Personal marijuana cultivation
must occur within a cumulative area totaling no larger than 100 square feet.



         (g)   Ventilation. Any multi-family dwelling used for
personal marijuana cultivation must have a ventilation and filtration system
installed in the dwelling unit that shall prevent marijuana plant odors from
exiting the interior of the unit, and shall comply with all applicable
building code regulations, including obtaining all required permits and
approvals for the ventilation and filtration system. Personal Cannabis
cultivation shall not create humidity or mold within the private residence or
fully-enclosed accessory structure in violation of the Building Code, as
adopted by the city, or the city's health and safety regulations, as codified
in Chapter 150 Building Regulations of the city municipal code.



         (h)   Residential structure. The primary residence
shall, at all times, maintain a kitchen, bathroom, and primary bedroom(s) for
their intended purpose, and shall not be used for Cannabis cultivation where
such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of meals,
sleeping, and bathing.



         (i)   Accessory structure. A fully-enclosed accessory
structure, as defined herein, shall be located within the rear yard area of
any legal parcel or premises. The structure shall maintain a minimum setback
of 10-feet from any property line and the marijuana plants shall not be
visible from outside the structure.



   (H)   Upon 24-hours' notice, the city may conduct an inspection of
the private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure used for personal
Cannabis cultivation for the purpose of verifying compliance with this
chapter.



(Ord. 1272, passed 12-4-17)



§ 16.79.050  ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.



   The City Manager and his/her designee is hereby authorized to
promulgate and enforce administrative regulations in the implementation and
enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 1272, passed 12-4-17)



§ 16.79.060  VIOLATIONS.



   In addition to any other remedy available under law, violations of this
subchapter are subject to the administrative citations and penalties
provisions in Title 1, Chapter 14, of this code.



(Ord. 1262, passed 2-1-16; Am. Ord. 1272, passed 12-4-17)



§ 16.79.070  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any
provisions of this subchapter shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a
public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Code of
Civil Procedure section 731 or any other remedy available to the city.



(Ord. 1262, passed 2-1-16; Am. Ord. 1272, passed 12-4-17)



CHAPTER 16.80:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section




Division 1:  General Provisions




   16.80.010   Purpose and intent



   16.80.020   Definitions



   16.80.030   Applicability and exemptions



   16.80.040   Modification of requirements



   16.80.050   Maps required



   16.80.060   Fees and deposits



   16.80.070   Plan checking and inspection costs for revisions




Division 1:  Tentative Maps




   16.80.080   Application requirements



   16.80.090   Filing and initial review



   16.80.100   Notifying other agencies



   16.80.110   School district notification



   16.80.120   Development review



   16.80.130   Planning Commission review and action



   16.80.140   City Council review and action



   16.80.150   Time limit for taking action



   16.80.160   Required findings



   16.80.170   Mandatory denial



   16.80.180   Additional findings for denial



   16.80.190   Denials under California Land Conservation Act of 1965



   16.80.200   Conditions of approval



   16.80.210   Finality of action



   16.80.220   Changes to an approved tentative map or conditions



   16.80.230   Expiration and extensions of time




Division 2:  Vesting Tentative Maps




   16.80.240   Applicability



   16.80.250   Application requirements



   16.80.260   Processing vesting tentative maps



   16.80.270   Finality of action



   16.80.280   Development rights vested



   16.80.290   Expiration of vested rights on recorded map



   16.80.300   Building permit applications and vested rights




Division 3:  Parcel Map




   16.80.310   When required



   16.80.320   Waiver of parcel map



   16.80.330   Parcel map waivers - Application and processing



   16.80.340   Parcel map waivers - Required findings



   16.80.350   Parcel map waivers - Certificate of Compliance



   16.80.360   Parcel map waivers - Time expirations and extensions



   16.80.370   Parcel map filing requirements



   16.80.380   Review of parcel map



   16.80.390   Parcel maps - City Council action



   16.80.400   Recordation of parcel map - Effect




Division 4:  Final Maps




   16.80.410   Final Map - Time for filing



   16.80.420   Survey required



   16.80.430   Final map - Form and content



   16.80.440   Approval by City Council



   16.80.450   Final Map recordation



   16.80.460   Circumstances under which corrections and amendments can
be made



   16.80.470   Additional circumstances




Division 5:  Certificates of Compliance




   16.80.480   Filing



   16.80.490   Review of application and decision



   16.80.500   Conditional Certificate of Compliance



   16.80.510   Effect of Conditional Certificate of Compliance



   16.80.520   Information required on Certificate of Compliance



   16.80.530   Certificates of Compliance for multiple parcels




Division 6:  Lot Line Adjustments




   16.80.540   Filing



   16.80.550   Review and processing



   16.80.560   Action



   16.80.570   Finalization of adjustment




Division 7:  Reversion to Acreage




   16.80.580   Initiation



   16.80.590   Filing



   16.80.600   Processing



   16.80.610   City Council action



   16.80.620   Required findings



   16.80.630   Finality of action




Division 8:  Mergers




   16.80.640   Conditions under which a merger can be required



   16.80.650   Notice of Intention to merge parcels



   16.80.660   Planning Commission review and action



   16.80.670   Determination when no hearing is requested



   16.80.680   Finality of action




Division 9:  Condominium Conversions




   16.80.690   Applicability



   16.80.700   Filing and processing



   16.80.710   Completion of conversion




Division 10:  Subdivision Improvements




   16.80.720   Conformance with city plans and standards



   16.80.730   Connections to existing streets



   16.80.740   Subdivision access to public street



   16.80.750   Parcel access



   16.80.760   Private streets



   16.80.770   Street design and improvement



   16.80.780   Alleys



   16.80.790   Drainage



   16.80.800   Lot patterns



   16.80.810   Grading and use of natural topography



   16.80.820   Sidewalks, parkways and trails



   16.80.830   Street lighting



   16.80.840   Improvements - General



   16.80.850   Streets



   16.80.860   Drainage facilities



   16.80.870   Undergrounding of utilities



   16.80.880   Water and sewer service



   16.80.890   Landscaping



   16.80.900   Utility easements



   16.80.910   Cable access



   16.80.920   Monuments



   16.80.930   Supplemental improvements



   16.80.940   Security and agreements



   16.80.950   Securities and special assessments



   16.80.960   Right-of-way dedication



   16.80.970   Parkland dedication and fees



   16.80.980   Bicycle paths and trails



   16.80.990   Transit facilities




Division 11:  Fees




   16.80.991   Bridge and major thoroughfare fees



   16.80.992   Supplement size, capacity or number required



   16.80.993   Reimbursement agreement



   16.80.994   Method of reimbursement



   16.80.995   Reimbursement for drainage and sanitary sewer facilities



   16.80.996   Reimbursement for bridges or major thoroughfares



   16.80.997   Fees established by resolution



   16.80.998   Payment of fees required



   16.80.999   In-lieu considerations



DIVISION 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 16.80.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision
Map Act set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66410 et seq. for the purpose of
regulating and controlling the design and improvement of subdivisions within
the City of Santa Paula. Such regulation is required to promote the public
health, safety, and welfare; to ensure orderly growth and development;
encourage appropriate land use; and assist with preserving property value.
The regulations set forth in this article are intended to supplement the Act
and must be used in conjunction with the regulations set forth in the Act for
all activities associated with subdividing land within the city's
jurisdiction. Nothing in this article is intended to supersede the Act and
the Act prevails over any conflicting part of this article.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.020  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this article. Words and phrases not given a meaning by this article have
the meaning set forth in this title and the Act.



   ACT means the Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 66510 et seq. and any subsequently adopted amendments or successor
statutes. Unless specified otherwise, all citations in this article to an
unspecified code are to the California Government Code.



   CEQA  means, collectively, the California Environmental Quality Act
(Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.), the regulations promulgated
thereunder (14 Cal. Code of Regs. §§ 15000 et seq., the "CEQA Guidelines"),
and the city's Environmental Guidelines.



   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION PROJECT  means the division of real property
into common interest, the establishment of a community apartment project, or
the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative
as set forth in Cal. Civ. Code § 1351.



   CONSTRUCTION  includes, without limitation, design, acquisition of
right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual
construction.



   DIRECTOR  means the Planning Director, or designee.



   ENGINEER  means the City Engineer, or designee.



   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT  means an adjustment of an existing lot line
between four or fewer adjoining parcels where the land taken from one parcel
is added to an adjoining parcel and a greater number of parcels than
originally existed is not created.



   PLANNING COMMISSION  may be used interchangeably with "Advisory
Agency" as defined in the Act.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.030  APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Unless exempt, land subdivisions require one of the following:



      (1)   A tentative map or vesting tentative map;



      (2)   A Final Map; or



      (3)   A parcel map.



   (B)   In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66412, this article
does not apply to the following:



      (1)   Leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes.



      (2)   Leases of land exclusively for the placement and
operation of cellular radio transmission facilities. Establishing such
facilities is subject to the city's discretionary approval.



      (3)   Leases of land or granting of easements in conjunction
with financing; erecting; and sale or lease of wind-powered electrical
generation devices. Establishing such facilities is subject to the city's
discretionary approval.



      (4)   Financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or
similar spaces within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial
buildings, or mobile home parks.



      (5)   Financing or leasing any parcel of land, or portion
thereof, in conjunction with construction of commercial or industrial
buildings on a single parcel, or the financing or leasing of existing
separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel.



      (6)   Mineral, oil, or gas leases.



      (7)   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Cal.
Health & Safety Code.



      (8)   Any separate assessment under Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code §
2188.7.



      (9)   Conversion of a community apartment project or stock
cooperative, as defined, respectively, in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code §§ 11004
and 11003.2, to a condominium, as defined in Cal. Civ. Code § 783, unless a
parcel or Final Map was approved by the City Council, and only if the
requirements specified in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66412(g) and (h) are met.



      (10)   Subdivisions of four or fewer parcels for constructing
removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than 100 square
feet.



      (11)   Construction, financing, or leasing of second dwelling
units as authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65852.1 and 65852.2.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.040  MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission may modify the requirements of this
article for a specific application when, in its opinion, the land involved in
the subdivision is of such size and shape, or is subject to such title
limitations, or is affected by such topographical location or conditions, or
is to be devoted to such use that it is impossible or impractical for the
subdivider to fully conform to the regulations contained in this article.



   (B)   Such modification may be made only as reasonably necessary or
expedient, provided modification ensures conformity with the spirit and
purpose of the Act and this title.



   (C)   Any request for a modification must be made in conjunction
with a subdivision application and be reviewed by the Planning Department
before a recommendation is made to the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.050  MAPS REQUIRED.



   (A)   A tentative and final map is required for all subdivisions
creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, a community
apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for conversion of a
dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units,
except where:



      (1)   The land before division contains less than five acres,
each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or
highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative
body;



      (2)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of
20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or
highway;



      (3)   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having
approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract
of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the
approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or



      (4)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of
not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.



   (B)   A tentative and final parcel map is required for subdivisions
(to which this article applies) that create four or less parcels; lot line
adjustments; and those subdivisions described above, except that the parcel
map requirement may be waived as provided in this article.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.80.060  FEES AND DEPOSITS.



   All persons submitting maps as required by this article must pay all
fees and deposits as provided by City Council resolutions establishing fees
and deposits.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.070  PLAN CHECKING AND INSPECTION COSTS FOR REVISIONS.



   Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans or calculations or
inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans must be borne by
the subdivider at actual cost. The city may require a deposit to be applied
toward actual costs.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 1:  TENTATIVE MAPS



§ 16.80.080  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   At a minimum, each tentative map submitted to the city must contain the
following information:



   (A)   The tract number of a subdivision.



   (B)   The date, north arrow, and scale.



   (C)   A sufficient legal description of the land to define the
boundaries of the proposed division of land.



   (D)   A key map indicating the location of the proposed division of
land in relation to the surrounding area.



   (E)   The name and address of the record owner, the subdivider, and
the civil engineer or licensed surveyor under whose direction the map was
prepared, including the registration number of the engineer or surveyor and
the names and addresses of all operators of the utility systems of the
subdivision.



   (F)   The existing topography of land proposed to be divided using
contour intervals as follows:



      (1)   One foot when the slope of the ground is less than 5%;



      (2)   Two feet when the slope of the ground is between 5% and
10%;



      (3)   Five feet when the slope of the ground is between 10%
and 25%; and



      (4)   Ten feet when the slope of the ground is greater than
25%.



   (G)   At least every fifth contour of topography described above
must be clearly labeled and indicated so as to be distinctive. Contours of
adjacent land must also be shown whenever the surface features of such land
affect the design and/or improvement of the proposed division. The tentative
map must contain a statement by the person preparing the map stating the
source of information used to develop the contours shown on the map.



   (H)   The approximate location and outline to scale of each building
or structure on the property proposed for division. Buildings or structures
on adjacent property must also be shown if such buildings or structures
affect the design of the proposed subdivision. Each building shown must be
identified by house number or other identifying feature, including a notation
on each building, structure, fence, wall, tree row, and land use to be
retained.



   (I)   The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or
storm water overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of each
watercourse and existing flood control district channels within ½ mile of
the exterior boundaries of the subdivision.



   (J)   Descriptions of the proposed source of water supply and the
proposed method of sewage disposal.



   (K)   A proposed method, and plan for storm water disposal in
accordance with the Ventura County Storm Water Urban Impact Mitigation Plan
("SQUIMP") requirements.



   (L)   The approximate location of each area covered by trees, with a
statement of the nature of the cover and the kind and approximate location of
all trees standing within the boundaries of proposed public rights-of-way.



   (M)   The location, width, approximate grade, and curb radii of all
existing and proposed streets and highways within and adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.



   (N)   The width, purpose, and approximate location of all existing
and proposed easements or rights-of-way, whether public or private, within
and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, as well as the approximate radius
and arc length of each centerline curve.



   (O)   The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions and
net area of each lot and building site. Engineering data must show the
approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all
grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and
fill slopes to scale, and the number of each lot. All lot lines must be
located at the top of the slopes.



   (P)   The proposed areas for public use.



   (Q)   The angle of intersecting streets or highways if such angle
deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees.



   (R)   The location of all cut and fill slopes, or a separate grading
plan.



   (S)   Each street shown by its actual street name or by a temporary
name or letter for purpose of identification until the proper name of such
street is determined.



   (T)   The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose
services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map.



   (U)   A geologic soils report prepared by a civil engineer,
registered by the State of California, based upon adequate test borings or
excavations, unless the Engineer or designee determines that, due to
information the Engineer has regarding the qualities of the soil of such
subdivision or lot, no preliminary analysis is necessary.



      (1)   If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of
critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected,
would lead to structural defects, the person filing the tentative map must
submit a soils investigation of each lot within the subdivision, prepared by
a California-registered civil engineer, who must recommend corrective action
likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be
constructed on the expansive soil.



      (2)   The Engineer, or designee, must approve the soils
investigation if determined that the recommended action is likely to prevent
structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed and must require that
the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each
dwelling as a condition to the issuance of a building permit.



   (V)   A geologic hazards report, if the Engineer finds that a
written geological hazards report is necessary to determine whether the
property to be divided is subject to an existing or potential geological
hazard. Such report is prepared by a registered engineering geologist and
must state:



      (1)   Whether the proposed plan is feasible;



      (2)   Proposed solutions for all known hazardous conditions or
problems;



      (3)   The location and lot numbers of any test borings;



      (4)   The effect of the geology on the proposed development
and on adjacent properties; and



      (5)   A description of specific locations in which development
may create hazardous conditions.



   (W)   Through the application review process, the Engineer or
Director may require that additional information be included on the tentative
map to provide important or necessary disclosures or other information.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.090  FILING AND INITIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   Tentative maps must be filed with the Director on forms
provided by the Planning Department and in accordance with procedures
established by that Department.



   (B)   The Director and Engineer will preliminarily review the
tentative map application for completeness and required compliance with CEQA.
Within 30 days after receiving a tentative map application, the Director must
inform the applicant in writing whether the application is deemed complete.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.100  NOTIFYING OTHER AGENCIES.



   The Director must send notice of the tentative map application to other
city departments, schools, utility companies, and other agencies that may
have an interest in the tentative map application for the purpose of
receiving comment from those departments, companies, and agencies.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.110  SCHOOL DISTRICT NOTIFICATION.



   Within ten days after a tentative map is filed, the Director must send
notice to the governing board of any elementary, high school or unified
school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to
be located. Such notice must contain information about the location of the
proposed subdivision, the number of units, density and any other information
which would be relevant to the affected school district. Failure of the
school district to respond within 20 days after receiving notice is deemed
approval of the proposed subdivision by the school district.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.120  DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon deeming an application complete, the Director must
forward the tentative map and any associated applications to the Design
Review Committee for review in accordance with this code.



   (B)   The Design Review Committee will review and evaluate each
tentative map for compliance with this title, the General Plan, any
applicable Specific Plan or Planned Development, the Act, and the city's
development policies.



   (C)   The Director will report to the Planning Commission
identifying the extent to which the tentative map complies with this article
and recommending that the Planning Commission approve, conditionally approve,
or deny the tentative map application.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.130  PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW AND ACTION.



   (A)   The Planning Commission must hold a public hearing in
accordance with this chapter to consider the tentative map application.



   (B)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning
Commission must determine the extent to which the tentative map complies with
this article and recommend to the City Council whether to approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map application.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.140  CITY COUNCIL REVIEW AND ACTION.



   (A)   Upon receiving the Planning Commission's recommendation, the
City Clerk will schedule a public hearing before the City Council in
accordance with this title.



   (B)   During the hearing, in addition to any other evidence, the
City Council will consider the Planning Commission's recommendation.



   (C)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council must
determine the extent to which the tentative map complies with this article
and approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map application.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.150  TIME LIMIT FOR TAKING ACTION.



   All actions by the Director, Planning Commission, and City Council must
occur within the time limits specified in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66452.1 and
66452.2 and Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 21151.5.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.160  REQUIRED FINDINGS.



   (A)   In acting to approve or conditionally approve a tentative map,
together with the provisions for its design and improvement, the City Council
must find that the proposed subdivision is:



      (1)   Consistent with the Santa Paula General Plan;



      (2)   Consistent with any applicable Specific Plan or Planned
Development;



      (3)   Consistent with the provisions of this title;



      (4)   In the interest of public health and safety; and



      (5)   Is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development
of the surrounding area.



   (B)   The findings apply to the entire subdivision; to each proposed
parcel within the subdivision; and any designated remainder parcel.



   (C)   For condominium conversions, the City Council must make the
additional findings as set forth in this article.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.170  MANDATORY DENIAL.



   (A)   A tentative map application must be denied if the City Council
finds any of the following findings consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code §
66474:



      (1)   The proposed map, or the design or improvement of the
proposed subdivision, is not consistent with the General Plan or Specific
Plans as specified by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65451;



      (2)   The proposed map, or the design or improvement of the
proposed subdivision, is not consistent with an applicable General Plan or
Specific Plan;



      (3)   The site is not physically suitable for the type of
development proposed;



      (4)   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed
density of development proposed;



      (5)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed
improvements will likely cause substantial environmental damage or
substantially and unavoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;



      (6)   The design of the subdivision or type of improvements
will likely cause serious public health or safety problems;



      (7)   The design of the subdivision or the type of
improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large,
for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. The
City Council may approve a tentative map, however, if it finds that
alternative easements will be provided, and that these will be substantially
equivalent to the ones previously acquired by the public. All easements must
be recorded or established by court order; or



      (8)   The proposed subdivision is not consistent with all
applicable provisions of this title.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.180  ADDITIONAL FINDINGS FOR DENIAL.



   The City Council may also deny a proposed tentative map based on any of
the following findings:



   (A)   The proposed subdivision is not compatible with surrounding
development in terms of density, patterns of development, access, or other
consideration;



   (B)   The city's cost of providing infrastructure support or
services outweigh any benefits associated with the subdivision.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.190   DENIALS UNDER CALIFORNIA LAND CONSERVATION ACT OF 1965.



   (A)   The City Council may deny a proposed tentative map if the land
is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land
Conservation Act of 1965 (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 51200 et seq.) and the
resulting parcels following a subdivision of that land would be too small to
sustain their agricultural use.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, land is presumed to be in
parcels too small to sustain their agricultural use if the land is: less than
ten acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land; or less than 40
acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agricultural land.



   (C)   For purpose of this section, agricultural land is presumed to
be in parcels large enough to sustain their agricultural use if the land is:
at least ten acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land; or at
least forty acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agricultural
land.



   (D)   A subdivision with parcels smaller than those specified in
this section may be approved if either of the following findings are made:



      (1)   The parcels can nevertheless sustain an agricultural use
permitted under the contract, or are subject to a written agreement for joint
management pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 51230.1, provided that the
parcels which are jointly managed total at least ten acres in size in the
case of prime agricultural land or 40 acres in size in the case of land which
is not prime agricultural land.



      (2)   One of the parcels contains a residence and is subject
to Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code § 428; the residence has existed on the property
for at least five years; the landowner has owned the parcels for at least ten
years; and the remaining parcels shown on the map are at least ten acres in
size if the land is prime agricultural land, or at least 40 acres in size if
the land is not prime agricultural land. In such case, no other homesite
parcels may be created on any remaining parcels under contract for at least
ten years following the creation of a homesite parcel pursuant to this
section.



   (E)   This section does not apply to land subject to a contract when
any of the following occurred:



      (1)   A local agency formation commission approved annexation
of the land to the city and the city will not succeed to the contract as
provided in Cal. Gov’t Code  §§ 51243 and 51243.5;



      (2)   Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract was served
before March 7, 1985, as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 51245;



      (3)   Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract was served
on or after March 7, 1985, as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 51245, and, as
a result of that notice, there are no more than three years remaining in the
term of the contract;



      (4)   The City Council granted tentative approval for
cancellation of the contract as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 51282.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.200  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   In acting to approve a tentative map, the City Council may impose
conditions on map approval in accordance with the Act and this title to,
among other things, achieve the objectives of the General Plan, ensure
consistency with the provisions of this Code, and mitigate against adverse
environmental impact.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.210  FINALITY OF ACTION.



   The decision of the City Council to approve, conditionally approve, or
deny a tentative map is final and, unless otherwise specified, effective upon
the date such decision is rendered.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.220  CHANGES TO AN APPROVED TENTATIVE MAP OR CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The following changes to an approved tentative map may be
requested:



      (1)   Adjustments to the locations of lot lines and
improvements, provided no new lots are created.



      (2)   Reduction in the number of approved lots.



      (3)   Any changes to the conditions of approval.



   (B)   Changes other than as set forth in this section require a new
tentative map application.



   (C)   A subdivider may request changes to an approved tentative map
or its conditions of approval before the city records the map. Such a request
must be made on forms provided by the Director and be accompanied with
payment of required fees.



   (D)   The application for a change to an approved tentative map or
map conditions is processed in the same manner as the tentative map.



   (E)   The City Council must make the following findings, as
applicable, to make any proposed changes to a previously approved tentative
map:



      (1)   A material mistake of facts was made in the
deliberations leading to the original approval; or



      (2)   A change of circumstances has occurred which affects
conditions related to the original approval.



   (F)   Modification of an approved tentative map or its conditions of
approval does not extend the time limits applicable to the filing of a Final
Map.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.230  EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS OF TIME.



   (A)   Except as otherwise specified by a development agreement or
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.6(a)(1), a tentative map expires 24
months after the date the map was approved.



   (B)   The person filing the tentative map may request an extension,
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.6(e), or stay, pursuant to Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66452.6(c) of an approved tentative map by filing a written
application with the Director before the map's expiration date. The
application must state the reasons for requesting the extension or stay. Such
application must be filed at least fifteen (15) days before the tentative
map's expiration date.



   (C)   The Planning Commission will either approve, conditionally
approve or deny extension requests. Within 40 days after receiving an
application for a stay, the Planning Commission must either approve the
requested stay for a period not exceeding five years or deny the application.



   (D)   Each extension of tentative map approval or conditional
approval may be allowed for a period not exceeding one year from the
anniversary date of the map's original approval. The total time of extensions
cannot exceed five years. A stay may be for the period of time during which a
lawsuit involving the tentative map is or was pending in a court of competent
jurisdiction, not to exceed five years. The ultimate length of the extension
or stay must be consistent with the Act.



   (E)   Modifications of a tentative map after approval or conditional
approval cannot extend the time limits imposed by this section, unless an
extension or stay is specifically granted.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 2:  VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS



§ 16.80.240  APPLICABILITY.



   A vesting tentative map may be filed for either a residential or
nonresidential development project. Whenever a provision of this title or the
Act requires the filing of a tentative map or parcel map, a vesting tentative
map may be filed in accordance with the provisions of this division.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.250  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A vesting tentative map is filed using the same form,
accompanying reports, and data as a tentative map, with the following
additional requirements:



      (1)   Identification. At the time a vesting tentative map is
filed, it must have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting
Tentative Map.”



      (2)   Right-of-way. The map must show proposed street
widenings and extensions; existing and proposed sidewalks and curb cuts;
existing and proposed fire hydrants within 300 feet of the project perimeter;
and existing utility poles.



      (3)   Site and buildings. Information must be provided
regarding the type and use of all buildings, both existing and proposed;
location of buildings to be removed; square footage of each floor, building,
lot, and total project; all facilities and accessory structures related to
underground utilities and street lighting; all mechanical equipment on the
buildings or on the site; appropriate screening methods and materials; and
the location and screening of outdoor trash and storage areas.



      (4)   Parking and circulation (if applicable). Information
must be provided regarding the parking spaces to be provided, with total
number of spaces given; wheel stops or curb substitute; parking space
striping; handicap parking; ingress and egress to include all private drives;
and pedestrian walkways.



      (5)   Landscaping (if applicable). Diagrams must be provided
showing and identifying all existing trees; existing and proposed landscaped
areas in terms of proposed plants by type, size, spacing, and number;
screening of adjacent properties, if required; and square footage of common
usable and private open space (patio) areas, where such is required by this
title.



      (6)   Floor plans. Dimensioned preliminary floor plans must be
provided for each proposed use.



      (7)   Building elevations, with grading. Diagrams must be
provided to show two cross-section lines that clearly portray buildings and
grading concepts; natural grade (dotted lines) and finished grade (solid
lines); preliminary renderings of front, right side, left side, and rear
elevations of all buildings; building height in feet and stories; proposed
construction materials; and the proposed colors of all buildings.



   (B)   Through the application review process, the Director or
Engineer may require that additional information be included with the vesting
tentative map to provide important or necessary disclosures or other
information.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.260  PROCESSING VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS.



   Except as they specifically differ in this division, procedures for
processing a vested tentative map are the same as for processing a tentative
map including, without limitation, filing, review, notification, Planning
Commission consideration, City Council approval, final decisions, changes
after approval, expiration, and renewal.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.270  FINALITY OF ACTION.



   The decision of the City Council to approve, conditionally approve, or
deny a vesting tentative map is final and, unless specified otherwise,
becomes effective upon the date such decision is rendered.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.280  DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS VESTED.



   (A)   The approval of a vesting tentative map confers a vested right
to proceed with development on recorded lots in substantial compliance with
the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date that the map is
approved.



   (B)   The city may condition or deny a permit, approval, extension,
or entitlement pursuant to the approved vesting map if the City Council
determines any of the following:



      (1)   Failure to take such action would place the residents of
the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous
to their health and safety, or both.



      (2)   The condition or denial is required to comply with state
or federal law.



   (C)   All development permit fees required subsequent to the
approval of the vesting tentative map must be paid.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.290  EXPIRATION OF VESTED RIGHTS ON RECORDED MAP.



   (A)   The rights conferred upon a vesting tentative map is vested
for an initial time period of 24 months from the date a Final Map is
recorded. Where several Final Maps are recorded on various phases of a
project, approved by a single vesting tentative map, this time period begins
for each phase when the Final Map for that phase is recorded.



   (B)   The initial time period is automatically extended by any time
used by the city for processing a complete application for a grading permit
or for design or architectural review, if the time period used by the city to
process the application exceeds 30 days from the date the complete
application is filed.



   (C)   The conditions under which an extension of time or stay is
granted for a vesting tentative map must be consistent with that established
for tentative maps.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.300  BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND VESTED RIGHTS.



   If a developer submits a complete application for a building permit
during the initial time period, or any granted extension, the rights
conferred by the vesting map continue until the expiration of that building
permit or any extension to that building permit that the city may issue.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 3:  PARCEL MAP



§ 16.80.310  WHEN REQUIRED.



   A Parcel Map is required for subdividing property into four or fewer
parcels or for any other division of land for which a tentative and Final Map
are not required by the Act or this Code. No Parcel Map is required for a
land division of four or fewer parcels where such land is conveyed to a
public utility for a public use.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.320  WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP.



   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66428, a subdivider may
request the waiver of a Parcel Map if the following conditions apply:



      (1)   Each parcel created by the subdivision has a gross area
not less than 40 acres or not less than a quarter of a quarter section.



      (2)   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having
approved access to a public street or highway, comprises part of a tract of
land zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial development, and has City
Council approval as to street widths and alignments.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.330  PARCEL MAP WAIVERS - APPLICATION AND PROCESSING.



   (A)   A request to waive a Parcel Map must be filed on forms
provided by the Director, together with required filing fees.



   (B)   The Engineer and Director will review the application for
compliance with the provisions of this title and the Act. The Director will
report to the Planning Commission and identify the extent to which the waiver
request complies with the required findings, and recommend to the Commission
to approve or deny the waiver request.



   (C)   The Planning Commission will consider the application for a
Parcel Map waiver at a public hearing.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning
Commission must determine whether to approve or deny the waiver request. The
action of the Planning Commission is final unless an appeal is filed in
accordance with this title.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.80.340  PARCEL MAP WAIVERS - REQUIRED FINDINGS.



   To grant a request for waiving a Parcel Map requirement, the Planning
Commission must find that the proposed subdivision complies with this title
with regard to area, improvement, and design; floodwater drainage control;
appropriate improved public roadways; sanitary disposal facilities; water
supply availability; environmental protection; and other applicable
regulations.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.350  PARCEL MAP WAIVERS - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   The city must issue a Certificate of Compliance required to complete
the subdivision of property where the Planning Commission waives a Parcel Map
requirement.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.360  PARCEL MAP WAIVERS - TIME EXPIRATIONS AND EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   A Parcel Map waiver expires 24 months from the date it was
approved.



   (B)   The subdivider may request an extension for a Parcel Map
waiver. Such requests must be made to the Director on forms provided by the
Director, with the payment of any required fees, at least 15 days before the
Parcel Map Waiver expires.



   (C)   The Director can approve, conditionally approve, or deny an
extension request pursuant to this title. Any Director's decision may be
appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with this title. Any such
extension is limited to a total of 18 months.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.370  PARCEL MAP FILING REQUIREMENTS.



   The following apply to the filing of an application for a Parcel Map:



   (A)   The Parcel Map must meet the requirements of the Act and be in
the form and contain the required data set forth in this section.



   (B)   The Parcel Map must be prepared by or under the direction of a
registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor and be based upon a property
survey.



   (C)   The scale of the map must be large enough (not smaller than 1
inch equals 100 feet) to show details clearly and contain sufficient sheets
of paper for accomplishing this requirement.



   (D)   The title of each Parcel Map must include a name and a map
number, as secured from the county surveyor, conspicuously placed at the
lower right hand corner of the sheet, followed by the words "consisting of  
          sheets" (showing the number thereof), followed by the words
"in the City of Santa Paula" or "partly in the City of Santa Paula and partly
in unincorporated territory."



   (E)   Every sheet of the map property must bear the title (but not
subtitle), scale, north arrow, sheet number, and the number of each adjoining
sheet in its proper location.



   (F)   Below the title, a subtitle must appear consisting of a
description of all the property being subdivided. The subtitle must reference
any such map or maps of the property which were previously recorded or filed
in the County Recorder's office; or which were previously filed with the
County Clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition; or
which have been previously filed in the office of the County Recorder under
authority of Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.55; or by reference to the plat of
any United States survey.



   (G)   Each reference in such description to any tract or subdivision
must be spelled out and worded identically with the original record thereof
and show a complete reference to the book and page of records of such county.



   (H)   The description must also include reference to any vacated
area, with the number of the ordinance of vacation included.



   (I)   The name of the survey, survey date, and map scale must be
stated on the title sheet, below the subtitle. The map must also show the
basis of bearings, making reference to some recorded subdivision map, county
surveyor's map, or other record acceptable to such county surveyor, or to a
solar or polaris observation. The basis of bearings must not be in close
proximity to the north arrow.



   (J)   Lots must be numbered consecutively, commencing with the
number "1," with no omissions or duplications.



   (K)   Each lot must be shown entirely on one sheet.



   (L)   Blocks may be used, provided they are numbered or lettered
consecutively.



   (M)   Names of proposed streets must approved by the Planning
Commission in conformance with a street name list approved by the City
Council. The names of all proposed streets must be shown without
abbreviations.



   (N)   All streets, highways, easements (except easements indicated
for privately owned public utility companies), and parcels of land shown on
the parcel map and intended for any public use must be offered for dedication
for public use.



   (O)   Where easements for conveyance to privately owned public
utility companies are reserved, a certificate to that effect must be shown on
the parcel map. This certificate may show that in no event, except when
permission is obtained from public utility companies occupying such easement,
may any dwelling house, building or other structure, except fences or any
portion thereof, be erected in, upon, over, or across any such public utility
easement.



   (P)   The following certificates and acknowledgments must appear on
the title sheet of a parcel map:



      (1)   Owner's certificate and acknowledgment and offer of
dedication, if any;



      (2)   Certificate of the City Clerk of approval by the City
Council and acceptance of offer of dedication;



      (3)   Certificate of approval of the Engineer;



      (4)   Certificate of approval as to form by the City Attorney;
and



      (5)   Certificate of the subdivision engineer with that
engineer's state registered engineer's number or of the subdivision surveyor
with that surveyor's state licensed land surveyor's number.



      (6)   The title sheet must also contain such other affidavits,
certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, and notarial seals as are
required by law.



   (Q)   The parcel map must particularly define, delineate, and
designate all lots intended for sale or reserved for private purposes; all
parcels offered for dedication for any purpose; and any private streets with
all dimensions, minimum lot sizes, boundaries and courses clearly shown and
defined in every case.



   (R)   Parcels offered for dedication other than for streets or
easements must be designated by number.



   (S)   Private streets must be designated by name and include the
words "not a public street."



   (T)   Sufficient linear, angular, and curve data must be shown to
determine readily the bearing and length of the boundary lines of the
subdivision and of the boundary lines of every block, lot, and parcel which
is a part thereof. All lots and blocks are shown in their entirety on one
sheet wherever practicable.



   (U)   Arc lengths, radii, and central angle and radial bearing of
each curve at intersection with a line not tangent to such curve must be
shown.



   (V)   The parcel map must fully describe and show the location of
any stakes, monuments, or other evidence to determine the boundaries of the
subdivision. Each adjacent corner of each adjoining subdivision or portion
thereof by lot and block numbers, tract names and place of record, or by
section, township and range or other proper designation must be shown and
identified on the map.



   (W)   The location, size, and depth of all monuments placed in
making the survey must be shown, and if any points were reset by ties, that
fact must be noted.



   (X)   The boundary of the subdivision must be indicated by a border
of prussian blue water color or blue india ink approximately one-eighth of an
inch wide, applied on the reverse side of the tracing and inside such
boundary line.



   (Y)   Such water color must be of such density as to be transferable
to white print of such map and not obliterate any line, figure, or other data
appearing thereon.



   (Z)   All lines shown on the map that do not constitute a part of
the subdivision itself must be clearly distinguishable from those lines which
are a part of the subdivision, and any area enclosed by such lines is labeled
"not a part of this subdivision."



   (AA)   City boundaries that cross or adjoin the subdivision must be
clearly designated and located in relation to adjacent lot or block lines.



   (BB)   The parcel map must show the line of high water in instances
where the subdivision is adjacent to a stream, channel, or any body of water.
The parcel map must also show any area subject to periodic inundation by
water, as required by the Engineer.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.380  REVIEW OF PARCEL MAP.



   (A)   All parcel maps, together with any required reports or other
relevant information, must be filed with the Director on forms provided by
the Director.



   (B)   Upon deeming a parcel map application to be complete, the
Director will forward the application to the Design Review Committee, the
Engineer and other appropriate city departments for review and comment. The
Engineer is responsible for checking the parcel map as to correctness of
surveying data, plans and specifications of improvements, certificates of
dedication, acceptances of dedication and acknowledgments, and such other
matters that require checking to ensure compliance with the provisions of law
and of this title. The Director must review the parcel map for consistency
with this title, the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, and the
city's development policies.



   (C)   If the Director determines that the parcel map conforms to all
the requirements of this article and the Act, and provided the subdivider has
posted all bonds or deposited money or negotiable bonds as required by this
article, the Director must approve the parcel map. If the parcel map does not
conform or all security requirements have not been met, the subdivider will
be notified and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit
the parcel map, along with any other required information.



   (D)   After determining that a parcel map complies with this
article, the Director must approve the map and forward it to the County
Recorder for filing in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66450.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 1172, passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.80.390  PARCEL MAPS - CITY COUNCIL ACTION.



   The City Council must act on a parcel map whenever any of the following
circumstances apply:



   (A)   If a dedication or offer of dedication is required, the
Director must forward the parcel map to the City Clerk. The Clerk must place
the item on the next City Council agenda for acceptance of dedications.



   (B)   If improvements required pursuant to this title or other
regulations were not completed, the Director must not approve the map unless
the City Council authorizes deferred completion. Such authorization must only
be granted if the subdivider enters into an agreement with the city to post
security to guarantee the improvements.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.400  RECORDATION OF PARCEL MAP - EFFECT.



   Recordation of a parcel map has the effect of eliminating any lot lines
within the boundaries of the subdivision that existed before recordation of
the parcel map.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 4:  FINAL MAPS



§ 16.80.410  FINAL MAP - TIME FOR FILING.



   (A)   Within 24 months after the date the City Council approves a
tentative map, or any later date that may be authorized by an extension
granted pursuant to this article, the subdivider must cause the subject
property to be accurately surveyed and a Final Map to be prepared in
conformance with the tentative map and any and all applicable conditions.



   (B)   The Final Map must be submitted to the Engineer for review and
action within the time period specified by this section.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.420  SURVEY REQUIRED.



   (A)   An accurate and complete field survey of the land to be
subdivided must be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor authorized to practice land surveying in the State of California.
All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements
adjoining or within the subdivision must be tied into the survey. The
allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map must not exceed
1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.



   (B)   At the time of making the survey for the final map, the
engineer or surveyor must set sufficient durable monuments to conform with
the standards described in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 8771 so that another
engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior
boundary line must be monumented before recording the final map. Other
monuments must be set as required by the Engineer.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.430  FINAL MAP - FORM AND CONTENT.



   The original Final Map and one duplicate reproducible copy must be
submitted to the Engineer, accompanied by the following:



   (A)   In the event any dedication is to be made for public use, a
certificate of title, a subdivision guarantee, or a dedication letter in the
name of the owner of the land, issued to or for the benefit and protection of
the city by a title company authorized by the laws of the state to write such
letter, showing all parties whose consent is necessary to pass clear title to
the land being subdivided, together with the nature of their interests
therein, except where the land contained in such subdivision is registered
under the Land Registration Act ("Torrens Act"), in which latter case a
certified copy of the certificate of title is furnished.



   (B)   A white print of the Final Map showing the contemplated
location of installations of facilities or all public utilities, whether
publicly or privately owned, with a statement of the proposed work, with such
statement to be filed by the Engineer.



   (C)   A grading plan as required by the Engineer.



   (D)   The subdivider must file, either at the time of filing the
Final Map at a later date as provided in this Division, detailed plans and
specifications of the improvements to be installed as required by the
provisions of this article and of all other improvements proposed to be
installed by the subdivider in, on, or under any street or right-of-way,
easement, or parcel of land dedicated by the map, including the estimated
cost thereof.



   (E)   The subdivider may file multiple Final Maps on the approved
tentative map, subject to the Engineer's approval.



   (F)   The Final Map must meet the requirements of the Act and be in
the form and contain the required data set forth in this section.



   (G)   The Final Map must be prepared by or under the direction of a
registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor and be based upon a property
survey.



   (H)   The scale of the map must be large enough (not smaller than 1
inch equals 100 feet) to show details clearly and enough sheets must be used
to accomplish this end.



   (I)   The title of each Final Map must consist of a name and a tract
number, as secured from the county surveyor, conspicuously placed at the
lower right hand corner of the sheet, followed by the words "consisting of  
          sheets" (showing the number thereof), followed by the words
"in the City of Santa Paula" or "partly in the City of Santa Paula and partly
in unincorporated territory."



   (J)   Every sheet of the map property must bear the title (but not
subtitle), scale, north arrow, sheet number, and the number of each adjoining
sheet in its proper location.



   (K)   A subtitle, describing all property being subdivided, must
appear below the title. The subtitle must reference any map of the property
that was previously recorded or filed in the County Recorder's office; or
previously filed with the County Clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any
action in partition; or which have been previously filed in the office of the
County Recorder under authority of Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.55; or by
reference to the plat of any United States survey.



   (L)   Each reference in such description to any tract or subdivision
must be spelled out and worded identically with the original record thereof
and show a complete reference to the book and page of records of such county.



   (M)   The description must also include reference to any vacated
area, with the number of the ordinance of vacation included.



   (N)   The name of the surveyor, survey date, and scale must appear
on the title sheet below the subtitle. The map must also show the basis of
bearings, making reference to some recorded subdivision map, county
surveyor's map, or other record acceptable to such county surveyor, or to a
solar or polaris observation. The basis of bearings must not be close to the
north arrow.



   (O)   The lots must be numbered consecutively, commencing with the
number "1," with no omissions or duplications; provided, that where the
subdivision is a continuation of or an addition to an existing subdivision,
the lot numbers may commence with the number immediately following the last
or highest number of each existing subdivision and in all other respects must
conform with the preceding requirements.



   (P)   Each lot must be shown entirely on one sheet.



   (Q)   Blocks may be used, provided they are numbered or lettered
consecutively.



   (R)   Proposed street names must conform with a City Council
approved list of street names. The names of all proposed streets must be
shown without abbreviations.



   (S)   All streets, highways, easements (except easements indicated
for privately owned public utility companies), and parcels of land shown on
the Final Map and intended for any public use must be offered for dedication
for public use.



   (T)   A certification regarding reservation of easements to
privately owned public utility companies must be included on the Final Map
when applicable. This certificate may show that in no event, except when
permission is obtained from public utility companies occupying such easement,
may any dwelling house, building or other structure, except fences or any
portion thereof, be erected in, upon, over, or across any such public utility
easement.



   (U)   The following certificates and acknowledgments must appear on
the title sheet of a Final Map:



      (1)   Owner's certificate and acknowledgment and offer of
dedication, if any;



      (2)   Certificate of the City Clerk of approval by the City
Council and acceptance of offer of dedication;



      (3)   Certificate of approval of the Engineer;



      (4)   Certificate of approval as to form by the City Attorney;



      (5)   Certificate of the subdivision engineer with the
engineer's state registered engineer's number or of the subdivision surveyor
with the surveyor's state licensed land surveyor's number.



      (6)   Such other affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments,
endorsements, and notarial seals as are required by law.



   (V)   The Final Map must particularly define, delineate, and
designate all lots intended for sale or reserved for private purposes; all
parcels offered for dedication for any purpose; and any private streets with
all dimensions, minimum lot sizes, boundaries and courses clearly shown and
defined in every case.



   (W)   Parcels offered for dedication other than for streets or
easements must be designated by number.



   (X)   Private streets must be designated by name and have inserted
within the limits thereof the words "not a public street."



   (Y)   Sufficient linear, angular, and curve data must be shown to
determine readily the bearing and length of the boundary lines of the
subdivision and of the boundary lines of every block, lot, and parcel which
is a part thereof. All lots and blocks are shown in their entirety on one
sheet wherever practicable.



   (Z)   Arc lengths, radii, and central angle and radial bearing of
each curve at intersection with a line not tangent to such curve are shown.



   (AA)   The Final Map must fully describe and show the location of
any stakes, monuments, or other evidence to determine the boundaries of the
subdivision. Each adjacent corner of each adjoining subdivision or portion
thereof by lot and block numbers, tract names and place of record, or by
section, township and range or other proper designation must be shown and
identified on the map.



   (BB)   The location, size, and depth of all monuments placed in
making the survey must be shown, and if any points were reset by ties, that
fact must be noted.



   (CC)   The boundary of the subdivision must be indicated by a border
of prussian blue water color or blue india ink approximately one-eighth of an
inch wide, applied on the reverse side of the tracing and inside such
boundary line.



   (DD)   Such water color must be of such density as to be
transferable to white print of such map and not obliterate any line, figure,
or other data appearing thereon.



   (EE)   All lines shown on the map that do not constitute a part of
the subdivision itself must be clearly distinguishable from those lines which
are a part of the subdivision, and any area enclosed by such lines is labeled
"not a part of this subdivision."



   (FF)   City boundaries that cross or adjoin the subdivision must be
clearly designated and located in relation to adjacent lot or block lines.



   (GG)   The Final Map must show the line of high water in instances
where the subdivision is adjacent to a stream, channel, or any body of water.
The Final Map must also show any area subject to periodic inundation by
water, as required by the Engineer.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.440  APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   After review and approval by the Engineer, the final map must
be placed on the City Council agenda for its approval. The City Council must
consider the final map for approval at the next regular meeting after the
Engineer approves the map.



   (B)   The City Council must approve the final map if it has
previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision, and if it
finds that the final map is in substantial compliance with the previously
approved tentative map, and if it conforms to all applicable requirements of
this title and the Act.



   (C)   If the final map is unacceptable, the Council must make its
recommended corrections, instruct the subdivider to revise the final map and
defer approval until the final map is resubmitted.



   (D)   The City Council must deny approval of the final map only for
failure to meet or perform requirements or conditions which were applicable
to the subdivision at the time of approval of the tentative map. Where the
Council denies approval of the final map, such disapproval must be
accompanied by a finding identifying the requirements or conditions which
have not been met or performed. The City Council may waive the requirements
of this section upon a finding that the failure of the map to meet the
conditions set forth in the tentative map is the result of a technical and
inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.450  FINAL MAP RECORDATION.



   Following action by the Engineer, and after the required signatures and
seals are affixed, the City Clerk must transmit the Final Map to the County
Recorder for recordation.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.460  CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH CORRECTIONS AND AMENDMENTS CAN BE
MADE.



   (A)   After a Final Map or Parcel Map is filed in the office of the
County Recorder, such map may be amended by a Certificate of Correction or an
amending map for any of the following purposes:



      (1)   To correct an error in any course or distance shown
thereon.



      (2)   To show any course or distance that was omitted thereon.



      (3)   To correct an error in the description of real property
shown on the map.



      (4)   To indicate monuments set after the death, disability,
retirement from practice, or replacement of the engineer or surveyor charged
with the responsibilities for setting the monuments.



      (5)   To show the proper location or character of any monument
which has been changed in location or character and originally shown at the
wrong location or incorrectly as to its character.



      (6)   To correct any additional information filed or recorded
with the map, as required by the city, if the correction does not impose
additional burden on the present fee owner of the property and does not alter
the right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded
map.



      (7)   To correct any other type of map error or omission as
approved by the County Surveyor or Engineer that does not affect any property
right. Such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot
numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps.



   (B)   As used in this section, "error" does not include changes in
courses or distances that cannot be proven from the data shown on the Final
Map.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.470  ADDITIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES.



   (A)   In addition to the circumstances specified above, changes or
modifications may be made to a Final or Parcel Map if the City Council finds
that:



      (1)   There are changes in circumstances which make any or all
of the conditions of such a map no longer appropriate or necessary;



      (2)   The modifications do not impose any additional burden on
the present fee owner of the property;



      (3)   The modifications do not alter any right, title, or
interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and



      (4)   The map, as modified, meets the findings for approval.



   (B)   A request for a change to or modification of a Final Map
pursuant to this section must be made on forms provided by the Director. Such
change or modification is processed in accordance with the procedures
established for a tentative map of this Title 16. The public hearings for
such application are confined to the consideration of and action on the
proposed change or modification.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 5:  CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE



§ 16.80.480  FILING.



   Upon determination by the Director that a Certificate of Compliance is
required, the property owner or authorized representative must file a
Certificate of Compliance application on forms provided by the Director,
together with required filing fees, a chain of title, and other information
that may be required by the Director or Engineer to establish the status of
the parcel.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.490  REVIEW OF APPLICATION AND DECISION.



   (A)   The Director must forward the application for review by the
Engineer and any other city or governmental agency that may have jurisdiction
over any aspect of the application.



   (B)   The Director must review all available information, including
information provided by other city and governmental agencies, and make a
determination whether the real property was divided in accordance with the
Act and this title or any prior city subdivision regulations.



   (C)   Upon making a determination that the real property complies
with applicable provisions of the Act and this title, the Director must issue
a Certificate of Compliance and cause such Certificate of Compliance to be
recorded with the Ventura County Recorder.



   (D)   Upon making a determination that the real property does not
comply with applicable provisions of the Act and this title, the Director may
deny the application, or impose conditions on the granting of a Certificate
of Compliance, in accordance with this division.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.500  CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The Director may impose conditions upon the granting of a
Certificate of Compliance in the event that the real property does not comply
with applicable provisions of the Act and this Title. Such conditions are
limited to those requirements that would have been applicable to the division
of the property at the time the applicant acquired interest therein. However,
if the current owners were responsible for the division, then current
requirements of this article may be imposed.



   (B)   The Director will forward the application and related
information to the Design Review Committee for review. Related information
must include references to state law and city ordinances that were in effect
at the time the property was subdivided.



   (C)   The Design Review Committee may impose conditions on the
approval of the Conditional Certificate of Compliance. Any decision of the
Design Review Committee regarding imposition of conditions may be appealed to
the Planning Commission.



   (D)   If no appeals are filed within the designated appeal period,
the Director must issue a Conditional Certificate of Compliance and cause
such Conditional Certificate of Compliance to be recorded with the Ventura
County Recorder.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.510  EFFECT OF CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   The Conditional Certificate of Compliance serves as notice to the
property owner who has applied for the certificate or any subsequent owner or
developer that the fulfillment and implementation of conditions is required
before the subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for
development of the property.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.520  INFORMATION REQUIRED ON CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   A recorded Certificate of Compliance or Conditional Certificate of
Compliance must include all information specified in Cal. Gov’t Code §
66499.35(f).



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.530  CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE FOR MULTIPLE PARCELS.



   A single Certificate of Compliance or Conditional Certificate of
Compliance application may be processed and recorded for multiple parcels,
provided that such single Certificate of Compliance or Conditional
Certificate of Compliance clearly identifies and distinguishes between the
descriptions of each parcel.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 6:  LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS



§ 16.80.540  FILING.



   Lot line adjustment applications must be filed on forms provided by the
Director, together with required filing fees and other information required
by the Director to allow for review of the application.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.550  REVIEW AND PROCESSING.



   (A)   Upon receiving a completed Lot Line Adjustment application,
the Director must forward the application for review by the Engineer and any
other city or governmental agency that may have jurisdiction over any aspect
of the application.



   (B)   The Director must review all available information, including
information provided by other city and governmental agencies, and make a
determination whether the proposed lot line adjustment conforms with the
provisions of this Code and any applicable Specific Plan or Planned
Development.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.560  ACTION.



   (A)   The Director may approve or conditionally approve a request
for a lot line adjustment in writing after investigating and receiving
reports from other departments, if the Director finds that the proposed lot
line adjustment conforms to all of the following requirements:



      (1)   The lots adjoin one another;



      (2)   The lot line adjustment will not create a greater number
of lots than originally existed;



      (3)   It conforms with the city's general plan;



      (4)   It conforms with the city's zoning and building
regulations set forth in this Code.



   (B)   Any conditions imposed on the approval are limited to those
conditions necessary to:



      (1)   Ensure conformance with the city's general plan;



      (2)   The city's zoning and building regulations as set forth
in this Code;



      (3)   Require the prepayment of real property taxes before
approval of the adjustment; or



      (4)   Facilitate the relocation of existing utilities,
infrastructure, or easements.



   (C)   Should the lot line adjustment application fail to meet any of
the criteria set forth above, the Director may deny the application.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.570  FINALIZATION OF ADJUSTMENT.



   Within 24 months after the Director approves a lot line adjustment, all
record owners must cause to be recorded with the office of the Ventura County
Recorder either a grant deed or quit claim deed reflecting the adjustment. No
record of survey is required for a lot line adjustment. However, the legal
descriptions provided on the deed or deeds is prepared by a licensed
surveyor, licensed in the State of California, or qualified registered civil
engineer.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 7:  REVERSION TO ACREAGE



§ 16.80.580  INITIATION.



   Either the City Council, on its own motion, or all owners of record of
the real property within the subdivision, by formal application, may initiate
proceedings for a Reversion to Acreage.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.590  FILING.



   (A)   Reversion to Acreage applications initiated by owners of
record of the real property within the subdivision must be filed on forms
provided by the Director, together with required filing fees and other
information required by the Director to allow for review of the application.
At a minimum, information provided must include:



      (1)   Adequate evidence of title of the real property within
the subdivision;



      (2)   Sufficient data to enable the City Council to make all
of the findings and determinations required by this division; and



      (3)   A Final Map that delineates dedications that will not be
vacated and dedications that are a condition of reversion.



   (B)   Where the City Council initiates a Reversion to Acreage, the
Council will direct the Director to obtain the information necessary to
initiate and conduct the proceedings.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.600  PROCESSING.



   The Director, in consultation with the Engineer, must review the
application for conformance with the provisions of this division and report
to the City Council identifying the extent to which the Reversion to Acreage
complies with this division and the findings set forth below.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.610  CITY COUNCIL ACTION.



   (A)   The City Council must hold a public hearing to consider the
application and any related, relevant, information.



   (B)   Following the public hearing, the City Council must act to
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Reversion to Acreage.



   (C)   In acting to approve or conditionally approve a Reversion to
Acreage, the City Council must require:



      (1)   Dedications or offers of dedications necessary for
purposes specified by city regulations;



      (2)   Retention of all previously paid fees, if necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this title; and



      (3)   Retention of any portion of required improvement
security or deposits, if necessary to accomplish the purpose of this title.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.620  REQUIRED FINDINGS.



   As part of its action to approve or conditionally approve a Reversion
to Acreage, the City Council must make the following findings:



   (A)   That dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or
abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or
prospective public purposes; and



   (B)   Either:



      (1)   All owners of interest in the real property within the
subdivision consented to the reversion;



      (2)   None of the improvements required to be made were made
within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record,
or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements,
whichever is later; or



      (3)   No lots on the Final Map or parcel map were sold within
five years from the date such map was filed for record.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.630  FINALITY OF ACTION.



   In order for a Reversion to Acreage to become effective, a Final Map
must be recorded.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 8:  MERGERS



§ 16.80.640  CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH A MERGER CAN BE REQUIRED.



   Whenever two or more contiguous parcels are under common ownership and
any one of the parcels does not conform to the standards for minimum parcel
size set forth in this title, the city can require the merger of parcels
before it issues a development permit, provided all of the requirements
specified in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.11 are satisfied.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.650  NOTICE OF INTENTION TO MERGE PARCELS.



   (A)   Before initiating a merger, the city must mail to the owner of
the affected parcels a Notice of Intention to Determine Status. The same
notice is filed with the Ventura County Recorder on the same date that notice
is mailed to the property owner. Such notice must inform the property owner
that the affected parcels may be merged and advise the owner of the
opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status.



   (B)   At any time within 30 days of the recording of the Notice of
Intention to Determine Status, the property owner may file with the Director
a request for a hearing.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.660  PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW AND ACTION.



   (A)   Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the Director must
schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission in accordance with
this title. The hearing should be conducted not later than 60 days after the
Director receives the hearing request.



   (B)   The Planning Commission must hold a public hearing in
accordance with this chapter to consider the parcel merger application.



   (C)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning
Commission must determine whether the parcels should or should not be merged.



   (D)   The decision of the Planning Commission is final unless an
appeal is filed.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.670  DETERMINATION WHEN NO HEARING IS REQUESTED.



   If the Director does not receive a timely filed request for hearing,
the Director may decide whether or not the parcels may be merged. Decisions
allowing a merger must be recorded not later than 90 days after notice of the
decision.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.680  FINALITY OF ACTION.



   (A)   A notice of merger must be filed with the Ventura County
Recorder's Office after a decision which allows allowing a parcel merger. The
notice must identify the names of the record owners and describe the property
being merged.



   (B)   A release of the notice of intention to determine status must
be filed with the Ventura County Recorder's Office after a decision that
disallows a parcel merger.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 9:  CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS



§ 16.80.690  APPLICABILITY.



   A condominium conversion requires the approval of a tentative and Final
Map, or a parcel map, unless the exemptions specified in Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 66412(g) and (h) apply, or unless the city waives the requirement for
conversion of a mobile home park to resident ownership pursuant to Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66428.1.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.700  FILING AND PROCESSING.



   (A)   Filing a condominium conversion application is the same as
that established for a tentative tract map with the following exceptions and
additional requirements:



      (1)   The tentative map for a condominium conversion project
need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or the
airspace above the property are to be divided. However, the city may require
that an exhibit be provided showing the manner in which buildings are to be
arranged on the property.



      (2)   Addresses of all tenants of the property proposed for
conversion must be provided with other required notice materials.  Also, the
subdivider must provide the city with notarized verification of provision of
the Notice of Intent to Convert required by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66452.8 and
66452.9.



      (3)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66427.4, if a mobile home
park is proposed for conversion, the applicant must submit a report on the
impact of the conversion upon the displaced residents of the mobile home
park.  Such report must be prepared in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code §§
66427.4 and 66427.5.



      (4)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66452.10, if the proposed
condominium conversion project involves a stock cooperative or community
apartment project, the applicant must submit notarized verification of the
vote.



   (B)   The processing of a condominium conversion project is the same
as that established for a tentative tract map except that, pursuant to Cal.
Gov't Code § 66451.3, notice of the public hearing must be provided to all
tenants of the subject property.



   (C)   In acting to approve a condominium conversion project, the
Planning Commission and/or the City Council must make the same findings as
for a tentative map and the additional findings set forth in Cal. Gov't Code
§ 66427.1.



   (D)   A condominium conversion project must also comply with Chapter
16.85 - Condominiums and Conversions.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.80.710  COMPLETION OF CONVERSION.



   Filing of Final Map or parcel map is required for completion of the
condominium conversion project, except when waived for a mobile home park.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 10:  SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS



§ 16.80.720  CONFORMANCE WITH CITY PLANS AND STANDARDS.



   All subdivision plans and associated street plans must conform to the
Circulation Element of the Santa Paula General Plan and street standards
adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.730  CONNECTIONS TO EXISTING STREETS.



   All new streets must connect to existing streets and must provide
street gap closures to the maximum extent feasible and practical to
facilitate traffic circulation and ensure implementation of the General Plan
Circulation Element.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.740  SUBDIVISION ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREET.



   Every subdivision must be designed to provide access to a public street
as follows:



   (A)   Direct access where the property abuts an existing public
street or a planned public street for which the right-of-way was defined and
improvements to the planned street are provided pursuant to this chapter; or



   (B)   A non-exclusive easement for street, utility, drainage, or
similar purposes, provided the easement is:



      (1)   Offered for dedication;



      (2)   Unencumbered by any rights that would restrict the
proposed use; and



      (3)   Of a width, grade, location, and configuration which, in
the opinion of the Engineer, will allow it to serve its intended function.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.750  PARCEL ACCESS.



   (A)   New parcels created by a subdivision must provide access to
either a public street or a private street, if a private street is allowed by
this section.



   (B)   Direct parcel access to a state highway or a City Major
Arterial, Arterial, Minor Arterial, Major Commercial/Industrial, or
Commercial/Industrial may be denied to ensure traffic safety. Alternatively,
the city may require construction of a frontage road between the parcel and
the abutting highway or city street.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.760  PRIVATE STREETS.



   Private streets may be permitted by the City Council, provided such
streets meet the following requirements:



   (A)   The street design provides a width, configuration, slope, and
other design characteristics satisfactory to the Public Works Director and
the Fire Chief;



   (B)   Streets do not prevent the orderly development of adjacent
properties, prevent future connections to planned public streets, or
interfere with local circulation;



   (C)   Streets meet the circulation needs of the property they serve;
and



   (D)   The owners, association of owners, or organization responsible
for the private streets provides the city with written assurance, approved as
to form by the City Attorney, that the street or streets will be adequately
maintained.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.770  STREET DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT.



   All new public streets proposed or required within or adjacent to a
subdivision must be designed in accordance with adopted city street standards
and the following requirements:



   (A)   Where a property for which a tentative or parcel map was filed
is adjacent to a property which may be subject to a future subdivision, the
review authority may require streets to be extended to the boundary of the
adjacent property to allow for future access and street connections.



   (B)   Street intersections must be as near to right angles as
practicable.



   (C)   Street grades between 6% and 10% are allowed only for limited
distances in which, in the judgment of the review authority, topographical
conditions make a lesser grade impractical. A grade exceeding 10% will be
approved only when, in the judgment of the review authority, conclusive
evidence shows that a lesser grade is physically impractical.



   (D)   Where an existing city street adjoins, passes through, or
otherwise provides access to a proposed subdivision, the review authority may
require dedication of additional right-of-way and/or improvements consistent
with the General Plan Circulation Element.



   (E)   Permanent dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs must not exceed 660
feet in length.



   (F)   All streets within a subdivision must be named in accordance
with City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.780  ALLEYS.



   All new alleys must have a minimum width of 25 feet and is designed per
adopted city standards.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.790  DRAINAGE.



   (A)   All subdivisions must be designed to accommodate storm
drainage tributary to and originating within the subject subdivision.



   (B)   All on grade storm water conveyance facilities, including
ditches, channels, catch basins, and road improvements must be designed and
constructed for flood frequency of ten years or other threshold determined by
the Public Works Director to be appropriate and necessary to provide adequate
flood protection. All facilities serving sump locations must be designed for
a flood frequency of 50 years or other threshold determined by the Public
Works Director to be appropriate and necessary to provide adequate flood
protection. The design of such facilities and systems is based upon
information provided by a registered engineer and approved by the Public
Works Director.



   (C)   To the maximum extent feasible, existing natural drainage
courses must be retained.



   (D)   Facilities and systems must be designed to avoid
concentrations of runoff and to avoid the creation of facilities that could
pose a risk or hazard to public health and safety.



   (E)   Drainage facilities must be located with street rights-of-way
or public easements.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.800  LOT PATTERNS.



   (A)   Every lot must be designed to conform to the minimum area and
dimension requirements applicable to the zoning in which the lot is located
or, in the case of a change of zone, proposed to be located.



   (B)   Each new lot created by a subdivision must have a physical
shape and configuration that allows subsequent buildings and other
improvements to be constructed in conformance with the development standards
for the zone in which such lot is located, to ensure that safe driveways and
other accesses can be provided, and to ensure that any required landscaping
can be provided.



   (C)   The creation of flag lot configurations in any new subdivision
is discouraged.



   (D)   The creation of lots with double street frontage is
discouraged.



   (E)   Blocks longer than 1,200 feet in length are discouraged and
may be cause for disapproval of a tentative map.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.810  GRADING AND USE OF NATURAL TOPOGRAPHY.



   The design of subdivisions in hillside areas must conform to the
grading standards contained in this title.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.820  SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS AND TRAILS.



   (A)   Sidewalks must be provided in new subdivisions, and be
designed and installed in accordance with adopted city standards.



   (B)   Parkways must be provided where such parkways will contribute
positively to overall subdivision design, will better integrate the
subdivision with surrounding land uses, and will implement General Plan
policies. Parkways must have a minimum width of four feet or a width as may
be required by the responsible review authority. Parkway planting may be
required through subdivision conditions of approval.



   (C)   Bikeways and trails must be provided in new subdivisions. Such
bikeways and trails must be designed to eventually connect to a citywide
system.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.830  STREET LIGHTING.



   Street light fixtures must be provided pursuant to city policies
regarding street lighting, or as determined to be necessary by the Engineer.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.840  IMPROVEMENTS - GENERAL.



   (A)   As a condition for approving any Final Map, the subdivider
must improve or agree to make all improvements for all land designated for
streets, highways, public ways, and easements. Such improvements include
streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, culverts, bridges, storm drains, sanitary
sewers, permanent subdivision monuments, and other structures or improvements
set forth in this division or as recommended by the Planning Commission
and/or deemed by the City Council to be necessary for the general use of the
lot owners in the subdivision and for traffic and drainage needs.



   (B)   All improvements must be installed to grades approved by the
Engineer. Plans and specifications of proposed improvements must be furnished
to the Engineer in conjunction with the Final Map. These plans and profiles
must show full details of the proposed improvements in accordance with the
most current city standards.



   (C)   The minimum improvements which the subdivider will be required
to make at the subdivider's own cost in the subdivision before the acceptance
and approval of the Final Map is as described generally below and in detail
in this division:



      (1)   Fire hydrants and adequate distribution lines to provide
adequate domestic water supply to each lot and sufficient fire protection to
meet local neighborhood needs, as determined by the Fire Chief;



      (2)   City wastewater disposal system to each lot;



      (3)   Adequate drainage of the subdivision streets, highways,
ways and alleys;



      (4)   Adequate grading and surfacing of streets, highways,
ways and alleys;



      (5)   Curbs, gutters and sidewalks; and



      (6)   Permanent subdivision monuments.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.850  STREETS.



   All required public and private streets must be installed in accordance
with plans approved by the Engineer.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.860  DRAINAGE FACILITIES.



   All required drainage and flood control facilities must be installed in
accordance with plans approved by the Engineer.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.870  UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES.



   (A)   Utility lines including, without limitation, electrical,
telephonic, street, and cable television must be placed underground within
all new subdivisions.



   (B)   All underground construction must be installed before the
streets are paved if such construction occurs within streets and requires
open excavation of the street surface. All construction must be performed to
the satisfaction of the Engineer and in accordance with city standards.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.880  WATER AND SEWER SERVICE.



   (A)   Water mains and other required facilities must be installed to
serve each lot within a proposed subdivision per the requirements of the
water service provider. All such facilities must be installed consistent with
applicable master plans. Where water facilities are to be installed in a
public street, all improvement plans are subject to review by the Public
Works Director, and fire hydrant locations and specifications are approved by
the Fire Chief.



   (B)   All new subdivisions and each lot within a proposed
subdivision are required to connect to the city's sewer system. All sewer
facilities must be installed consistent with applicable master plans. Where
sewer facilities are to be installed in a public street, all improvement
plans are subject to review by the Public Works Director.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.890  LANDSCAPING.



   Landscaping and associated automatic irrigation systems must be
installed as required for erosion control and slope stabilization.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.900  UTILITY EASEMENTS.



   (A)   The subdivider must reserve and grant the following
right-of-way easements, either overhead or underground, to public utility
companies:



      (1)   At the rear of all lots, except at the perimeter of the
subdivision, of a width of not less than six feet;



      (2)   At the rear of all lots at the perimeter of the
subdivision, of a width of not less than ten feet;



      (3)   Along side lot lines, where necessary, of a width of not
less than six feet; and



      (4)   Over areas contiguous to public alleys, where necessary,
of a width necessary for overhang of facilities, anchorage, line continuity,
ingress and egress, and for trimming and topping trees that may endanger or
interfere with the maintenance of such public utility facilities.



   (B)   Such right-of-way easements are delineated on the subdivision
map and identified as "Easements for Public Utilities."



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.910  CABLE ACCESS.



   As a condition of approval of a final map, the subdivider must provide
access to all cable operators within the city.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.920  MONUMENTS.



   Monuments must be provided as required by the Act.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.930  SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   At the City Council's direction, the subdivider may be
required to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may
be of such supplemental size, capacity, number, or length as will benefit
property not within the subdivision. Such improvements may be a condition
precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map.



   (B)   The subdivider will be reimbursed for that portion of the
costs of those improvements, including an amount attributable to interest, in
excess of the construction required for the subdivision.



§ 16.80.940  SECURITY AND AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   A subdivider may record a final or parcel map pursuant to this
article before completing required improvements, provided the City Council
approves a subdivision improvement agreement and the subdivider provides
security as approved by the Council in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §
66499(a). The improvement agreement and security must be in a form approved
by the City Attorney.



   (B)   The amount of security must be based upon 100% of the
estimated cost of the required improvement or improvements. Such cost
estimate is provided by the subdivider, based upon information provided by a
qualified engineer, and is approved by the Public Works Director.



   (C)   Release of the security may be accomplished in accordance with
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66499.7 and 66499.8.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.950  SECURITIES AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   Should the required subdivision improvements be financed and installed
pursuant to special assessment proceedings, the subdivider may apply to the
City Council for a reduction in the amount of the improvement security
required, up to an amount corresponding to the amount of faithful performance
and labor and material bonds required by the special assessment act being
used. The City Council may grant such reduction if it finds that such bonds
have been in fact provided and that the obligations secured thereby are
substantially equivalent to those required by this division.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.960  RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATION.



   (A)   As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider must
dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land
within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys (including
access rights and abutters rights), drainage, public utility easements, and
other public easements.



   (B)   The subdivider must improve or agree to improve all streets
and alleys (including access rights and abutters rights), drainage, public
utility easements, and other public easements offered for dedication. Such
improvements must be performed in accordance with the requirements of this
division or as may otherwise be approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.970  PARKLAND DEDICATION AND FEES.



   All projects approved for development under this division must provide
for at a minimum its fair share of future parkland and open space through
dedication to the city, or payment of impact fees in accordance with adopted
and enacted fee schedules for this purpose, or both.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.980  BICYCLE PATHS AND TRAILS.



   (A)   For any residential subdivision containing 40 or more parcels,
and where the dedication of roadways is required, the subdivider may be
required to dedicate such additional land as may be necessary and feasible to
provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of residents of the subdivision,
as well as bicycle paths included as part of the General Plan Circulation
Element Bicycle and Trail Plan.



   (B)   The subdivider may be required to dedicate additional land as
may be necessary and feasible to accommodate trails included in the General
Plan Circulation Element Bicycle and Trail Plan.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.990  TRANSIT FACILITIES.



   For any residential subdivision containing 200 or more parcels, or for
any subdivision containing 100 acres or more, the subdivider may be required
to dedicate or provide an irrevocable offer of dedication of land within the
subdivision for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches,
shelters, bus stop pads, and similar features which directly benefit the
residents of the subdivision.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



DIVISION 11:  FEES



§ 16.80.991  BRIDGE AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARE FEES.



   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66484 and 66489, the city
may require the payment of a fee as a condition of approval of a final map,
or as a condition of issuing a building permit for purposes of defraying the
actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways,
freeways and canyons, or constructing major thoroughfares, upon compliance
with the procedure and conditions set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Such construction must comply with the circulation element of
the city's general plan and, in the case of bridges, to the transportation or
flood control provisions that identify railways, freeways, streams or canyons
for which bridge crossings are required on the city’s general plan or local
roads and in the case of major thoroughfares, to the provisions of such
circulation element which identify those major thoroughfares whose primary
purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the
state highway system; provided, such circulation element, transportation or
flood control provisions were adopted by the city 30 days before the filing
of a map or application for a building permit.



   (C)   Payment of a fee is not required or made a condition for
approval of a subdivision map or made a condition for the issuance of a
building permit until the area benefited is determined by the City Council.
There must be a public hearing held by the City Council for each area
benefited.



      (1)   The hearing must be set before the City Council and
notice must be given pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65905 at least ten
calendar days before the hearing date.



      (2)   Notices must contain preliminary information related to
the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost and method of fee
apportionment. The area of benefit may include land or improvements in
addition to the land or improvements which are the subject of any map or
building permit application considered at such proceedings.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may
decide to establish the boundaries of the benefit area by resolution, the
costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of allocation of costs
to the area of benefit and fee apportionment.  The city may impose a
reasonable charge on property within the area which in the opinion of the
City Council is benefited by the construction of the bridge or major
thoroughfare. The method of fee apportionment, in the case of major
thoroughfares, must not provide for higher fees on land which abuts the
proposed improvement except where the abutting property is provided direct
usable access to the major thoroughfare.  A description of the boundaries of
the area of benefit, the property or properties within said area which in the
opinion of the City Council are benefited by the construction of the
improvement, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee
apportionment and imposition of charges on properties within the area, as
established at the hearing, must be incorporated in the City Council
resolution, a certified copy of which must be recorded by the City Council
with the County Recorder. Such apportioned fees are applicable to all
property within the area of benefit and are payable as a condition of
approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for
such property or portions thereof.  Where the area of benefit includes lands
not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this section, the City Council
must provide for payment of the share of improvement costs apportioned to
such lands from other sources.



   (E)   Payment of fees with respect to major thoroughfares is not
required unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a
reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the
time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit.



   (F)   Payment of fees with respect to a bridge facility are not
required unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the
area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the
time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit.  Fees must
not be expended to reimburse the cost of existing bridge facility
construction.



   (G)   Major Protest.



      (1)   Protests against the proposed improvement, the
requirement for paying fees, the apportionment of the fees or the
determination of the boundaries of the area of benefit may be filed at any
time before the hour set for hearing.  If there is a written protest filed
with the City Clerk by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the
property to be benefited by the improvement and sufficient protests are not
withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that
to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings must be abandoned, and the
City Council must not, for one year from the filing of that written protest,
commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement or acquisition
under the provisions of these sections.



      (2)   Nothing in this section must preclude the processing and
recordation of maps in accordance with other provisions of the law and
ordinances relating to maps if the proceedings under these sections are
abandoned.



      (3)   Any protest may be withdrawn by the owner making the
same, in writing, at any time before the conclusion of the aforesaid public
hearing held pursuant to this title.



      (4)   If any majority protest is directed against only a
portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions
of these sections to construct that portion of the improvement so protested
against are barred for a period of one year, but the City Council is not
barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the
improvement or acquisition protested against. Nothing in this section
prohibits the City Council, within such one-year period, from commencing and
carrying on new proceedings or the construction of a portion of the
improvements so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of
four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area
of the property to be benefited are in favor of going forward with such
portion of the improvement or acquisition.



   (H)   Fees.



      (1)   Fees or charges paid pursuant to these sections must be
deposited in a planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund. A fund
must be established for each planned bridge facility project or each planned
major thoroughfare project. If the benefit area is one in which more than one
bridge is required to be constructed, a fund may be so established covering
all of the bridge projects in the benefit area. Monies in such fund may be
expended only for constructing or reimbursing for construction of the
improvement serving the area to be benefitted and from which the fees
comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the city for the cost of
constructing the improvement.



      (2)   The fees or charges collected must be paid to the city
or the subdivider constructing the bridge or major thoroughfare, and the
city, with respect to any property within its jurisdiction which in the
opinion of the City Council is benefitted by the construction of the bridge
or major thoroughfare, may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the
subdivider.



      (3)   In lieu of the payment of fees, the city may accept
other considerations which it deems equivalent.



      (4)   The city may advance money from its general fund or road
fund to pay the cost of constructing improvements and may reimburse the
general fund or road fund for such advances from planned bridge facility
funds or major thoroughfare funds established to finance the construction of
such improvements.



   (I)   Interest-bearing Indebtedness; Other Funds.



      (1)   The city, when imposing fees pursuant to this section,
may incur an interest-bearing indebtedness for the construction of such
bridge facilities or major thoroughfares; provided, that the sole security
for repayment of such indebtedness are monies deposited as set forth above in
planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare funds.



      (2)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed to preclude
the city from providing funds for the construction of bridge facilities or
major thoroughfares in order to defray costs not allocated to the area of
benefit.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.992  SUPPLEMENT SIZE, CAPACITY OR NUMBER REQUIRED.



   Improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the
subdivision must contain supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for
the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and such improvements
must be dedicated to the public. Supplemental length may include minimum
sized off- site sewer lines necessary to reach a sewer outlet in existence at
that time.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.993  REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT.



   The city may enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse
the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the
difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install
such improvements to serve the subdivision only, and the actual cost of such
improvements, including an amount attributable to interest.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.994  METHOD OF REIMBURSEMENT.



   In order to pay the costs as required by the reimbursement agreement,
the city may:



   (A)   Collect from other persons, including public agencies, using
such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the
subdivision, a reasonable charge for such use.



   (B)   Contribute to the subdivider that part of the cost of the
improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the
subdivision and levy a charge upon the real property benefitted to reimburse
itself for such cost, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the
subdivider.



   (C)   Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the levy
and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefitted.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.995  REIMBURSEMENT FOR DRAINAGE AND SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES.



   The City Council may adopt the plan and map designated in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66483 and impose a reasonable charge on property within the area
which, in the opinion of the City Council, is benefitted by drainage or
sanitary sewer facilities. The charge collected must be paid to the city or
subdivider constructing such drainage or sanitary sewer facilities, and any
local agency within the drainage or sanitary sewer area may enter into a
reimbursement agreement with the subdivider.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.996  REIMBURSEMENT FOR BRIDGES OR MAJOR THOROUGHFARES.



   The City Council may establish an area of benefit pursuant to Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66484 and may impose a reasonable charge on property within
the area which, in the opinion of the City Council, is benefitted by the
construction of the bridge or major thoroughfare. The charge collected must
be paid to the city agency or subdivider constructing the bridge or major
thoroughfare, and any local agency having jurisdiction over any property
which, in the opinion of the City Council, is benefitted by the construction
of the bridge or major thoroughfare may enter into a reimbursement agreement
with the subdivider.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.997  FEES ESTABLISHED BY RESOLUTION.



   The amount and manner of collecting fees, and the Area of Benefit to
which the fees are apportioned, may be established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.998  PAYMENT OF FEES REQUIRED.



   Pursuant to the provisions of this division, as a condition of approval
of a Final Map or as a condition of issuing a building permit, and before a
Final Map is filed or a building permit issued, every subdivider must pay any
fees established and apportioned to the property pursuant to this division.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



§ 16.80.999  IN-LIEU CONSIDERATIONS.



   The City Council may accept consideration in lieu of fees required
pursuant to this division, provided:



   (A)   The City Council finds, upon recommendation of the Public
Works Director, that the substitute consideration has a value equal to or
greater than the fee; and



   (B)   The substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the
City Council.



(Ord. 1102, passed 6-7-04)



CHAPTER 16.85: CONDOMINIUMS AND CONVERSIONS



Section




Division 1.  Residential Condominiums and Conversions




   16.85.010   Purpose



   16.85.020   Applicability



   16.85.030   Conditional use permit required



   16.85.040   Application for residential condominium conversion
project



   16.85.050   Standards and criteria



   16.85.060   Zone requirements



   16.85.070   Development standards



   16.85.080   Noise attenuation



   16.85.090   Verification of sound class



   16.85.100   Additional development standards



   16.85.110   Notice - Residential condominium conversions



   16.85.120   Right to purchase - Residential condominium conversions



   16.85.130   Relocation assistance - Residential condominium
conversions



   16.85.140   Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs)



   16.85.150   Preconversion protection - Residential condominium
conversions



   16.85.160   Affordable rental units - Residential condominium
conversions



   16.85.170   Preservation of low-and-moderate income housing supply -
Residential condominium conversions



   16.85.180   Required findings - Residential condominium conversions



   16.85.190   Conditions of approval - Residential condominium
conversions



   16.85.200   Capital contributions and warranties - Residential
condominium conversions



   16.85.210   Notice upon approval - Residential condominium
conversions



   16.85.220   Modification of residential condominium conversion
development standards




Division 2.  Commercial and Industrial Condominiums and Conversions




   16.85.230   Application requirements



   16.85.240   Standards conformance



   16.85.250   Other standards and conditions



DIVISION 1:  RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS AND CONVERSIONS



§ 16.85.010  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Residential condominium projects and residential condominium
conversion projects provide for individual ownership of separate dwelling
units, which usually are in close proximity (either attached or detached) to
one another.  The area surrounding the dwelling units is a common area that
is normally managed and maintained by the individual owners of dwelling units
in accordance with the rules of an association agreement.  This hybrid
ownership, that mixes individual ownership and ownership in common, magnifies
the impact upon the public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and economic
prosperity of the larger community when conditions of poor land use and site
planning, mismanagement, neglect and blight are allowed to occur.



   (B)   The city seeks to avoid the unique problems that beset
residential condominium projects and residential condominium conversion
projects and it further seeks to provide a varied choice of housing types and
neighborhoods for all residents regardless of whether they are renters or
owners.  Therefore, it is the express intent of the city to treat
residential condominium projects and residential condominium conversion
projects, which are usually owner occupied, differently from apartment
projects and other like structures or projects, which usually provide rental
forms of housing.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.020  APPLICABILITY.



   The regulations set forth in this chapter apply to residential
condominium projects, residential condominium conversions, and mobile home
park condominium conversions.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.030  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Residential condominium projects.  All residential condominium
projects require a valid conditional use permit issued in accordance with
this Development Code.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.040  APPLICATION FOR RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION PROJECT.



   In addition to any other requirements in this Development Code,
applications for a conditional use permit for a residential condominium
conversion project require the following:



   (A)   A site plan, which includes at least the location, number of
stories, number of dwelling units, and proposed uses for each structure to
remain and for each proposed new structure;



   (B)   The location and description for all private outdoor storage
areas;



   (C)   The location and type of surfacing for all driveways,
pedestrian ways, vehicle parking areas and curb cuts;



   (D)   The location, height and type of materials for walls or fences;



   (E)   The location of all landscaped areas, the type of landscaping,
method of irrigation, and a statement specifying private or common open
maintenance;



   (F)   The location and description of all recreational facilities;



   (G)   The location size and number parking spaces to be used in
conjunction with each unit;



   (H)   Floor plans, indicating the square footage and number of
bedrooms per unit;



   (I)   Specific information concerning the demographic
characteristics of the project, including, without limitation, the following:



      (1)   A certified list of the names and addresses of all
tenants residing in the proposed project at the time the application is filed;



      (2)   Information concerning the existing tenants households,
including family size, length of residence, and age of tenants;



      (3)   Current rents for each unit;



      (4)   Square footage and number of rooms in each unit;



      (5)   Approximate proposed price for which each unit would be
sold;



      (6)   The pro forma budget proposed to be submitted to the
State Department of Real Estate or a similar estimate of projected annual
operating expenses for the project after conversion and proposed level of
maintenance fees or assessments to be borne by individual unit owners
prepared by a certified public accountant; and



      (7)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the Planning Director.



   (J)   A property report describing in detail the condition and
useful life of the roof, foundations, exterior paint, insulation, paved
surfaces, mechanical systems, electrical systems, plumbing systems, sewer
systems, sprinkler systems for landscaping, utility delivery systems, center
or community heating and air conditioning systems, fire protection systems
including any automatic sprinkler systems, alarm systems, standpipe systems,
structural elements and drainage systems of all existing buildings and
structures; such report must be prepared by a registered civil or structural
engineer, or a licensed architect. The property report must list each
built-in appliance (garbage disposals, dishwashers, water heaters, ranges,
ovens and air conditioners) to be contained in each or any unit offered for
sale and state whether the appliance is or will be new or used when the unit
is first offered for sale. The report must also state the terms and nature of
the warranty offered by the applicant on each such appliance.



   (K)   A descriptive report containing acoustical test data which
indicates the noise attenuation characteristics of existing party walls and
ceilings; the data for such report must include a sampling of at least 10% of
the dwelling units involved, but in no case fewer than two dwelling units,
and must be compiled by a person licensed in the field of acoustical testing
and engineering.



   (L)   A structural pest control report on each structure and on each
unit within a structure, describing in detail the presence and effects of any
wood-destroying organisms, prepared by licensed pest-control operator.



   (M)   Signed copies from each tenant of notice of intent to convert,
as required by this Development Code. The subdivider must submit evidence
that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a
signed copy of said notice is not submitted.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.050  STANDARDS AND CRITERIA.



   (A)   Copy of reports. For residential condominium conversion
projects, the subdivider must provide each prospective purchaser with a copy
of the property report, acoustical report and structural pest control report
(in their final acceptable form), and a copy of the conditional use permit
with all conditions of approval prior to entering escrow. Copies of the
reports and permits must be available at all times at the sales office and
the project site. The permit and documents must be printed in Spanish if
requested.



   (B)   Code compliance investigation. For residential condominium
conversion projects, the subdivider must request, and pay for, a code
compliance inspection by the Building and Safety Department for all units in
a project.



   (C)   Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs). Residential
condominium and residential condominium conversions must submit CC&Rs to the
city for approval at the time of the conditional use permit application. The
CC&Rs must first be approved as to form and content by the City Attorney and
then by the City Council at the time the Council takes action on the
tentative map. The CC&Rs must include, without limitation, the conveyance of
units; parking assignments; common area maintenance agreements, including
facilities and landscaping; an estimate of any initial assessment fees
anticipated for maintenance; description of how maintenance will be provided
for all vehicle access areas; an allocation of appropriate responsibilities
for maintaining all utility lines and services for each unit. In addition,
the following provisions must be contained in the CC&Rs:



      (1)   A residential condominium project or residential
condominium conversion project consisting of three or more units must
establish and maintain a home owners association.



      (2)   An individual owner cannot avoid liability for the
owner's prorated share of the expenses for the common area by renouncing
rights in the common area.



      (3)   Any additional conditions as may be required by the City
Council.



      (4)   Any amendment or modification to the CC&Rs relating to
the provisions required by the city, must have the approval of the City
Council.



      (5)   The applicant must reimburse all costs for the city's
review of the CC&Rs including, without limitation, attorney's fees.



   (D)   Criteria.  In considering residential condominium projects,
the Planning Commission and City Council will utilize the following criteria:



      (1)   The project should be a comprehensive and integrated
design, providing its own open space, off-street parking and amenities for
contemporary living. Insofar as the scale of the project allows, open space,
walkways and other areas for people should be separated from parking areas,
driveways and other areas for automobiles.



      (2)   Architectural unit and harmony should be achieved both
within the project and between the project and the surrounding community so
that it does not constitute a negative disruption to the established fabric
of the community.



      (3)   The layout of structures and other facilities should be
designed for maintenance and management of street, driveway, curb cut,
utility and other public or quasi-public improvements. Additionally,
structures should be designed to minimize, within the context of accepted
architectural practice, the consumption of natural resources either directly
or indirectly (e.g., gas, water, and electricity).



      (4)   The project should be designed to maintain as much of
the natural topography, large trees and environment as practicable.



      (5)   The configuration and orientation of the project should
respect reasonable design limits imposed by the natural and manmade
environment. Structures should be situated to take advantage of view,
topography, sun and wind, while at the same time, not destroying these
advantages for adjacent properties.  Structures should also be situated to
minimize or buffer any undesirable properties of the site such as street
noise and nearby obnoxious commercial or industrial uses.



      (6)   The layout of units and open space within the project
should establish, through the use of structure and landscape materials, a
perceptible spatial transition from the public street, through the
semi-privacy of the common areas, to the privacy of the unit. Most
importantly, the environment of each condominium unit should be private and
free from visual, auditory and other intrusions.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.060  ZONE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All residential condominiums must meet the standards for
residential dwellings within the zone the project is proposed, or in the case
of a conversion, where it exists, except as may be modified by this
Development Code or through the conditional use permit.



   (B)   In multi-family zones, the project must meet the common and
private usable open space requirements of the underlying zone.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.070  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following standards apply to both residential condominium projects
and residential condominium conversion projects.



   (A)   Off-street parking. Each unit must be provided with a two-car
garage or carport or with two adjoining single-car garages or carports. One
parking space per four units, which may be covered or uncovered, must be
provided for guest parking.



   (B)   Private storage.  Each unit must have at least 90 cubic feet
of enclosed weatherproofed and lockable private storage space in addition to
guest, linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space may
be provided in any location approved by the city but cannot be divided into
two or more locations.



   (C)   Laundry facilities. A laundry area must be provided in each
unit for new condominiums. For condominium conversion projects, laundry
facilities may be provided in each unit or a common laundry area. If common
laundry areas are provided, such facilities must consist of not less than one
automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof. A house
panel and separate meters for gas and water must serve common laundry areas.



   (D)   Drip pans.  Clothes washers, dish-washers, hot water heaters
and any other appliance which the Building Official determines to be a
potential source of water leakage or flooding must be installed with built-in
drip pans and appropriate drains subject to the approval of the Building
Official.



   (E)   Utility meters.  Each utility that is controlled by and
consumed within the individual unit must be separately metered in such a way
that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use. In the case of
water, master meters for the project may be permitted, with the exception of
water sprinklers, in certain projects in which the Planning Commission or the
City Council finds that there will be a substantially uniform use of water by
individual owners, provided each unit is individually plumbed and each is
provided with an accessible location for future installation of a submeter.



   (F)   Circuit breakers.  Each unit must have its own circuit
breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets, which serve the unit.
Circuit breaker panels must be accessible to occupants.



   (G)   Isolation of vibration and structure-borne noise. Isolation of
vibration and sources of structure-borne noise in condominium projects where
units have common walls, floors or ceilings must comply with the following:



      (1)   Shock mounting of mechanical equipment.  All permanent
mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which,
because of their rotation, reciprocation, expansion and/or contraction,
turbulence, oscillation, pulsation, impaction or detonation, is determined by
the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or
structure-borne noise must be shock-mounted with inertia blocks or bases
and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Building Official. 
Domestic appliances which are cabinet installed or built into the individual
units, such as clothes washers and dryers, or other appliances which are
determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or
structure-borne noise, must be isolated from cabinets and the floor or
ceiling by resilient gaskets and vibration mounts approved by the Building
Official. The cabinets in which they are installed should be offset from the
back wall with strip gasketing of felt, cork or similar material approved by
the Building Official. Where such appliances utilize water, flexible
connectors must be installed on all water lines.  If the units can
accommodate nonpermanent appliances such as clothes washers and dryers, then
permanent rubber mounting bases and surface plates must be installed in a
manner approved by the Building Official.



      (2)   Location of plumbing fixtures. No plumbing fixture may
be located on a common wall between two separate units where it would back up
to a living room, family room, dining room, den or bedroom of an adjoining
unit. For residential condominium conversion projects, where determined
practicable by the Building Official, plumbing fixtures must be located on
interior walls within the unit or on exterior walls of the project.



      (3)   Isolation and insulation of lines. All water supply
lines within the project must be isolated from wood or metal framing with
pipe isolators specifically manufactured for that purpose and approved by the
Building Official. In multi-story condominium projects, all vertical drainage
pipes must be surrounded by three-quarter-inch thick dense insulation board
or full thick fiberglass or wool blanket insulation for its entire length
including the sections that pass through wood or metal framing. All vertical
drainage pipes must be cast iron.



      (4)   Drain waste and vents. All drain waste and vents must be
separate, and connected only outside of the building.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.080  NOISE ATTENUATION.



   The following standards apply to both residential condominium projects
and residential condominium conversion projects.



   (A)   General. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units
from each other or from public or quasi-public spaces such as interior
corridors, laundry rooms, recreation rooms, and garages must provide airborne
sound insulation for walls, and both airborne and impact sound insulation for
floor/ceiling assemblies.



   (B)   Airborne sound insulation. All wall assemblies must be of a
type of construction that has a minimum rating of 55 STC (sound trans-mission
class). All floor/ceiling assemblies must be of a type of construction that
has a minimum rating of 55 STC. Wood floor joists and subflooring must not be
continuous between separate condominium units. Penetrations or openings in
the construction for piping, electrical outlets and devices, recess cabinets,
bathtubs, soffits, heating, and ventilating or air-conditioning intake and
exhaust ducts, and the like must be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise
treated to maintain the required rating and such treatment must be approved
by the Building Official.  Entrance doors to the unit must be of solid
construction and, together with perimeter seals, must have a minimum rating
of 33 STC. Such perimeter seals must be maintained in effective operating
condition.



   (C)   Impact sound insulation.  All separating floor/ceiling
assemblies must be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 65
IIC (impact insulation class). Floor coverings may be included in the
assembly to obtain the required ratings, but must be retained as a permanent
part of the assembly and may only be replaced by another floor covering that
provides the same or greater impact insulation.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.090  VERIFICATION OF SOUND CLASS.



   The following standards apply to both residential condominium projects
and residential condominium conversion projects.



   (A)   STC and IIC ratings must be based on the results of laboratory
measurements and will not be subjected to field testing.  The STC rating
must be based on the American Society for Testing and Materials system
specified in ASTM E90-66t or equivalent.  The IIC rating must be based on
the system in use at the National Bureau of Standards or equivalent. Ratings
obtained from other testing procedures will require adjustment to the above
rating systems.



   (B)   In documenting wall and floor/ceiling compliance with the
required sound ratings, the applicant of the residential condominium project
or residential condominium conversion must either:



      (1)   Furnish the Building Official with data based upon tests
performed by a recognized and approved testing laboratory; or



      (2)   Furnish the Building Official with verified
manufacturer's data on the ratings of the various wall and floor/ceiling
assemblies utilized in the project.



   (C)   Field testing may be required for residential condominium
conversions projects if the Building Official finds that it is necessary to
verify the technical data submitted.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.100  ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following standards apply to both residential condominium projects
and residential condominium conversion projects.



   (A)   All residential condominium and condominium conversion
projects must comply with all applicable uniform codes as adopted by the city
including without limitation fire, building, plumbing and electrical.



   (B)   Fire-resistive separations. All separation between units must
be one-hour fire-resistive construction as a minimum.



   (C)   Energy conservation measures. Roof and ceiling assemblies must
meet the R-30 insulation standards. Exterior openings must be
weather-stripped. New or replacement windows must meet state energy
standards.  Exposed heating ducts and hot water piping and hot water tanks
must be insulated. Every project must include energy conservation features
such as high efficiency furnaces, low flow toilets and showerheads, as
determined by the Building Official per the State Energy Code.



   (D)   All public improvements necessary to comply with city
requirements must be constructed before the final map can be approved.



   (E)   Seismic safety report. For residential condominium conversion
projects only, a seismic safety report with recommended improvements must be
provided.



   (F)   Appearance. For residential condominium conversion projects
only, all main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports,
accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas irrigation
systems and additional elements as required by the City Council must be
refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high degree of appearance,
quality and safety.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.110  NOTICE - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   (A)   Notice to the tenants within a proposed condominium or
cooperative conversion must be as provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 66427.1. The
subdivider is responsible for any costs involved in complying with the
provisions of this division. Conversion of a mobile home park to another use
will require compliance with Cal. Gov't Code § 66427.4.



   (B)   Written notices must also be mailed to each tenant residing in
the project not less than ten days before the public hearing on the
conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.120  RIGHT TO PURCHASE - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't. Code § 66427.1, the subdivider must provide
each tenant notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his
or her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will
be initially offered to the general public.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.130  RELOCATION ASSISTANCE - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   The subdivider must provide relocation assistance to any tenant who was
a resident of the building to be converted at least 60 days before the filing
date of the tentative map, as well as on the date of final map approval, and
who does not intend to purchase a unit. Such assistance must include the
following:



   (A)   The subdivider must provide each tenant with a complete and
current list of available rental units within a three-mile radius of the
building being converted, which are comparable in size, price and amenities.
This list must be provided with the 180-day notice of tenancy termination as
required in Cal. Gov't Code § 66427.1.



   (B)   The subdivider must pay relocation assistance equaling the
cost of three months rent, to each rental household at the time the 180-day
notice of tenancy termination is given. If the tenant elects to purchase his
or her unit, such relocation assistance must be applied to the cost of the
unit.



   (C)   Any tenant over the age of 62, handicapped as defined in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 50072, disabled as defined in 42 USC § 423(d), and
any successor statute or regulation, or residing with one or more minor
dependent children, must be given an additional 60 days to relocate beyond
the 180-day provision of the Government Code.



   (D)   In conversion projects of 25 or more dwelling units, the
developer must provide a relocation specialist to assist displaced tenants in
finding new housing who must be on-site at least biweekly, beginning no later
than 15 days after the approval of the tentative map by the city and
continuing until the expiration of the tentative map or six months after the
approval of the final map, whichever occurs first.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.140  COVENANTS, CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS (CC&Rs).



   In addition to the general requirements for CC&Rs set forth in this
chapter, the following provisions must be contained in CC&Rs for residential
condominium conversions:



   (A)   For the period beginning with the sale of the first unit and
continuing for a period of one year after the sale of 50% of the units the
developer must fulfill all responsibilities of the association for
maintenance of all facilities that may require maintenance during this
period.  The expiration of this period will not limit or relieve the
developer from satisfactory performance of any agreements executed with the
city.



   (B)   The condominium must be managed by a professional manager or
management firm for at least the first year following the date of the sale of
the first unit.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.150  PRECONVERSION PROTECTION - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   From the date of application for a permit to convert, or until
relocation takes place or the application is denied or withdrawn, but in no
event for more than two years, no tenant can be unjustly evicted and no
tenant's rent can be increased more frequently than once every year nor in an
amount greater than the annual increase in utility costs and insurance costs,
plus increased operating costs not to exceed 2% a year.  This limitation
will not apply if rent increases are expressly provided for in leases or
contracts in existence before the filing date of the conditional use permit
for the conversion.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.160  AFFORDABLE RENTAL UNITS - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   If any of the units in the project are classified as "affordable
housing" under this Development Code, a conditional use permit allowing for
residential condominium conversion can be approved only with a condition
requiring the project to have the same number and type of affordable units
after conversion. Such condition will be secured with an appropriate covenant
in a form approved by the City Attorney. All units subject to this
affordability restriction must be owner-occupied, except as otherwise set
forth in an approved affordable housing plan. Any such units that are
retained by the original owner and not sold are subject to affordable rental
restrictions as set forth in this Development Code.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.170  PRESERVATION OF LOW-AND-MODERATE INCOME HOUSING SUPPLY -
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   In order to reduce the effect of conversions on the city's housing
supply and to minimize the displacement of tenants, the number of residential
condominium conversion projects is limited as follows:



   (A)   The current vacancy rate for rental units within the city is
not less than 2.45%, as determined by the most recent Community Development
Department survey, State of California Department of Finance or other
reliable vacancy rate data acceptable to the city; or



   (B)   That mitigating circumstances exist which justify approval of
the condominium conversion when the vacancy rate is lower than 2.45%. 
Consideration of mitigating circumstances must, at a minimum, include that
new rental units are to be constructed which will replace those to be
converted. The number of replacement units will equal or exceed the number of
units proposed to be converted. Replacement units will be completed and
occupancy permits issued before approval of the final map for the conversion;
or that the conversion will help meet other city housing goals by providing a
substantial percentage of its units at affordable prices and the provision of
such housing opportunities outweighs any loss of rental units.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.180  REQUIRED FINDINGS - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   In approving a conditional use permit for a residential condominium
conversion project, the Planning Commission or City Council must find that
the proposed residential condominium conversion project would not adversely
affect the supply and availability of rental housing in the city or within a
specified area in the city and make the following findings:



   (A)   All provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act are
met, including all notices required pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66427.1;



   (B)   The proposed conversion is consistent with the General Plan;



   (C)   The proposed conversion will conform to this Development Code,
in effect at the time of tentative map approval, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter;



   (D)   The overall design and physical conditions of the condominium
conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety; and



   (E)   The current vacancy rate for rental units within the city is
not less than 2.45% except as otherwise provided in the chapter.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.190  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   All conditional use permits allowing residential condominium conversion
projects are subject to all of the following conditions in addition to those
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or City Council:



   (A)   All tenants must be given a minimum of 180 days notice to
vacate the premises in accordance with applicable law. Such notice does not
restrict the exercise of lawful remedies pertaining to, without limitation,
tenants' default in the payment of rent or the defacing or destruction of all
or part of the rented premises.



   (B)   The property owner must request and receive inspection of
individual dwelling units from the Building Department before sale or
reoccupancy of each unit.



   (C)   In the case of the conversion of a mobile home park to any
other use, the person proposing such a change of use must file a report with
the city and the tenants on the impact of the conversion upon the displaced
residents of the mobile home park to be converted as provided for in Cal.
Gov't Code § 65863.7. The city will have the right to require the person
proposing the conversion to mitigate any adverse impacts of the conversion on
the ability of the displaced residents to find adequate space in a mobile
home park.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.200  CAPITAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND WARRANTIES - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM
CONVERSIONS.



   Without limiting the generality of the provisions relating to
conditions that may be imposed on a conditional use permit under this title,
the City Council may include the following in any conditional use permit
issued pursuant to this chapter:



   (A)   A capital contribution provided by the subdivider to the
association for the deferred maintenance of the common area and the deferred
maintenance or replacement of any of the elements described in the property
report, which are owned or maintained by the association. The information
regarding the estimated replacement cost of those elements whose useful life
is less than five years may be used in determining the amount of such
contribution.



   (B)   A one-year warranty provided free of charge by the subdivider
to the association for those systems described in the property report which
are owned or maintained by the association. Such warranty need not cover
those systems, which may be covered by a substantial capital contribution by
the developer for deferred maintenance.



   (C)   A one-year warranty provided free of charge by the subdivider
to the first purchaser of each unit on dishwashers, garbage disposals,
stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks, heating systems, and air conditioners
provided therein as of the close of escrow.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.210  NOTICE UPON APPROVAL - RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   (A)   Written notices must be mailed to all tenants residing in the
project within ten days after the approval of any conditional use permit
allowing a residential condominium conversion project.



   (B)   Such notice must state all of the conditions of approval of
the conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.220  MODIFICATION OF RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS.



   The City Council can modify the development standards on residential
condominium projects or residential condominium conversion projects through
the conditional use permit if, based upon substantial evidence, the City
Council finds that the modification will not be materially detrimental to the
proposed residents of the projects or to residents of surrounding properties;
the modification is not materially detrimental to public health or safety;
and that the modification helps implement the goals of the General Plan.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



DIVISION 2: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONDOMINIUMS AND CONVERSIONS



§ 16.85.230  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   All commercial and industrial condominium and cooperative or
condominium and cooperative conversion projects require a conditional use
permit and must comply with all provisions of the subdivision regulations of
the city and the Subdivision Map Act.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.240  STANDARDS CONFORMANCE.



   All commercial and industrial condominiums and cooperatives, whether
being constructed or converted, must comply with the standards set forth
below unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission or City Council, the
strict adherence to these standards is unreasonable or impossible and the
project should still be approved for other reasons based upon substantial
evidence.



   (A)   Unit Separation Walls. All unit separation walls must be of
one-hour fire-resistive construction as a minimum.



   (B)   Utility Metering. All units must be separately metered for all
public utilities unless findings can be made by the Planning Commission or
the City Council that utility usage will be nearly uniform for all units
within the project.



   (C)   Meter Rooms. Any meter rooms must have an outside access
point, which is available to all units without the necessity of entering
another unit.



   (D)   Restroom Facilities. Each unit must have individual restroom
facilities. If, in the opinion of the Planning Commission or City Council,
such facilities cannot be provided, community restroom facilities may be
provided if those facilities are available to each unit without the necessity
of entering another unit.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



§ 16.85.250  OTHER STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS.



   The project must meet all of the development standards required of
properties within the zone in which the project is located as well as any
other conditions which may be imposed as a part of the conditional use permit
or subdivision approval.



(Ord. 1169, passed 2-5-07)



CHAPTER 16.96:  GRADING PERMITS



Section



   16.96.010   Purpose and intent



   16.96.020   Applicability



   16.96.030   Grading permit required



   16.96.040   Grading permit application



   16.96.050   Grading permit issuance and conditions



   16.96.060   Performance security



   16.96.070   Time limits and extensions



   16.96.080   Inspections during grading operations



   16.96.090   Inspections and final report



§ 16.96.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of Chapters 16.96 through 16.99 (Grading and Erosion
Control) of this Title 16 is to establish minimum requirements for the
grading of properties both in hillside and other environments. These
requirements are intended to minimize hazards affecting people and properties
from adverse slope, erosion, and drainage conditions; protect the integrity
and diversity of natural environments, and the animals living in these
environments; and preserve and enhance the scenic qualities and aesthetic
character of the city.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.96.020  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of Chapters 16.96 through 16.99 (Grading and
Erosion Control) of this Title 16 apply to all excavation, fill, or other
grading activities regardless of whether a grading permit is required, unless
alternate grading and erosion control standards have been established for a
particular site through the adoption of a specific plan.



   (B)   Every map approved pursuant to this Title 16 will be
conditioned on compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion
control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site
property, as set forth in the Building Code.



   (C)   The provisions of Chapters 16.96 through 16.99 (Grading and
Erosion Control) of this Title 16 will not apply to work accomplished under
the auspices of, or on land owned or controlled by, the United States of
America or by the State of California.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.96.030  GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person may commence or perform any
grading or relocation of earth, and no person may import or export any earth
materials to or from any grading site without first having obtained the
appropriate development permit and/or final recorded tract map, and without
first having received a grading permit from the City Engineer or Building
Official, as required by provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Grading on adjacent property.  Upon approval by the City
Engineer or Building Official, grading may be performed on property for which
required permits or entitlements have not been granted, if such grading is
necessary to development on adjacent property for which such permits or
entitlements have been granted.



   (C)   Exceptions.  The following activities are exempt from the
requirement for a grading permit:



      (1)   An excavation which does not exceed 50 cubic yards or is
less than two feet in depth, or which does not create a cut slope greater
than five feet in height and steeper than 2:1, unless the cut slope is made
in an area of adverse geological conditions.



      (2)   A fill less than one foot in depth and placed on natural
terrain with a slope flatter than 5:1, or a fill less than three feet in
depth not intended to support structures, provided such fill does not exceed
50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course.



      (3)   Excavations below the finished grade for basements and
footings of buildings, retaining walls, swimming pools, or other structures
authorized by a valid building permit. This will not exempt any fill made
with materials from such excavations or exempt any excavation having an
unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such
structures.



      (4)   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, and the
stockpiling of rock sand, or gravel aggregate or clay, provided a valid
surface mining permit has been issued by the city pursuant to Chapters 16.100
through 16.104 (Surface Mining and Reclamation) of this Title 16.



      (5)   The depositing of rubbish or other materials at any dump
or sanitary landfill approved by and operating pursuant to the requirements,
rules, and other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. Such
exemption will not extend, however, to surrounding berms, permanent access
roads to the site, permanent building sites, or protective drainage works.



      (6)   The construction of dams or reservoirs regulated or
owned by the state and the federal governments.



      (7)   The temporary stockpiling of quarried or mined products
or earth for future processing, disposal, or sale, but only insofar as such
operations are conducted at a distance of more than 100 feet inside the outer
property line of any parcel of land held in a single ownership, and further
provided such stockpiling is authorized by applicable land use permits.



      (8)   Fanning and agricultural grading operations on parcels
in a single ownership which are



larger than ten acres, and are zoned and used primarily for agricultural
and/or soil and water conservation work under the direct control of the
United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. Fanning
and agricultural grading operations will not be interpreted to include:



         (a)   The construction of water- impounding structures
of earth (which are not under the direct control of the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service), where the maximum depth
to which water is or may be impounded is five feet or greater, or



         (b)   The excavation and/or filling of earth on which a
structure requiring a building permit is to be supported.



      (9)   Grading operations conducted by the city for capital
improvement projects approved by the Council.



      (10)   Exploratory borings and trenches made for soil
engineering and engineering geological investigations.



      (11)   Routine excavations and fills for cemetery graves.



      (12)   Any grading operation conducted during a period of
emergency or disaster and which is directly connected with or related to the
relief of conditions caused by such emergency or disaster.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.96.040  GRADING PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application requirements.  An application for a grading
permit and all required permit fees must be filed with the City Engineer or
Building Official on forms provided by the city and in accordance with the
terms set forth on the form. Except as waived by the City Engineer or
Building Official for minor grading, the plans must be prepared and signed by
a civil engineer, soils engineer, and, where applicable, engineering
geologist, and/or landscape architect, and must show the following:



      (1)   A vicinity sketch or other data adequately indicating
the site location.



      (2)   The property lines and dimensions and bearings of the
property on which the work is to be performed.



      (3)   The location of any existing buildings or structures on
the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any
building or structure on the land of adjacent property owners, where such
building or structure is within 50 feet of the property boundary.



      (4)   Identification of any tree or trees protected by the
provisions of Chapter 16.232 (Tree Removal Permit) of this Title 16,
including those trees for which removal has been expressly allowed. The
location of such trees must be precisely depicted on the plan, indicating the
location of the exact center of the trunk, based upon a field survey by a
licensed surveyor. Trees to remain must be permanently marked with numbered
tags at a location three feet above the natural grade in a manner acceptable
to the Public Works Director. The plan must indicate such tag number for each
tree, the diameter of the trunk of each tree, the existing ground elevation
of the downhill side of the tree, a specific reference to its habit of
branching (i.e., low branching restricting movement to the southeast), and
the ground plane projections the natural drip line of the tree, as determined
by a physical survey. The plan must indicate the proposed disposition of each
such tree.



      (5)   Accurate topography showing suitable contours of the
existing ground. The contours must be extended past the boundary lines of any
project for a minimum of 100 feet. The City Engineer or Building Official may
require the contours to be extended to include the watershed area and all
other areas influencing the proposed development.



      (6)   The deviations, dimensions, locations, extent, and
slopes of all proposed grading, shown by contours or other means.



      (7)   A certification of the quantity and type of material of
the excavation and fill involved, and the estimated starting and completion
dates.



      (8)   Detailed plans of all drainage devices, walls, cribbing,
dams, or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with or as
a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area
and estimated runoff of the area served by the drains. All hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations must be signed by a civil engineer.



      (9)   Any special reports, such as geotechnical, soils, or
groundwater, required by the City Engineer or Building Official.



      (10)   An indication as to the type of structure to be
constructed or proposed use of the site, such as single-family residence,
multiple-family residence, or commercial or industrial building.



      (11)   Any additional plans, drawings, or calculations
required by the City Engineer or Building Official to facilitate review of
the grading plan.



   (B)   Environmental review.  Grading permit applications are
subject to review under the California Environmental Quality Act, or CEQA
(Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.), the Guidelines for the California
Environmental Quality Act (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 15000 et seq.), and the
city's own CEQA guidelines, except as may be exempted by these statutes and
regulations. Any such required review will be conducted in conjunction with
review of a grading permit application, unless proposed grading has
previously been reviewed as part of an approved land use permit pursuant to
this Title 16.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.96.050  GRADING PERMIT ISSUANCE AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Findings required for approval.  Grading projects may be
approved and grading permits issued only when the City Engineer or Building
Official makes all of the following findings:



      (1)   The proposed grading conforms to all applicable
requirements set forth in Chapters 16.96 through 16.99 (Grading and Erosion
Control) of this Title 16;



      (2)   The proposed grading conforms with all applicable
provisions of the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and any
applicable associated discretionary approval issued pursuant to this Title 16;



      (3)   Any permits required by county, state, or federal
agencies for the proposed grading have been obtained;



      (4)   Appropriate environmental review pursuant to the
California Environmental Quality Act has been completed;



      (5)   The proposed grading will not endanger any private
property or present hazards to human life;



      (6)   The proposed grading will not result in the deposit of
debris on any public property, create erosion hazards, or interfere with any
existing drainage course; and



      (7)   The proposed grading will achieve the city's aesthetic
goals for protection of viewsheds and scenic resources.



   (B)   Grounds for denial.  If the City Engineer or Building
Official is unable to make all of the findings cited in paragraph (A) above
and/or the area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological or
flood hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can
eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to human life or property, the
grading permit will be denied.



   (C)   Conditions.  In granting any permit pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the City Engineer, Building Official, or their
authorized representatives may attach such conditions as may be reasonably
necessary to prevent the creation of a nuisance or hazard to public or
private property. Such conditions may include, but will not be limited to:



      (1)   The improvement of any existing grading to bring it up
to the standards of this chapter;



      (2)   Requirements for the fencing of excavations or fills
which would otherwise be hazardous;



      (3)   Control of dust, erosion, water runoff, noise, and
construction traffic;



      (4)   Protection of trees pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 16.232 (Tree Removal Permit) of this Title 16; and



      (5)   Mitigation of any adverse environmental impacts
identified through associated CEQA documentation.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.96.060  PERFORMANCE SECURITY.



   A grading permit will not be issued until the permittee posts with the
office of the City Engineer or Building Official a bond or cash deposit to
insure compliance with the provisions of Chapters 16.96 through 16.98
(Grading and Erosion Control) of this Title 16 and all conditions imposed on
behalf of the city.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.96.070  TIME LIMITS AND EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   Time limit.



      (1)   Once a grading permit has been issued, the permittee
must fully perform and complete all of the approved work pursuant to the
grading permit within the time limit specified in the permit. Once grading
has commenced, it must be pursued with diligence so as to complete the
operation within a reasonable period of time.



      (2)   If there is a cessation of grading activity for a period
in excess of 60 days, the city may utilize the bonds posted to guarantee
performance to complete the grading. The cessation of grading activity
between November 1 and April 15 due to heavy rainfall will not be cause for
the city to utilize the bonds to complete the grading.



   (B)   Extensions.  If the permittee is unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he or she may, prior to the expiration of the
permit, submit a written request for an extension of time in which to
complete the work. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer or Building
Official, sufficient justification is shown, the time specified on the permit
may be extended for a period of up to 180 days or as approved by the City
Engineer or Building Official, but no such extension will release any surety
upon the bond.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.96.080  INSPECTIONS DURING GRADING OPERATIONS.



   (A)   The City Engineer, the Building Official, the Planning
Director, the City Council, and the surety company, or their duly authorized
representatives, must have access to the premises described in the grading
permit for the purposes of inspecting progress of the work. In the event of
default in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, the
surety, or any person employed or engaged in his or her behalf, must have the
right to go upon the premises to complete the required work, including
installation of temporary erosion control devices and landscaping as required
by the provisions of Chapters 16.96 through 16.99 (Grading and Erosion
Control) of this Title 16.



   (B)   It will be unlawful for the owner or any other person to
interfere with the ingress or egress from such premises of any authorized
representative or agent of any surety company or the city engaged in the work
ordered by the City Engineer, Building Official or the City Council.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.96.090  INSPECTIONS AND FINAL REPORT.



   (A)   Inspections authorized.  All construction or work for which a
permit is required will be subject to inspections by authorized employees of
the city, and certain types of work to be determined by the City Engineer or
Building Official will have either continuous inspection and supervision by a
registered civil engineer, soils engineer, engineering geologist, and/or
other appropriate consultants as a condition of the issuance of the grading
permit. Prior to issuing a grading certificate, a final inspection will be
made of all construction or work for which a permit has been issued.



   (B)   Exposure of work.  Whenever any work on which called
inspections are required, as specified in this section, is covered or
concealed by additional work without having first been inspected, the City
Engineer or Building Official may, by written notice, require that such work
be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering will not
entail expense to the city.



   (C)   Notices.  The permittee or his or her agent must notify the
City Engineer or Building Official at least 24 hours in advance of the time
when the grading operation is ready for each of the following inspections:



      (1)   Initial inspections. When the permittee is ready to
begin work but before any grading or brushing is started;



      (2)   Toe inspections. After the natural ground is exposed and
prepared to receive fill but prior to the placing of any fill. Approval for
placing fill must not be made until all debris and unsuitable material has
been removed from the site to an approved location;



      (3)   Subdrain inspections. Inspections will be required on
all subdrains after the installation but prior to the placement of any fill;



      (4)   Excavation inspections. After the excavation is started
but before the vertical depth of the excavation exceeds ten feet;



      (5)   Fill inspections. After the fill emplacement is started
but before the combined vertical height of the lift exceeds ten feet;



      (6)   Drainage device inspections. After the forms, steel
reinforcement, and pipe are in place but before any concrete is placed;



      (7)   Rough grading. When all the rough grading has been
completed. This inspection may be called for at the completion of the rough
grading without the necessity of the City Engineer or Building Official
having previously reviewed and approved applicable reports;



      (8)   Rough grading certification. A conditional interim
certificate may be issued to the Public Works Department to allow the
issuance of building permits. This certificate will in no way exonerate the
applicant from completing the grading;



      (9)   Final certification. When all work, including the
installation of all drainage structures, other protective devices, the
compaction of trench backfill, and planting and slope stabilization, has been
completed and the "as built" plan and required reports have been submitted;



      (10)   Other inspections. In addition to the called
inspections provided by this section, the City Engineer or Building Official
may make any other inspections of any work to ascertain compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and other laws; and



      (11)   Interrupted grading. When the permittee is ready to
resume work, but before any grading or brushing is started, the permittee or
his or her agent must notify the City Engineer or Building Official 24 hours
in advance of the time when the grading operation is ready.



   (D)   Issuance of certificates.  Upon the final inspection, when it
is found that the work authorized



by the grading permit, including the installation of a drainage structures,
has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the requirements of
Chapters 16.96 through 16.99 (Grading and Erosion Control) of this Title 16,
a grading certificate covering such work will be issued to the permittee by
the City Engineer.



   (E)   Final reports.  Upon the completion of the work, the City
Engineer may require the following reports and information:



      (1)   A report from a registered civil engineer certifying
that all grading, lot drainage, and drainage facilities have been completed
in conformance with the approved plans and the provisions of Chapters 16.96
through 16.99 (Grading and Erosion Control) of this Title 16 and that the
graded site will support residential or commercial type structures, whichever
is applicable;



      (2)   A soils engineering report including, but not limited
to, certification of the soil bearing capacity, summaries of field and
laboratory tests, locations of tests, expansive soil classification lot by
lot, and slope tests taken in the fills showing the limits of compacted fill
on an "as built" grading plan;



      (3)   An engineering geology report by the engineering
geologist, based on the final contour map, including specific approval of the
grading as affected by geological factors. Where necessary, a revised
geologic map, cross sections, and any recommendations necessary must be
included; and



      (4)   When "as built" grading plans are required, as
determined by the City Engineer, such plans must be signed by the supervising
civil engineer, the soils engineer, and the engineering geologist, when
applicable, for their portions of the work.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



CHAPTER 16.97:  GRADING REGULATION



Section



   16.97.010   Excavations



   16.97.020   Fills



   16.97.030   Slope setbacks



   16.97.040   Grading designation and inspection



   16.97.050   Reports and statements, engineered grading



§ 16.97.010  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Maximum slope.  Cuts must not be steeper in slope than two
horizontal units to one vertical unit. The City Engineer or Building Official
may allow a slope greater than 2:1 for special circumstances or site
conditions. Before the City Engineer or Building Official may allow a greater
slope, the owner must furnish a geotechnical engineering or an engineering
geology report, or both, as requested by the City Engineer or Building
Official, stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion
that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to
public or private property. Substantiating calculations and supporting data
may be required where the City Engineer or Building Official determines that
such information is necessary to verify the stability and safety of the
proposed slope.



   (B)   Slope surface protection.  All slopes must be stabilized
against surface erosion. Stabilization may be accomplished through the
application of erosion control blankets, soil stabilizers or other means as
approved or directed by the City Engineer or Building Official.



   (C)   Drainage.  Drainage, including drainage terraces and overflow
protection, must be provided as required by Chapter 16.99 of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.97.020  FILLS.



   (A)   Compaction.  Fill must be compacted throughout their full
extent to a minimum of 90% of maximum density as determined by ASTM Soil
Compaction Test D 1557-91, where applicable; where not applicable a test
acceptable to the City Engineer or Building Official must be used. Field
density must be determined by a method acceptable to the City Engineer or
Building Official.



      (1)   Fill slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical
must be constructed by the placement of soil a sufficient distance beyond the
proposed finish slope to allow compaction equipment to operate at the outer
surface limits of the final slope surface. The excess fill is to be removed
prior to completion or rough grading. Other construction procedures may be
utilized when it is first shown to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or
Building Official that the angle of slope, construction method and other
factors will accomplish the intent of this section.



      (2)   Fills not intended to support structures are not
required to be compacted to these standards if the City Engineer or Building
Official determines that such compaction is unnecessary as a safety measure.
In making this determination, the City Engineer or Building Official may
require that the owner provide a report from a soils engineer establishing
the characteristics of the soil, the amount of settlement to be expected and
the susceptibility of the soil to erosion or slippage.



      (3)   Slope surfaces may be prepared for planting by
scarifying, by the addition of top soil, or by other methods, provided such
slopes when so prepared otherwise comply with the requirements of this
section.



   (B)   Preparation of ground.  The existing ground surface must be
prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill or other
incompetent material. Where the slope of the existing ground surface is five
horizontal to one vertical or steeper, the fill must be supported on level
benches cut into competent material. The bench under the toe of a fill on a
slope steeper than five to one must be at least ten feet wide. The area
beyond the toe of fill must be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain
must be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the
toe of fill must be at least ten feet wide, but the cut must be made before
placing the fill and before acceptance by the geotechnical engineer or
engineering geologist, or both if applicable, as a suitable foundation for
fill. Daylight lines indicating a transition between fill and natural ground
or fill and excavation are not allowed within the building area of a graded
pad unless approved by the City Engineer or Building Official based on
special circumstances or site conditions. Except where recommended by the
geotechnical engineer or geologist as not being necessary and approved by the
City Engineer or Building Official, subdrains must be provided under all
fills placed in natural drainage courses and in other locations where seepage
is evident. Such subdrainage systems must be of a material and design
approved by the geotechnical engineer and acceptable to the City Engineer or
Building Official. The permittee must provide continuous inspection during
the process of subdrain installation to conform with approved plans and
geotechnical engineer's recommendation. Such inspection must be done by the
soil testing agency. The location of the subdrains must be shown on a plan by
the geotechnical engineer. Excavations for the subdrains must be inspected by
the geologist when such subdrains are included in the recommendations of the
geologist.



   (C)   Fill slope.  The City Engineer or Building Official may allow
a slope of steeper than 2:1 for special circumstances or site conditions. The
steepness of fill slopes must be determined by a soil engineer who must
submit soil test data and engineering calculations to substantiate to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer or Building Official the stability of the
fill slope and slope surface under conditions of saturation.



   (D)   Fill material.  Detrimental amounts of organic material are
not permitted in fills. Soil containing small amounts of roots may be allowed
if the roots are in a quantity and distributed in a manner that is not
detrimental to the future use of the site, and the use of the material is
approved by the soil engineer and the City Engineer or Building Official. No
rock or similar irreducible materials with a maximum dimension greater than
12 inches can be buried or placed in fills except as recommended by the soil
engineer, approved by the City Engineer or Building Official and meeting the
following requirements:



      (1)   The oversized material must be placed ten feet or more
below finish grade;



      (2)   A representative of the soil engineer must be present
while the oversized material is placed and covered;



      (3)   The reports submitted by the soil engineer must
acknowledge the placement of the oversized material and whether the work
performed is in accordance with his or her recommendations and the approved
plans; and



      (4)   The location of oversized rock dispersal areas must be
shown on the as-built plan.



      (5)   Stockpiled soil, sand or gravel must be covered or
stabilized as to prevent erosion by wind or water.



   (E)   Drainage.  Drainage, including drainage terraces and overflow
protection, must be provided as required by Chapter 16.99 of this Title 16.



   (F)   Slopes to receive fill.  Where fill is to be placed above the
top of an existing slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, the
toe of the fill must be set back from the top edge of the slope a minimum
distance of six feet measured horizontally or such other distance as may be
specifically recommended by a soil engineer or engineering geologist and
approved by the City Engineer or Building Official. Fills must not toe out on
slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.



   (G)   Inspection of fill.  For engineered grading, the soil
engineer must provide sufficient inspections during the preparation of the
natural ground and the placement of compaction of the fill to be satisfied
that the work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of plan
approval and the appropriate requirements of this Code. In addition to the
above, the soil engineer must be present during the entire fill placement and
compaction of fills that will exceed a vertical height or depth of 30 feet or
result in a slope surface steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.



   (H)   Testing of fills.  Sufficient tests of the fill soils must be
made to determine the density thereof and to verify compliance of the soil
properties with the design requirements, including soil types and shear
strengths in accordance with the standards established by the City Engineer
or Building Official. The results of such testing must be included in the
report required by this chapter.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.97.030  SLOPE SETBACKS.



   (A)   General requirements.  Cut and fill slopes must be setback
from site boundaries in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions must
be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary. The
grading design must require that the property line between adjacent lots will
be at the apex of the berm at the top of the slope. Property lines between
adjacent lots cannot be located on a graded slope equal to five horizontal to
one vertical or steeper.



   (B)   Top of cut slope.  The top of cut slopes must not be made
nearer to a site boundary line than one-fifth of the height of cut with a
minimum of two feet and a maximum of ten feet. The setback may need to be
increased for any required intercepter drains.



   (C)   Toe of fill slope.  The toe of a fill slope must not be made
nearer to the site boundary line than one-half of the height of the slope
with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of 20 feet. Where a fill slope is to
be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is
developed to such grading, special precautions must be incorporated in the
work as the City Engineer or Building Official deems necessary to protect the
adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions
may include but are not limited to:



      (1)   Additional setbacks;



      (2)   Provision for retaining or slough walls;



      (3)   Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope
surface to minimize erosion; or



      (4)   Provisions for the control of surface waters.



   (D)   Modification of slope location.  The setback and other
restrictions imposed by this section may be increased where unusual soil or
geologic conditions make such increase necessary for safety or stability or
may be modified upon investigation and recommendation by a soil engineer or
geologist where such modification will provide equivalent safety, stability
and protection, and the City Engineer or Building Official so finds.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.97.040  GRADING DESIGNATION AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   General.  Grading involving a fill intended to support
structures, or the development of more than one lot or parcel of land, or in
excess of 5,000 cubic yards of material, or grading where the City Engineer
or Building Official determines special conditions or unusual hazards exist
must conform with subsection (D) of this section.  Grading other than
engineered grading must be designated regular grading.



   (B)   Regular grading requirements.  The grading must be inspected
by the City Engineer or Building Official as set forth in subsection (C) of
this section.  The City Engineer or Building Official may require inspection
and testing by a soil testing agency. If required, the soil testing agency's
responsibility will include, but need not be limited to, approval concerning
the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, and the
compaction of fills.



   (C)   Inspection of excavation and fills. 



      (1)   The City Engineer or Building Official, upon
notification from the permittee or his or her agent, will inspect the grading
at the following stages of the work and must either approve the portion then
completed or must notify the permittee or his or her agent wherein it fails
to comply with the requirements of this Code.



         (a)   Initial. When the site has been cleared of
vegetation and unapproved fill and it has been scarified, benched or
otherwise prepared for fill. No fill can be placed prior to this inspection.



         (b)   Rough. When approximate final elevations have been
established; drainage terraces, swales and other drainage devices graded
ready for paving; berms installed at the top of the slopes; and the
statements required have been received.



         (c)   Final. When grading has been completed; all
drainage devices installed: slope planting established, irrigation systems
installed; and the as-graded plans and required statements and reports have
been submitted.



      (2)   In addition to the called inspections specified above,
the City Engineer or Building Official may make such other inspections as he
or she may deem necessary to determine that the work is being performed in
conformance with the requirements of this Code. Investigation and reports by
an approved soil testing agency, soils engineer and/or engineering geologist
may be required.



   (D)   Engineered grading requirements.



      (1)   For engineered grading, it is the responsibility of the
persons listed below to perform the designated functions and provide reports
as required by § 16.97.050. These responsibilities and



functions are in addition to those of the City Engineer or Building Official
as set forth in subsection (C) of this section:



         (a)   Design engineer. The design engineer will prepare
the grading plans and will incorporate recommendations from the sail
engineering geology reports on such plans.



         (b)   Field engineer. The field engineer will establish
and approve line, grade and surface drainage. At the completion of the rough
grading and final grading, the field engineer must submit the statements and
reports required by § 16.97.050.



         (c)   Soil engineer. The soil engineer will provide
professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty,
which will include observation during grading and testing for required
compaction. The soil engineer must provide sufficient observation during the
preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to
verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of
the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this Code. Revised
recommendations relating to conditions noted during grading and differing
from the approved soils engineering and engineering geologic reports must be
coordinated with the engineering geologist and submitted to the permittee,
the Building Official.



         (d)   Engineering geologist. The engineering geologist
will provide professional inspection within such geologist's area of
technical specialty, which will include professional inspection of bedrock
excavation or excavations of subdrains, buttress fills, and shear keys to
determine that conditions encountered are in conformance with the approved
report. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the
approved geology reports must be submitted to the soils engineer.



         (e)   Grading contractor. The grading contractor will
submit the statement required by at the completion of rough grading.



         (f)   Planting and irrigation. When planting and
irrigation is required by § 16.99.020, the statement required by §
16.97.050 must be submitted prior to the final approval of the grading by the
City Engineer or Building Official.



      (2)   Reports that reflect conditions which are not in
agreement with the approved grading plans must be submitted to the field
engineer and the City Engineer or Building Official by the appropriate
consultants.



   (E)   Non-inspected grading.  No person may own, use, or maintain
any non-inspected graded property. For the purposes of this Code,
non-inspected grading is defined as any grading for which a grading permit
was first obtained, but which has progressed beyond any point requiring
inspection and approval by the City Engineer or Building Official without
such inspection and approval having been obtained.



   (F)   Notification of nonconformance.



      (1)   If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility
under this chapter, the field engineer, soil engineer or geologist finds that
the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the plans
approved by the City Engineer or Building Official, or in accordance with
good accepted practices, the person in charge of the grading work and the
City Engineer or Building Official must be immediately notified in writing of
the nonconformity and of the corrective measures to be taken.



      (2)   All uncertified fills and nonconforming grading must be
recorded on the title of the property so that any future buyer will be aware
of the situation. This recordation may only be removed when the City Engineer
or Building Official determines conformance. No building permits will be
granted until the fill and/or grading is in conformance.



   (G)   Termination of services.  The termination of the services of
the field engineer, soil engineer or geologist prior to the completion of the
work shown on the approved grading plan must be reported to the City Engineer
or Building Official in writing within 48 hours. The report must be by the
person terminated and must include the status of the work at the last
inspection. The work must be stopped until the replacement has agreed to
accept the responsibility within the area of his or her technical competence
for verification upon completion of the work.



   (H)   Violation.  It is a violation of this Code for any person to
verify to the satisfactory completion of work as required by this chapter if
such work is subsequently found by the City Engineer or Building Official to
be in substantial noncompliance with the approved design or code requirement
at the time of verification.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.97.050  REPORTS AND STATEMENTS, ENGINEERED GRADING.



   (A)   General.  The reports and statements set forth in this
section are those required for engineered grading. The City Engineer or
Building Official may waive the requirement for a report or statement when
such report or statement is found to be unnecessary for the approval of the
graded site. Nothing in this section may be deemed to waive the requirement
for reports or statements by other provisions of this Code.



      (1)   The statement required by this section supplement the
records of the City Engineer or Building Official. These forms may be
duplicated and the letterhead of the responsible person may be utilized.
Final approval of grading by the City Engineer or Building Official cannot be
given until all required maps, statements and reports have been submitted.



      (2)   Where reference is made to initial, rough or final
grading, it means those stages of construction set forth in § 16.97.040.



   (B)   Field engineer.  At the completion of rough grading and final
grading, the field engineer must submit a statement that work is in
conformance with the approved plans. A final contour map (as-built plan) must
be submitted unless the work has been completed in close agreement with the
approved plan.



   (C)   Soil engineer.  At the completion of rough grading, the soil
engineer must submit a statement that the portion of the work concerning the
preparation of the existing ground surface and the placing and compaction of
fill is in conformance with the approved plans and the appropriate provisions
of this Code. The soil engineer must submit a report which includes the
recommended soil-bearing capacity, a finding as to the expansive qualities of
the soil, the location of subdrains and a summary of tests. The location of
such tests and the limits of the compacted fill must be shown on a final plan
which must also show by plan and cross section the location of any rock
disposal areas and/or buttress fills, is such were involved in the grading.



   (D)   Geologist.  When a site inspection by the geologist is
required under § 16.97.040, a report based on an "as-built" geologic map
must be submitted by the geologist. The report must be submitted at the
completion of rough grading and must include specific approval of the grading
as affected by geological factors. Where necessary, such report must include
geologic cross sections and recommendations regarding the location of
buildings or sewage disposal systems.



   (E)   Planting and irrigation.  At completion of final grading, a
landscape architect or a field engineer must submit a statement that the
slope planting has been established and the irrigation system has been
installed in conformance with the approved plans.



   (F)   Grading contractor.  At the completion of rough grading, the
grading contractor must submit a statement that the work under the direction
of the grading contractor was performed in accordance with the approved plans
and the appropriate requirements of this chapter or that such work was not in
accordance with such plans and chapter.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



CHAPTER 16.98:  HILLSIDE GRADING PRACTICES



Section



   16.98.010   Purpose and applicability



   16.98.020   Use of natural topography



   16.98.030   Ridgeline preservation



   16.98.040   Roadways and driveways



   16.98.050   Location of building pads



   16.98.060   Manufactured slopes



§ 16.98.010  PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Purpose.  The city finds that the hillsides areas of Santa
Paula contribute a unique character to the city and forms an integral part of
the city's overall environment. Due to the physical dominance of hillsides on
the landscape, development of the hillside areas will affect the visual and
environmental character of the community. The city's primary objective
regarding hillside development is to preserve the natural terrain, the
quality environment, and the aesthetic features of the city while encouraging
creative, innovative, diverse, and safe development. Such goals will only be
achieved when special consideration is given to development in hillside areas.



   (B)   Intent.  In enacting the provisions of this chapter, it is
the intention and policy of the city to:



      (1)   Encourage only minimal grading which relates to the
natural contour of the land, and which will round off, in a natural manner,
sharp angles at the top and ends of cut and fill slopes so as to avoid a
"staircase" or "padding" effect;



      (2)   Require the retention of trees and other vegetation
which stabilize steep hillsides, retain moisture, prevent erosion, and
enhance the natural scenic beauty and, where necessary, require additional
landscaping to enhance the scenic qualities of the hillsides;



      (3)   Encourage a variety of building types and design, when
appropriate, to materially reduce grading and disturbance of the natural
character of the area;



      (4)   Require immediate planting wherever appropriate to
maintain necessary cut and fill slopes, to stabilize slopes with plant roots,
and to conceal bare soil from view; and



      (5)   Impose appropriate conditions on the development of all
slopes to obtain conformity with approved development policies of the city's
General Plan.



   (C)   Application.  This chapter applies to all parcels zoned
HR1-PD, HR2-PD; any parcels with an average slope of 10% or more; and any
parcel included in the "Potential High Landslide and Debris and Mud Flow
Hazard" and/or "High Potential for Rock Falls" areas as designated in the
General Plan.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.98.020  USE OF NATURAL TOPOGRAPHY.



   Grading must be designed and performed to respect the natural
topography of a site. The principals of contour grading must be used to blend
manufactured slopes with the natural topography as follows:



   (A)   Manufactured slopes must be rounded and shaped to simulate the
natural terrain.



   (B)   Grading must follow the natural topographic contours.



   (C)   Where cut or fill slopes exceed 200 feet in horizontal length,
the horizontal contours of the slope must be curved in a continuous, sinuous
manner with varying radii to reflect the natural terrain.



   (D)   Manufactured slopes must blend with adjacent natural slopes at
a radius comparable with the existing natural terrain.



   (E)   Grading on slopes of 30% or greater is prohibited, except as
necessary as determined by the City Engineer or Building Official.



   (F)   Grading in the hillside areas shall be limited to that
necessary to construct a driveway to serve the dwelling, the footprint of the
dwelling, a walkway around the house seven feet in width, and a patio area of
300 square feet. The Planning Commission may modify these standards to be
less or more restrictive, depending on the particular characteristics of the
lot. The intent of this division is to avoid any grading which is not
required to accommodate a house and the access to the house, and to eliminate
cut and fill slopes except in driveway areas when absolutely necessary.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.98.030  RIDGELINE PRESERVATION.



   Significant natural hillside landmarks and defining ridgelines, as
identified in the Santa Paula General Plan, must be retained in their natural
state. Development on the ridgelines is prohibited.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.98.040  ROADWAYS AND DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   Street alignments must, to the maximum extent feasible, be
parallel to the natural contours of the land.



   (B)   Street widths must conform to adopted minimum city standards.
However, the City Engineer, Building Official and Planning Director will have
the authority to approve narrower street pavement widths where such narrower
width would work to preserve natural contours and slopes, minimize grading,
reduce heights of required retaining walls, and/or result in better overall
subdivision design. Such approval is subject to the provision of sufficient
emergency access, as determined by the Fire Chief. Where such narrower widths
are provided, the City Engineer may require intermittent widening or turnouts
to be provided for turnarounds or parking.



   (C)   The Planning Director will have the authority to approve the
establishment of sidewalks on only one side of a street where such design
would preserve natural contours and slopes, minimize grading, reduce heights
of required retaining walls, and/or result in better overall subdivision
design.



   (D)   The maximum slope of any driveway must be 15%, with no portion
of any driveway exceeding a slope of 20%.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.98.050  LOCATION OF BUILDING PADS.



   (A)   Building pads must be located on that portion of a lot that
achieves the most of the following objectives:



      (1)   Requires the least amount of grading to create a
suitable building site;



      (2)   Preserves primary views from existing home sites;



      (3)   Minimizes the visual prominence of proposed structures
from close by and distant view points;



      (4)    Avoids ridgeline development as required by §
16.98.030;



      (5)   Keeps development below the ridgeline; and



      (6)   Preserves existing native vegetation and similar natural
features.



   (B)   Building sites must be located to allow structures to follow
the natural slope of the property.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.98.060  MANUFACTURED SLOPES.



   (A)   Height.  No manufactured slope may exceed a vertical height
of 25 feet unless a higher slope is required for a public street, or unless
approved by the Planning Commission or City Council through the review and
approval of a tentative tract map. The height of a manufactured slope must
include the height of any retaining wall constructed as an integral part of
the slope.



   (B)   Slope.  No manufactured slope angle may be steeper than 2:1
unless approved by the City Engineer or Building Official, based on studies
provided by the applicant demonstrating that:



      (1)   Special circumstances applicable to the property,
including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, deprive the
property of development opportunities otherwise available to properties in
the same zone; and



      (2)   Data provided by a soils engineer, engineering
geologist, and landscape architect support the contention that the slope
material and material underlying the slope are capable of permanent stability
at an angle steeper than 2:1, and that the required slope planting can be
adequately maintained.



   (C)   Location of lot line.  Any manufactured slope occurring on a
side or rear lot line must be made a part of the downhill lot.



   (D)   Cut slopes in rock.  Manufactured cut slopes in rock material
must be provided with soil pockets or cut terraces to facilitate the planting
of landscaping.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



CHAPTER 16.99:  DRAINAGE, EROSION, AND DUST CONTROL



Section



   16.99.010   Purpose and applicability



   16.99.020   Slope protection and graded surface revegetation



   16.99.030   Protection of trees during grading



   16.99.040   Protection of watercourses and wetlands



   16.99.050   Drainage provisions



   16.99.060   Erosion and stormwater control



   16.99.070   Dust prevention and control provisions



§ 16.99.010  PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter establishes standards for the conduct of all grading
activity, whether or not a grading permit is required pursuant to Chapters
16.96 through 16.99 (Grading and Erosion Control) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.99.020  SLOPE PROTECTION AND GRADED SURFACE REVEGETATION.



   (A)   All manufactured slopes greater than three feet in height and
all graded areas not to be occupied by structures or other approved
improvements must be planted with live landscape material and provided with
an automatic irrigation system in accordance with landscaping and irrigation
plans approved by the Planning Director.



   (B)   Installation of landscaping and irrigation required for
erosion and sediment control must be completed within 30 days of completion
of grading activity. All other required landscaping and irrigation must be
installed in accordance with applicable land use and development permits.



   (C)   Acceptable landscape materials used for slope protection and
erosion/sediment control include groundcover from rooted cuttings,
hydromulched mixtures, lawn seed or sod, or other similar materials, and may
include certain species of trees, as shown on landscape plans approved by the
Planning Director.



   (D)   For slopes in hillside residential areas, fire hazard
mitigation landscape approaches must be used consistent with the requirements
of § 16.13.150 (Fire Hazard Mitigation) of this Title 16.



   (E)   The use of fire-resistant, drought-tolerant landscape
materials is encouraged.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.99.030  PROTECTION OF TREES DURING GRADING.



   (A)   Identification of tree protection.  Where any mature trees
will affected by grading, other than trees for which removal will be
permitted via a tree removal permit pursuant to Chapter 16.232 of this Title
16, details for retaining walls, drains, pruning, trimming, and the
establishment of a drip line with respect to each such tree must be prepared
by a licensed landscape architect and be included with the grading plan.
Grading or activity detrimental to the health of such tree is prohibited to
take place within an established drip line of the tree.



   (B)   Protective fences required.  Prior to the commencement of
grading, fences must be constructed around the established drip line of all
such trees. The purpose of such fences is to prevent grading, heavy equipment
work, and the storage or dumping of materials within the established drip
lines of such trees. Grading or other site work within the established drip
line must be only as authorized by the approved grading plan and must be
supervised and approved by a landscape architect in attendance continuously
during the progress of the work. Fences may be temporarily removed or
omitted, upon the approval of the City Engineer or Building Official, to
facilitate such authorized work. All such work must comply with the approved
details to protect the tree.



   (C)   Coordination.  Where mature trees could be affected by a
grading operation, a field orientation meeting must take place prior to the
commencement of the work when deemed necessary or desirable by the City
Engineer or Building Official. The purpose of such meeting is to communicate
the approved methods of grading and tree preservation to all parties involved
with the grading operation. Such meeting should include the City Engineer or
Building Official or their authorized representatives, a representative of
the Planning Department, the permittee or his or her authorized
representative, the landscape architect, and the soils engineer.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.99.040  PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES AND WETLANDS.



   (A)   Watercourses and wetlands must, to the maximum extent
feasible, be left in their natural state, with grading designed to protect
such features.



   (B)   Grading, dredging, or any similar disturbance of a watercourse
or wetland will not be permitted except in accord with an approved grading
plan and provided that all permit requirements imposed by state and federal
agencies with jurisdiction have been complied with. Proof of compliance with
other agencies' requirements must be provided to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer or Building Official, and the Planning Director.



   (C)   Watercourses and wetlands must be protected during grading
operations in accord with standards and requirements of the State of
California Regional Water Quality Control Board, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, and other state or federal agency with jurisdiction. Proof of
compliance with other agencies' requirements must be provided to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer or Building Official, and the Planning
Director.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.99.050  DRAINAGE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   General.  The drainage structures and devices required by
this chapter must conform to the provisions of this section as well as
recognized principles of hydraulics.



   (B)   Disposal.  Drainage facilities must be designed to carry
surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural
watercourse approved by the City Engineer or Building Official or other
appropriate governmental agency as a safe place to deposit such waters.
Desilting basins, filter barriers or other methods, as approved by the City
Engineer or Building Official, must be utilized to remove sediments from
surface waters before such waters are allowed to enter streets, storm drains
or natural watercourses. If the drainage device discharges onto natural
ground, riprap or a similar energy dissipator may be required.



   (C)   Site drainage.  Graded building sites (building pads) must
have a minimum slope of 2% toward a public street or drainage structure
approved to receive storm waters. A lesser slope may be approved by the City
Engineer or Building Official for sites graded in relatively flat terrain, or
where special drainage provisions are made, when the City Engineer or
Building Official finds such modification will not result in unfavorable
drainage conditions. The grading must provide for drainage around proposed
buildings and their appurtenances.



   (D)   Drainage terraces required.  All cut or fill slopes steeper
than three horizontal to one vertical must have drainage terraces. For slopes
not steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, the City Engineer or
Building Official may require a drainage and terrace design to be submitted.
Suitable access to permit proper cleaning and maintenance must be provided
for all drainage terraces. Cut or fill slopes more than 30 feet in height
must have drainage terraces provided vertical intervals not exceeding 25 feet
except that where only one terrace is required, it must be at midheight. Such
terraces must be not less than eight feet in width (measured horizontally
from the outside edge). When the total slope height exceeds 100 feet, one
terrace near midheight must be not less than 20 feet in width (measured
horizontally from the outside edge). In lieu of the above, for cut and fill
slopes greater than 120 feet in height, the applicant may submit a drainage
and terrace design by a civil engineer to be approved by the City Engineer or
Building Official.



   (E)   Drainage terraces construction.  Drainage terraces must have
a longitudinal grade of not less than 5% nor more than 12% and a minimum
depth of one foot at a flow line. There must be no reduction in grade along
the direction of flow unless the velocity of flow is such that the slope
debris will remain in suspension on the reduced grade. Such terraces must be
paved with concrete not less than three inches thick reinforced with 6-inch x
6-inch No. 10 x No. 10 welded wire fabric or equivalent reinforcing centered
in the concrete slab. Drainage terraces exceeding eight feet in width need
only be so paved for a width of eight feet provided such pavement provides a
paved channel at least one foot in depth. Downdrains or drainage outlets must
be provided at approximately 300 foot intervals along the drainage terrace or
at equivalent locations. Downdrains and drainage outlets must be of approved
materials and of adequate capacity to convey the intercepted waters to the
point of disposal as defined in subsection (B) of this section.



   (F)   Overflow protection.  Berms, swales or other devices must be
provided at the top of cut or fill slopes to prevent surface waters from
overflowing onto the damaging face of the slope. Gutters or other special
drainage controls must be provided where the proximity of runoff from
buildings or other structures is such as to pose a potential hazard to slope
integrity. Swales used for slope protection must conform with subsection (H)
of this section. Berms used for slope protection must be at least 12 inches
above the level of the pad and must slope back at least four feet from the
top of the slope.



   (G)   Subsurface drainage.  Cut and fill slopes must be provided
with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability. Any required subsurface
drainage facilities will be passive in design and require no ongoing
monitoring to insure site stability.



   (H)   Interceptor drains.  Paved interceptor drains must be
installed along the top of all cut slopes where the height of the cut is
greater than five feet measured vertically. Interceptor drains must be paved
with a minimum of four inches of concrete or granite and reinforced as
required for drainage terraces. They must have a minimum depth of 12 inches
and a minimum paved width of 36 inches measured horizontally across the
drain. The side slope of interceptor drains must not be steeper than 1-1/2:1.
The slope of the drain must be approved by the City Engineer or Building
Official.



   (I)   Drainage guidelines.  All drainage devices which collect from
the slopes must be screened by means of underground pipes, diagonal
curvilinear drains, rock-lining, colored concrete or other approved materials
to blend with the natural topography in character, color or design.
Downdrains must be non-centralized to avoid a repetitive pattern. Where
feasible, underground drains must be utilized.



   (J)   Cross lot drainage device maintenance.  All cross lot
drainage devices not eligible for transfer to a flood control district or
similar entity must be maintained by the owner or a private entity such as a
homeowners association.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.99.060  EROSION AND STORMWATER CONTROL.



   Best Management Practices, or BMP, must be used to control erosion and
stormwater runoff during all grading and construction activities consistent
with Chapter 54 (Stormwater Quality Management) of Title V of the Santa Paula
Municipal Code and the Building Code.



   (A)   Slopes.  The faces of cut and fill slopes must be prepared
and maintained to control erosion. This control must consist of jute netting
and effective planting as described elsewhere in this section, or other
devices satisfactory to the City Engineer or Building Official.



   (B)   Planting.  The surface of all cut slopes more than five feet
in height and fill slopes more than three feet in height must be protected
against damage by erosion by planting with grass or ground cover plants.
Slopes exceeding 15 feet in vertical height must also be planted with shrubs,
spaced at not to exceed ten feet on centers; or trees, spaced at not to
exceed ten feet on centers; or a combination of shrubs and trees at
equivalent spacings, in addition to the grass or groundcover plants. The
plants selected and planting methods used must be suitable for the soil and
climatic conditions of the site and in accordance with standard
specifications prepared by the City Engineer or Building Official. Planting
need not be provided for cut slopes rocky in character and not subject to
damage by erosion and any slopes protected against erosion damage by other
methods when such methods have been specifically recommended by a soil
engineer, engineer geologist, or equivalent authority and found to offer
erosion protection equal to that provided by the planting specified in this
section. Plant material must be selected which will produce a coverage of
permanent planting effectively controlling erosion. Consideration must be
given to deep rooted plant material needing limited watering, to low
maintenance during the lifetime of the project, to high root to shoot ratio
(weight of above ground parts versus root system), wind susceptibility and
fire-retardant characteristics.



   (C)   Irrigation.  Slopes required to be planted by subsection (B)
above must be provided with an approved system of irrigation, designed to
cover all portions of the slope and plans therefore must be submitted and
approved prior to installation. A functional test of the system may be
required. For slopes less than 20 feet in vertical height, hose bibs to
permit hand watering will be acceptable if such hose bibs are installed at
conveniently accessible locations where a hose no longer than 50 feet is
necessary for irrigation. The requirements for permanent irrigation systems
may be modified upon specific recommendation of a landscape architect or
equivalent authority that because of the type of plans selected, the planting
methods used and the soil and climatic conditions at the site, an irrigation
will not be necessary for the maintenance of the slope planting.



   (D)   Plans and specifications.  Planting and irrigation plans must
be submitted for slopes required to be planted and irrigated by subsections
(B) and (C) of this section. Except as waived by the City Engineer or
Building Official for minor grading, the plans for slopes 20 feet or more in
vertical height must be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or landscape
architect. These plans must be approved by the city prior to issuance of the
grading permit unless other provisions are made to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer or Building Official. The responsibility of maintenance of
drainage terrace must be clearly stated on the grading plan to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer or Building Official.



   (E)   Rodent control.  Fill slopes steeper than two horizontal and
one vertical within a grading project located adjacent to undeveloped and
unoccupied land (as determined by the City Engineer or Building Official) to
be infested by burrowing rodents, must be protected from potential slope
damage by a preventative program of rodent control.



   (F)   Release of security.  The planting and irrigation systems
required by this section must be installed as soon as practical after rough
grading. Prior to final approval of grading and before the release of any
grading security, the planting must be well established and growing on the
slopes and, where required by subsection (E) of this section, there must be
evidence of an effective rodent control program.



   (G)   Other devices.  Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap
or other devices or methods must be employed to control any erosion. Also,
jute netting must be immediately installed on any slopes having a vertical
height of seven feet or more and steeper than 3:1 (horizontal: vertical) to
minimize or control erosion problems.



   (H)   Maintenance.  Graded and/or landscaped areas are to be
maintained in accordance with the original landscape plans and design concept
per the originally approved subdivision or development plans. Any alteration
of landscape plans or of areas must be approved by the city. Homeowner
encroachments such as fences, block walls, structures, unauthorized
plantings, alterations to the irrigation, grading or drainage are not
allowed. Any approved alterations must be done by city-authorized crews
through an approved city permit. Failure to comply with this section will
constitute a use of land contrary to the provisions of this Code and is
deemed a public nuisance under this Code.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.99.070  DUST PREVENTION AND CONTROL PROVISIONS.



   To protect the health, safety, and general welfare, all construction
sites must make all reasonable efforts to prevent or control blowing dust and
debris. Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining their property
in such a manner that dust and other wind borne debris transported to
adjacent properties are kept to reasonable minimal levels. In the case of
site grading and other construction operations, it will also be the
responsibility of the permittee to make all reasonable efforts to control
blowing dust and debris onto adjacent properties. When grading operations
involve the hauling of dirt from one site to another, it is also the
permittee's responsibility to maintain the public streets in a clean
condition and limit any spillage that would generate dust or other blowing
debris.



   (A)   Dust prevention and control plan required.  A dust prevention
and control plan shall be submitted in conjunction with a grading plan or
other plan involving the movement of dirt. The City Engineer or Building
Official may also require the submittal of a dust prevention and control plan
for other development deemed necessary.



   (B)   Plan requirements.  The plan shall demonstrate that the
discharge of dust from the construction site will not occur or can be
controlled to an acceptable level depending on the particular site conditions
and circumstances. The plan shall address site conditions during construction
operations, after normal working hours, and during various phases of
construction. The plan shall include the name and the 24-hour phone number of
a responsible party in case of emergency. If the importing or exporting of
dirt is necessary as demonstrated by the cut and fill quantities on the
grading plan, the plan shall also include the procedures necessary to keep
the public streets and private properties along the haul route free of dirt,
dust, and other debris. When an entire project is to be graded and the
subsequent construction on the site is to be completed in phases, the portion
of the site not under construction shall be treated with dust preventive
substance or plant materials and an irrigation system. All phased projects
shall submit a plan demonstrating that dust will not be generated from future
phase areas.



   (C)   Plan review.  The City Engineer or Building Official will be
responsible for the review and approval of the dust prevention and control
plan. This plan shall be incorporated into the grading plan and constructive
notice shall be placed on the grading plan to notify the owner and
contractors of the need to comply with the dust prevention and control plan.



   (D)   Dust control compliance statement.  A dust control compliance
statement form must be completed and signed by the property owner.



   (E)   Inadequate dust prevention and control measures.  If an
investigation of the project site indicates that dust prevention and control
measures are inadequate, the City Engineer or Building Official may limit or
halt all activities on the site until adequate dust prevention and control
measures are achieved. The City Engineer or Building Official may charge the
property owner and/or contractor for reasonable costs related to providing
the necessary site inspections to determine the adequacy of the dust control
plan.



   (F)   Notice of inadequate prevention and control measures.  If it
is determined that a property in violation of § 16.99.030, the City Engineer
or Building Official may deliver the property owner or contractor a written
notice of violation, and the property owner or contractor will then have 24
hours to bring the site into compliance. If after 24 hours, the site is not
brought into compliance or an extension of time has not been granted by the
City Engineer or Building Official, the violation may be prosecuted by the
City Attorney as a misdemeanor violation of the Municipal Code.



   (G)   Responsibility for adequate dust prevention and control.  The
approval of a dust prevention and control plan does not relieve the owner or
contractors of the responsibility to implement whatever additional measures
may be required to properly prevent and control dust as required by §
16.99.060.



   (H)   NPDES Stormwater Regulations.  The dust prevention and
control plan and any additional measures that may be necessary for the
adequate prevention and control of dust must comply with all applicable NPDES
Stormwater Regulations.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



CHAPTER 16.100:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   16.100.010      Purpose and intent



   16.100.020      Definitions



   16.100.030      Exempt activities



§ 16.100.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Chapters 16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining and
Reclamation) of this Title 16 are adopted pursuant to the California Surface
Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§2710 et seq.).



   (B)   The City Council finds and declares that the extraction of
minerals is essential to the continued economic well-being of the state and
to the needs of the society, and that the reclamation of mined lands is
necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to
protect the public health and safety.



   (C)   The Council further finds that the reclamation of mined lands
as provided in Chapters 16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining and
Reclamation) of this Title 16 will permit the continued mining of minerals
and will provide for the protection and subsequent beneficial use of the
mined and reclaimed land.



   (D)   The Council further finds that surface mining takes place in
diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological, and
social conditions are significantly different, and that reclamation
operations and the specifications for the reclamation may vary accordingly.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.100.020  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in Chapters 16.100
through 16.104 (Surface Mining and Reclamation) of this Title 16, will have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:



   EXPLORATION or PROSPECTING.  The search for minerals by geological,
geophysical, geochemical or other techniques, including but not limited to
sampling, assaying, drilling, or any surface or underground works needed to
determine the type, extent, or quantity of minerals present.



   MINED LANDS.  Includes the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an
area in which surface mining operations will be, are being or have been
conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area,
land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures,
facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which
result from or are used in surface mining operations are located.



   MINERALS.  Any naturally occurring chemical element or compound or
groups of elements and compounds formed from inorganic processes and organic
substances including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock,
but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.



   MINING WASTE.  The residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid,
vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property
directly resulting from or displaced by surface mining operations.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who is engaged in surface mining operations
himself or herself or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his
or her behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as
an employee with wages as his or her sole compensation.



   OVERBURDEN.  Soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural
mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal by
surface mining operations.



   RECLAMATION.  The process of land treatment that minimizes water
degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding,
erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including
adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands
are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate
land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may
extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands and may require backfilling,
grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other
measures.



   STATE BOARD.  The State Mining and Geology Board, in the Department of
Conservation.



   STATE GEOLOGIST. The individual holding office as structured in Cal.
Pub. Res. Code § 677.



   SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS. All or any part of the process involved in
the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining
directly from the mineral deposits; open-pit mining of minerals naturally
exposed; mining by the auger method; dredging and quarrying; or surface work
incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations include, but are
not limited to:



      (1)   In-place distillation, retorting or leaching;



      (2)   The production and disposal of mining waste; and



      (3)   Prospecting and exploratory activities.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.100.030  EXEMPT ACTIVITIES.



   The provisions of Chapters 16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining and
Reclamation) of this Title 16 are not applicable to the following:



   (A)   Excavations or grading conducted for farming or onsite
construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or
natural disaster, provided the grading and removal of material do not exceed
that required to meet the primary objective.



   (B)   Prospecting and exploration for minerals of commercial value
where less than 1,000 cubic yards of overburden is removed in any one
location of one acre or less.



   (C)   Any surface mining operation that does not involve either the
removal of a total of more than 1,000 cubic yards of minerals, ores, and
overburden or involve more than one acre in any one location.



   (D)   Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in
order to protect a mining claim, if such operations are conducted solely for
that purpose.



   (E)   Such other mining operations that the city determines to be of
an infrequent nature and which involve only minor surface disturbances and
are categorically identified by the State Board pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res.
Code §§ 2714(d) and 2758(c).



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



CHAPTER 16.102:  PERMIT AND RECLAMATION PLAN



Section



   16.102.010      Conditional use permit and reclamation plan
required



   16.102.020      Annual report required



   16.102.030      Compliance with State Surface Mining and
Reclamation Act



   16.102.040      Performance bond



   16.102.050      Periodic inspection



   16.102.060      Amendments to conditional use permit or
reclamation plans



§ 16.102.010  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT AND RECLAMATION PLAN REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person, except as provided in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 2776,
who proposes to engage in surface mining operations must, prior to the
commencement of such operations, obtain the following:



      (1)   A conditional use permit to mine in accordance with
Chapter 16.218 of this Title 16.



      (2)   Approval of a reclamation plan in accordance with
Chapters 16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining and Reclamation) of this Title
16 and as further provided in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 2770 et seq.



   (B)   No person who has obtained a vested right to conduct a surface
mining operation prior to January 1, 1975 will be required to secure a
conditional use permit as long as such vested right continues, provided that
no substantial change is made in that operation except in accordance with the
provisions of Chapters 16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining and Reclamation)
of this Title 16. A person will be deemed to have such vested rights if,
prior to January 1, 1976, that person has in good faith and in reliance upon
a conditional use permit, if such a permit was required, diligently commenced
surface mining operations and incurred substantial liabilities for work and
materials necessary for the operation.



   (C)   A person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface
mining operations prior to January 1, 1976 must submit to the Planning
Director a reclamation plan for operations to be conducted after January 1,
1976, unless a reclamation plan was approved by the city prior to January 1,
1976, and the person submitting that plan has accepted responsibility for
reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with that plan. The reclamation plan
will be approved or denied within three months of the date the Director deems
the plan complete.



   (D)   Nothing in Chapters 16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining and
Reclamation) of this Title 16 will be construed as requiring the filing of a
reclamation plan or the reclamation of mined lands on which surface mining
operations were conducted prior to but not after January 1, 1976.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.102.020  ANNUAL REPORT REQUIRED.



   The owner, lessor, lessee, agent, manager, or other person in charge of
any mining operation of whatever kind or character within the state must
forward to the Director of the State Department of Mines and Geology and the
city not later than July 1, 1991, and every year thereafter not later than an
anniversary date established by the Director, upon forms which are supplied
by the state, a report which contains all the required information specified
in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 2207 et. seq.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.102.030  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION ACT.



   (A)   The state geologist will be notified of the filing of all
applications.



   (B)   Required reclamation plans must consist of at least those
items as outlined in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 2770 et seq.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.102.040  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   Upon a finding by the Planning Commission that a supplemental guarantee
for the reclamation of the mined land is necessary, and upon the
determination by the Planning Director of the cost of the reclamation of the
mined land according to the reclamation plan, a surety bond, lien, or other
security guarantee conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
reclamation plan must be filed with the City Clerk. The surety must be
executed in favor of the city and will be reviewed and revised, as necessary,
bi-annually. The surety must be maintained in an amount equal to the cost of
completing the remaining reclamation of the site, as prescribed in the
approved or amended reclamation plan, during the succeeding two-year period
or other reasonable term.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.102.050  PERIODIC INSPECTION.



   As a condition of approval for the conditional use permit or the
reclamation plan or both, a schedule for periodic inspections of the site
will be established to evaluate continuing compliance with the permit and the
reclamation plan.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.102.060  AMENDMENTS TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT OR RECLAMATION PLAN.



   Amendments to an approved conditional use permit for surface mining
activity or to an approved reclamation plan must be processed in the same
manner as the original permit application.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



CHAPTER 16.104:  REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION OF SURFACE MINE



Section



   16.104.010      Access and circulation



   16.104.020      Performance standards



   16.104.030      Fencing and signage



   16.104.040      Removal of buildings and equipment



§ 16.104.010  ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.



   (A)   All access points from a mining operation directly to a public
roadway must have adequate sight distance provided to ensure traffic safety.



   (B)   The City Engineer may require the mine operator to post access
points to the mine to provide traffic direction to mining vehicles and to
ensure traffic safety.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.104.020  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Dust control.  Roads, driveways, and parking areas on the
site must be maintained to control dust and to comply with applicable
regulations established by the Ventura County Air Pollution Control District.



   (B)   Drainage and erosion control.



      (1)   Surface drainage must be controlled to prevent the
addition of silt or loose material above or beyond that normally occurring in
any existing drainage course.



      (2)   Silt, sand, and dirt must be controlled in a manner that
prevents such materials from being deposited on adjacent properties and
public rights-of-way.



      (3)   All provisions to control watercourses must be designed
to prevent overflow or diversion of water away from the natural point of
discharge.



      (4)   Adequate provisions for conveyance of water across and
from the site and for long-term retention of water must be accomplished in a
manner so as to minimize potential damages from erosion and landslide.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.104.030  FENCING AND SIGNAGE.



   (A)   Fencing.



      (1)   Fencing must be provided to enclose excavation areas,
settling basins, and other areas that pose potential public health and safety
hazards. Fencing must consist of, at a minimum, a six-foot-high steel, chain
link, or similar fence. Such fencing must be maintained in good condition and
repair.



      (2)   Gates of the same material and height as the fence must
be installed at all points of vehicular or pedestrian access. Said gates must
be equipped with keyed locks and must be kept locked at all times when not in
regular use.



   (B)   Signage.



      (1)   Within 90 days after a permit has been issued pursuant
to the provisions of Chapters 16.100 through 16.104 (Surface Mining and
Reclamation) of this Title 16, the outer boundaries of the site must be
continuously posted with signs not less than 500 feet apart and along each
property line. Said sign must contain letters at least four inches high
stating the following or similar language:



"THIS PROPERTY MAY BE USED FOR THE MINING, QUARRYING, OR COMMERCIAL
EXTRACTION OF SAND, GRAVEL, ROCK, AGGREGATE, CLAY, AND SIMILAR MATERIALS.
PLEASE OBSERVE APPROPRIATE SAFETY PRECAUTIONS."



      (2)   Required signs must be of a durable, weather-resistant
material and must be maintained in legible condition.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



§ 16.104.040  REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS AND EQUIPMENT.



   Buildings and equipment used in surface mining and quarrying operations
must be removed within six months of the termination of surface mining and
quarrying operations.



(Ord. 1103, passed 3-7-05)



CHAPTER 16.106:  GROWTH MANAGEMENT



Section



   16.106.010      Purpose and intent



   16.106.020      Application and exceptions



   16.106.030      Regulations by resolution



   16.106.040      Time limits



   16.106.050      Other applicable regulations



§ 16.106.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This chapter establishes the authority of the City Council to issue
regulations that place limitations on the issuance of residential building
permits within specified time periods.  Such limitations are considered
necessary to ensure that the rate and/or level of residential growth in the
city is consistent with regional growth management and resource protection
plans.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.106.020  APPLICATION AND EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter apply to all residential developments
that result in the creation of a new dwelling unit within any type of
residential development project, with the following exceptions:



   (A)   Single-family homes on vacant legal lots of record on the
effective date of City Council Ordinance No. 832.



   (B)   Residential units that are constructed to replace demolished
units, provided the replacement construction occurs within one year of the
demolition, that the replacement occurs on a 1-to-1 basis, and that the
demolition was accomplished with a valid city permit.



   (C)   Second dwelling units ("granny flats") constructed pursuant to
Chapter 16.13, Division 4 (Second Dwelling Units) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.106.030  REGULATIONS BY RESOLUTION.



   (A)   The City Council may, from time to time, issue by resolution
regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this
chapter, including the establishment of fees to provide for the processing of
applications.  The regulations provide for limitations on the issuance of
building permits for residential units based on the limits established by the
Ventura County Air Quality Management Plan and the 208 Water Quality Plan, as
said plans may be amended over time.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter will in no way require that the
city issue permits for a project which may not exceed the population
limitations which may be set forth by resolution.  The city will have the
right to review, approve, and deny residential development proposals through
the ordinary discretionary review processes set forth in Chapters 16.200
through 16.234 (Administration of Development Code) in this Title 16.



   (C)   The city may carry over allocations for previous review
periods into future review periods.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.106.040  TIME LIMITS.



   Time limits for submitting building plans, obtaining approved plans,
and commencement and completion of construction may be established by
Resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.106.050  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this Chapter 16.106, the
provisions of Chapter 16.200 (Administration of the Development Code) and
City Council Ordinance No. 832 apply to growth management allocations.



   City Council Ordinance No. 832



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.108:  TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT



Section



   16.108.010      Purpose and intent



   16.108.020      Applicability



   16.108.030      Transportation demand and trip reduction measures



   16.108.040      Review of transit impacts



   16.108.050      Monitoring and enforcement



   16.108.060      Definitions



§ 16.108.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The Ventura County Transportation Commission (VCTC) is
responsible for the preparation of the Congestion Management Plan (CMP) for
the County.  Among the state-mandated elements of the CMP is a trip
reduction and transportation demand management element that promotes
alternative transportation methods, such as carpools, vanpools, transit,
bicycles, walking, park-and-ride lots, improvement in the balance between
jobs and housing, and other strategies, including flexible work hours,
telecommuting and parking management programs.  The goals and policies of
the CMP also support the increased use of low- and no-emission vehicles.



   (B)   This chapter is intended to promote trip and travel demand
reduction measures in the city and to meet the TDM facilities ordinance
adoption requirement as set out in the CMP.  The requirements of District
Rule 210 are separate from this chapter and administrated by the District. 
This chapter sets forth the minimum requirements for meeting the CMP. 
Employers are encouraged to offer or provide additional inducements to use
alternatives to single-occupant vehicles to their employees necessary to meet
Rule 210 requirements.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.108.020  APPLICABILITY.



   Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant must make
provision for, at a minimum, all the applicable transportation demand
management and trip reduction measures contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.108.030  TRANSPORTATION DEMAND AND TRIP REDUCTION MEASURES.



   (A)   Nonresidential development projects: 50 to 99 employees. 
Nonresidential development projects serving 50 to 99 employees must provide a
bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information
located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. 
Information in the area must include, but is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit
routes serving the site;



      (2)   Ridesharing promotional material supplied by
commuter-oriented organizations;



      (3)   Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation
information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency,
Dial-A-Route, and local transit operators;



      (4)   Bicycle route and facility information, including
regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and



      (5)   A listing of facilities and services available for
carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the
site.



   (B)   Nonresidential development projects: 100 to 149 employees. 
Nonresidential development projects with 100 to 149 employees must comply
with subsection (A) above and must provide all of the following to the
satisfaction of the city:



      (1)   Not less than 10% of the employee parking area must be
located as close as practical to the employee entrance(s) and must be
reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing
handicapped and customer parking needs.  This preferential carpool/vanpool
parking area must be identified on the site plan upon application for a
building permit, to the satisfaction of the city.  A statement that
preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and
description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the
required transportation information board.  Spaces will be signed/striped as
demand warrants; provided that at all times at least one space for projects
of 50,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet, and two spaces for projects
over 100,000 square feet, will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.



      (2)   Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must
be accessible to vanpool vehicles.  When located within a parking structure,
a minimum vertical interior clearance of 7 feet 2 inches must be provided for
those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles.  Adequate turning
radii and parking space dimensions (minimum 9 feet by 19 feet) must also be
included in vanpool parking areas.



      (3)   Bicycle lockers or other secure bicycle parking must be
provided near building entrances to accommodate four bicycles per the first
50,000 square feet of gross floor area and one bicycle per each additional
50,000 square feet.  Calculations that result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher
must be rounded up to the nearest whole number.  Specific facilities and
locations (e.g. provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) must be to the
satisfaction of the city.



      (4)   Safe and convenient access from the external circulation
system to bicycle parking facilities on site.



   (C)   Nonresidential development projects: 150+ employees. 
Nonresidential development serving 150 or more employees must comply with
subsections (A) and (B) above and must provide all of the following measures
to the satisfaction of the city:



      (1)   A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool
vehicles may deliver or board their passengers.  Passenger loading areas
should be located as close as possible to the building entrance and should be
designated in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation in the
parking area.



      (2)   Sidewalks or other designated pathways following, to the
greatest extent feasible, direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian
circulation system to, and between, each building in the development.



      (3)   If determined necessary by the city to mitigate project
traffic congestion or air quality impacts, bus stop improvements must be
provided.  The city will consult with the local bus service providers in
determining appropriate improvements (e.g. bus pullouts, bus pads, shelters,
and the like).  When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances,
entrances should be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby
transit stations/stops.



      (4)   Development design must incorporate, to the extent
feasible, showers, changing rooms, lockers, and the like, for employees who
bicycle, jog or walk to work.  Projects that are required to construct
showers are exempt from the conditional use permit requirements of §
16.15.060 (Bathing and Showering Facilities) of this Title 16.



      (5)   Development design must incorporate lunchrooms,
cafeterias, eating establishments, and other facilities that will reduce the
need for mid-day driving.



      (6)   Development design must incorporate, to the greatest
extent feasible, interconnected circulation systems, such as joined parking
lots, to reduce the need for cars to travel on the street when traveling from
one business to another.



   (D)   Residential development projects: 100 to 349 units. 
Residential development projects of 100 to 349 dwelling units must provide
the following to the satisfaction of the city:



      (1)   Safe, convenient, and direct pedestrian and bicycle
access from the internal circulation system to adjacent collector and/or
arterial roadways.



      (2)   If determined necessary by the city, bus stop
improvements must be provided.  The city will consult with the local bus
service providers in determining appropriate improvements.



   (E)   Residential development projects: 350+ units.  Residential
development of 350 dwelling units or more must comply with subsection (D)
above and must comply with the following to the satisfaction of the city:



   Development design must, to the greatest extent possible and as
appropriate based on adjacent land use and markets, incorporate services such
as dry cleaners, eating establishments, child care facilities, grocery
markets, neighborhood work centers and other facilities which will reduce
home-based vehicle trips and vehicle miles traveled.  Such services must, to
the greatest extent feasible, interconnect to circulation systems.



   (F)   Maintenance of facilities.  All facilities and improvements
construction or otherwise required must be maintained in a state of good
repair.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.108.040  REVIEW OF TRANSIT IMPACTS.



   (A)   Prior to approval of any development project for which an
environmental impact report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the
requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a
local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators
providing service to the project must be identified and consulted to provide
input.  Pursuant to the provision of CEQA, transit operators will be sent a
Notice of Preparation (NOP) for all contemplated EIRs and will, as part of
the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the
project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements
which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation
measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and
recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator will be
evaluated in the draft EIR prepared for the project.  Related mitigation
measures adopted will be monitored through the mitigation monitoring
requirements of CEQA.



   (B)   Phased development projects, development projects subject to a
development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals
need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to
the project.  It will remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine
when a project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a
previously certified EIR.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.108.050  MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Compliance with the standards required in this chapter will be
ensured by the following two methods:



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy
for projects which are newly constructed or expanded, city staff will inspect
the property to ensure that all amenities, facilities and measures required
in this chapter and all conditions of approval have been fulfilled; and



      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a business license, staff will
inspect all projects for which amenities, facilities, and measures or
conditions of approval were provided in order to comply with this chapter, to
ensure ongoing compliance with the standards or conditions of this chapter. 
For example, if preferential parking spaces and bicycle lockers were
installed on a project in order to meet the requirements of this chapter, all
subsequent property owners must maintain the same amenities, facilities, or
measures.



   (B)   Failure to comply with this chapter will be enforced according
to applicable provisions of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.108.060  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION. The use or modes of transportation other
than the single-passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to
carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.



   APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT.  Any development project that is determined to
meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in § 16.108.030.



   BUSPOOL.  A vehicle with at least 16 seating positions used and
maintained primarily for carrying commuters to and from work.



   CARPOOL.  A vehicle occupied by two or more persons aged 16 years or
older commuting to or from work and/or school.



   DEVELOPER.  The builder who is responsible for the planning, design
and construction of an applicable development project.  A developer may be
responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by
the property owner if defined by a legal agreement.



   DEVELOPMENT.  The construction or addition of new building square
footage.  Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter and which exceed the thresholds defined in
§ 16.54.030 will comply with the applicable requirements but will not be
added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage will
be exempt from these requirements.  All calculations will be based on gross
square footage.



   EMPLOYEE PARKING AREA.  The portion of the total required parking at a
development used by on-site employees.  For information purposes, based upon
information developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE),
broad employee parking needs could be calculated as follows:



 


Type of Use

 

% of Required Parking



Devoted to Employees



Commercial
 

30%



Office/Professional
 

85%



Industrial/Manufacturing
 

95%




 



   NEIGHBORHOOD WORK CENTER.  A location in a community where facilities
are provided either by public or private means for shared employee work
activities.



   PREFERENTIAL PARKING.  Parking spaces designated or assigned, through
use of a sign or painted space markings, for carpool and vanpool vehicles
carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a
location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces
provided for single-occupant vehicles.



   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM).  The alteration of travel
behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through programs of incentives,
services and policies.  TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant
vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules
that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate then altogether (as is
the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks).



   TRIP.  At a minimum, the starting of an engine and the travel from an
origin to a destination.  If the trip is nonstop, it also means the round
trip to and from an origin.



   TRIP REDUCTION.  Reduction in the number of work-related trips made by
single-occupant vehicles.



   VANPOOL.  A group of at least seven commuters traveling to work in a
vehicle designed for carrying more than six but less than 16 persons,
including the driver, which is maintained and used primarily for work related
transportation of adults for the purpose of ride sharing.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.110:  NONCONFORMITIES



Section




   16.110.010   Purpose and intent





   16.110.020   Establishment of nonconforming status





   16.110.030   Nonconforming uses - continued use after damage or
destruction





   16.110.040   Nonconforming use - voluntary demolition of structure





   16.110.050   Nonconforming use - lack of conditional use permit





   16.110.060   Nonconforming use - allowed only by conditional use
permit





   16.110.070   Continuation and maintenance





   16.110.080   Nonconforming status tied to property





   16.110.090   Abatement





   16.110.100   Nonconforming uses - allowable changes





   16.110.110   Abandonment





   16.110.120   Nonconforming structures - generally





   16.110.130   Nonconforming structures - reconstruction of
multi-family residential structures





   16.110.140   Nonconforming structures - reconstruction of
single-family dwellings and non-residential structures





   16.110.150   Nonconforming fences and walls





   16.110.160   Historic properties





   16.110.170   Nonconforming lot





   16.110.180   Nonconformity abatement - notice





   16.110.190   Public hearing





   16.110.200   Findings and decisions





   16.110.210   Appeals





   16.110.220   Extension of time





   16.110.230   City removal




§ 16.110.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This chapter establishes regulations for legal nonconforming land uses,
structures, and parcels. These are land uses, structures, and parcels within
the city that were lawfully established, constructed, or subdivided before
the adoption or amendment of this Code, but which would be prohibited,
regulated, or restricted differently under the current terms of this Code or
its amendments.  This chapter is intended to encourage the city's continuing
improvement by limiting the extent to which nonconforming structures and uses
may continue to be used, expanded, or replaced, while improving the health,
safety, and welfare of all residents without creating an economic hardship
for individual property or business owners.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-10-04; Am. Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.020  ESTABLISHMENT OF NONCONFORMING STATUS.



   (A)   Applicability.  Nonconforming uses, structures and lots
within the city may continue to be used, and may be maintained, altered,
expanded, reconstructed, or replaced only as allowed by this chapter.



   (B)   This chapter does not apply to any nonconforming structures
owned in whole or part by the city.  Nothing in this chapter is intended to,
nor can it, require the city to remove a publicly owned nonconforming
structure or use.



   (C)   Effective date.  Whenever a use, structure, or lot becomes
nonconforming as a result of amending this Code, the time period for
eliminating the use established by this Code is computed from the effective
date of the amendment.



   (D)   Legal nonconforming use.  An existing use, structure, or lot
is deemed to be "legal nonconforming" if, prior to its establishment, such
use, structure, or lot was established or created in full conformance with
applicable regulations in effect at the time of such establishment or
creation.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.030  NONCONFORMING USES – CONTINUED USE AFTER DAMAGE OR
DESTRUCTION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by applicable law, a nonconforming
residential use occupying a structure that is damaged or destroyed by fire,
earthquake, or other calamity beyond the property owner's control may be
re-established.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided by applicable law, a nonconforming
non-residential use occupying a structure that is damaged or destroyed by
fire, earthquake, or other calamity beyond the property owner's control may
be re-established with a conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.040  NONCONFORMING USE – VOLUNTARY DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURE.



   A nonconforming use which occupies a structure that is voluntarily
demolished or demolished because of a maintenance failure or other neglect
can be replaced only with a use that complies with all applicable provisions
of this Code.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.050  NONCONFORMING USE – LACK OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   A use that is nonconforming because it lacks a conditional use permit
may continue only to the extent that it previously existed (e.g., floor or
site area occupied by the use, hours of operation). Any change to such use
requires a conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.060  NONCONFORMING USE – ALLOWED ONLY BY CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   A nonconforming use previously allowed by a conditional use permit but
is no longer permitted by the Code within the applicable zoning district can
continue in operation, but only in compliance with all provisions of the
original conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.070  CONTINUATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   A nonconforming non-residential use, structure, or lot may continue to
be used until such time it is required to be abated provided no alterations,
expansions, or modifications of area or use are made, except as otherwise
permitted by this chapter.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.080  NONCONFORMING STATUS TIED TO PROPERTY.



   Restrictions and conditions affecting nonconforming uses, structures,
and lots apply to that use, building, and structures, and are not affected by
ownership changes.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.090  ABATEMENT.



   Non-residential nonconforming uses must be abated or brought into
conformance with this Code in accordance with the following amortization
schedule:



TABLE 110-1 Abatement of Nonconforming Nonresidential Uses



 


Zone or Use

 
Abatement
Schedule


1.  In any zone, a nonconforming non-residential use not occupying a
structure.
 
1 year


2.  In any zone, a nonconforming non-residential use located in a structure
with less than 100 square feet of gross floor area.
 
3 years


3.  Any zone – Use not permitted
 
5 years



 



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.100  NONCONFORMING USES – ALLOWABLE CHANGES.



   (A)   Enlargement or expansion.  A nonconforming use cannot be
enlarged or increased to occupy a greater floor area or portion of the site
than it lawfully occupied before becoming a nonconforming use. Alterations
which do not increase or enlarge a nonconforming use may be approved.



   (B)   Extended hours. The hours of business for a nonconforming use
may be expanded to operate under extended business hours with a conditional
use permit.



   (C)   No nonconforming use can be changed to a less restrictive
nonconforming use.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.110  ABANDONMENT.



   A nonconforming use that is voluntarily discontinued or ceased
operations for a continuous period of 12 months or more cannot be
re-established on the site. Any further use of an existing structure or site
must be used in conformity with all applicable provisions of this Code.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.120  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES – GENERALLY.



   (A)   Expansions. A nonconforming structure cannot be expanded,
except as required by law, unless such expansion results in elimination of
the nonconformity.



   (B)   Maintenance, repair, and alterations. A nonconforming
structure may be regularly maintained and repaired. Alterations without
expansion are permitted if they improve the appearance or stability of the
structure.



   (C)   A building or structure which does not conform to the yard
regulations applicable to the zone in which such building or structure is
located may be structurally altered only when:



      (1)   The alteration causes the building or structure to
conform to the applicable yard regulations;



      (2)   The alteration or enlargement does not project into any
required yard; or



      (3)   The alteration or enlargement is an extension of that
portion of the existing building or structure that encroaches into a required
yard; provided, however, the alteration or enlargement cannot extend into the
required yard farther than the existing portion and cannot have an area
greater than 50% of the area of the existing portion within the required yard
(see Figure 110-1). This allowance may only be utilized once on a property;
future alterations or enlargements after the initial 50% allowance has been
used on a property may not encroach into the required yard.







 



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.130  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES – RECONSTRUCTION OF MULTI-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, a residential
nonconforming structure containing two or more dwelling units that is damaged
or destroyed by fire, earthquake, or other calamity beyond the property
owner's control may be reconstructed in compliance with this Code as follows.



   (A)   The replacement structure contains at most the same number of
dwelling units and floor area as the damaged structure;



   (B)   The replacement structure complies with all other applicable
provisions of this Code to the maximum extent feasible;



   (C)   Reconstruction or rebuilding of the structure will not be
detrimental or injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
persons residing or working in the neighborhood, or will not be detrimental
or injurious to the property and improvements in the neighborhood;



   (D)   A complete application for reconstruction is submitted within
12 months of the date of damage, and reconstruction is commenced within 180
days of land use permit approval; and



   (E)   Reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding of a multi-family
dwelling or duplex may be prohibited if the Planning Commission finds that
the reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding will be detrimental or
injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood, or will be detrimental or injurious to property
and improvements in the neighborhood.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.140  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES – RECONSTRUCTION OF SINGLE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS AND NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, a damaged single-family
dwelling or non-residential structure that is damaged or destroyed by fire,
earthquake, or other calamity beyond the property owner's control may be
reconstructed in compliance with this Code as follows.



   (A)   Less than 50% destruction.  A structure with 50% or more of
the total length of its original exterior walls remaining in place after the
damaging event, requiring no replacement, may be reconstructed provided that:



      (1)   The reconstructed structure occupies the same footprint
or decreases the nonconformity of the structure, and is of no greater height
than the original structure; and,



      (2)   A complete application demonstrating compliance with
Title 15 for reconstruction is submitted within 12 months of the date of
damage, and reconstruction is commenced within 180 days of land use permit
approval.



   (B)   More than 50% destruction. A structure that is damaged so that
more than 50% of the total length of its exterior walls must be replaced, may
also be reconstructed, provided that:



      (1)   The reconstructed structure occupies the same footprint
or decreases the nonconformity of the structure, complies with the city's
design standards to the extent feasible, and is of no greater height than the
original structure;



      (2)   A complete application for reconstruction demonstrating
compliance with Title 15 is submitted within 12 months of the date of damage,
and reconstruction is commenced within one year from land use permit
approval; and;



      (3)   The reconstructed structure must provide at least as
much parking as previously existed and as much as determined by the Director
to be feasible.



   (C)   Replacement after destruction of nonconforming residential
structures. A nonconforming residential structure that is completely
destroyed by fire, earthquake, or other calamity beyond the property owner's
control may be replaced provided that:



      (1)   The replacement structure occupies the same footprint or
decreases the nonconformity of the structure, complies with the city's design
standards to the extent feasible, and is of no greater height than the
original structure; and



      (2)   A complete application for reconstruction demonstrating
compliance with Title 15 is submitted within 12 months of the date of damage,
and reconstruction is commenced within one year from land use permit approval.



   (D)   Replacement after destruction of nonconforming non-residential
uses.  A nonconforming non-residential structure that is completely
destroyed by fire, earthquake, or other calamity beyond the property owner's
control can be replaced only with a structure that complies with all
applicable provisions of this Code.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.150  NONCONFORMING FENCES AND WALLS.



   Nonconforming fences and walls cannot be enlarged or altered unless
they are altered to conform with this Code.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.160  HISTORIC PROPERTIES.



   Based upon substantial evidence, the Planning Commission can find that
a national-, state-, or local-designated historic use or structure is
nonconforming and exempt from this chapter.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.170  NONCONFORMING LOT.



   (A)   Allowed use of a nonconforming parcel.  A parcel that does
not comply with the applicable requirements of this Code for minimum lot
area, dimensions, or access, is considered to be a legal building site for
the purposes of development or the establishment of a new land use only if:



      (1)   The parcel was previously a legal lot of record; or



      (2)   The parcel has a Certificate of Compliance.



   (B)   Development and use standards. Any proposed development or use
of a nonconforming parcel must comply with all applicable requirements of
this Code.



   (C)   Further division prohibited. A nonconforming parcel cannot be
further subdivided, and its boundaries may be changed through lot line
adjustment only if the extent of the nonconformity remains unchanged or is
reduced.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.180  NONCONFORMITY ABATEMENT – NOTICE.



   (A)   Upon determination by the Planning Director that a use on a
given parcel of land is a nonconforming use and the permitted abatement
period has lapsed, the Director must send a notice to the owner of the
parcel, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, identifying the
requirement for abatement. Such notice must be sent by a method certifying
delivery of the notice.



   (B)   The notice required by this section must state the following:



      (1)   The property in question contains a nonconforming use;



      (2)   The date the use became nonconforming; and



      (3)   The date of required abatement established in this Code.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.190  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   Within 30 days after the city issues a notice, the owner of
the subject property may request a public hearing before the Planning
Commission to consider the matter.



   (B)   The Planning Commission must receive written and oral
testimony at such hearing with regard to abatement of the nonconformity.



   (C)   At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission
must find and determine whether the nonconformity should be abated or whether
a time extension should be granted. The Commission must base its decision as
to the length of the permitted abatement period on evidence including,
without limitation, the depreciation schedule attached to the owner's latest
federal income tax return.



   (D)   The Planning Commission must also find and determine whether
the nonconformity can economically be used in its present condition or if the
nonconformity can be successfully modified for a purpose permitted by the
zone in which it is located.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.200  FINDINGS AND DECISIONS.



   (A)   The decision of the Planning Commission and the findings in
support of the decision must be in the form of a written order and be served
to the property owner personally or by a method certifying delivery within
ten calendar days after the decision is rendered.



   (B)   Findings must be made as to whether or not the balancing of
the public interest and the request by the owner for continuance complies
with the intent of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.210  APPEALS.



   The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council in accordance with this Code.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.220  EXTENSION OF TIME.



   (A)   In establishing the time periods for the termination of
nonconforming uses, the city recognizes that there may be some uses which
entail a substantial investment in time and money and which require a greater
period of time for abatement of the investment than that set forth in the
timetable. Any party may file a petition to the Planning Commission for an
extension of time for the termination of a nonconforming use. The Planning
Commission may direct the Planning Director to conduct a study of the
specific use and prepare a report recommending the appropriate time for
termination of the use.



   (B)   The Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, at its
discretion, may grant an extension of time for the abatement of nonconformity
where it finds that an unreasonable hardship would otherwise be imposed on
the property owner.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



§ 16.110.230  CITY REMOVAL.



   If removal of a nonconforming use is not performed within the
termination period determined by the Planning Commission in accordance with
this chapter, the city can remove the nonconforming use. Any cost of removal
can be charged to the property owner or recorded as a lien on the subject
property, in accordance with this Code.



(Ord. 1181, passed 11-19-07)



CHAPTER 16.200:  ADMINISTRATION - GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   16.200.010      Purpose and intent



   16.200.020      Type of review procedures in effect



   16.200.030      Review bodies established



   16.200.040      Purpose and responsibilities of the hearing bodies



§ 16.200.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This Chapters 16.200 through 16.236 (Administration of the Development
Code) establishes the regulations for the effective and efficient
implementation of the Santa Paula Development Code (Title 16 of the Municipal
Code).  Chapters 16.200 through 16.236 contain the procedures for
discretionary review of development applications, criteria for acceptance of
applications for discretionary actions, and general standards for processing
of applications.  The provisions of Chapters 16.200 through 16.236 provide
for a system of development review that is open to the public and responsive
to the needs of the community.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.200.020  TYPE OF REVIEW PROCEDURES IN EFFECT.



   Table 200-1 outlines the types of review procedures in effect in Santa
Paula.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.200.030  REVIEW BODIES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The City Council and Planning Commission will serve as hearing
bodies in the City of Santa Paula.



   (B)   The City Council will be established as set forth in Title
III, Chapter 30 of the Santa Paula Municipal Code.



   (C)   The Planning Commission will be established as set forth in
Title III, Chapter 32 of the Santa Paula Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



 




TABLE 200-1
Hearing Bodies And Responsibilities




Type of Application

 

Planning Director (a)

 

Planning Commission (b)

 

City Council




Authority to Approve or Deny

 

Advisory to Planning Comm. or City Council

 

Authority to Approve or Deny (c)

 

Advisory to City Council (c)

 

Final Authority (c)



Agricultural Preserves & Land Consv.  (See Ch. 16.214)
 


 

X

 


 


 

X



Annexation  (See Ch. 16.236)
 


 

X

 


 

X

 

X (d)



Conditional Use Permit  (See Ch. 16.218)
 


 

X

 

X

 


 




Design Review  (See Ch. 16.226)
 

X

 


 


 


 




Development Agreement  (See Ch. 16.234)
 


 

X

 


 

X

 

X



Development Code Text Amendment  (See Ch. 16.208)
 


 

X

 


 

X

 

X



General Plan Amendment  (See Ch. 16.212)
 


 

X

 


 

X

 

X



Home Occupation Permit  (See Ch. 16.230)
 

X

 


 


 


 




Lot Line Adjustment (See Ch. 16.80)
 

X

 


 


 


 




Minor Modification  (See Ch. 16.222)
 

X

 


 


 


 




Parcel Map  (See Ch. 16.80)

    No dedication of land

    Dedication or offer of

      dedication of land
 




X

 







X

 


 


 







X



Planned Development Permit  (See Ch. 16.31)
 


 

X

 

X

 


 




Reversion to Acreage (See Ch. 16.80)
 


 

X

 


 


 

X



Second Unit Permit (See Ch. 16.227)
 

X

 


 


 


 






 


Type of Application

 

Planning Director (a)

 

Planning Commission (b)

 

City Council




Authority to Approve or Deny

 

Advisory to Planning Comm. or City Council

 

Authority to Approve or Deny (c)

 

Advisory to City Council (c)

 

Final Authority (c)





Specific Plan  (See Ch. 16.216)
 


 

X

 


 

X

 

X



Temporary Use Permit  (See Ch. 16.228)
 

X

 


 


 


 




Tract Map  (See Ch. 16.80)

    Tentative Map

    Final Map
 


 




X



X

 


 




X

 




X



X



Tree Removal Permit (See Ch. 16.232)
 

X

 


 


 


 




Variance  (See Ch. 16.220)
 


 

X

 

X

 


 




Zone Change  (See Ch. 16.210)
 


 

X

 


 

X

 

X



Zoning Clearance  (See Ch. 16.224)
 

X

 


 


 


 






 



   Notes:   (a)   All decisions of the Planning Director are
appealable to the Planning Commission.



         (b)   All decisions of the Planning Commission are
appealable to the City Council.



         (c)   Public Hearing Required



         (d)   Subject to approval by LAFCO



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.200.040  PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HEARING BODIES.



   (A)   City Council.  The City Council will act as the final arbiter
to interpret and to ensure enforcement of the provisions of this Title 16,
subject to the rules of conduct and responsibilities established by city
ordinances.  The City Council will be responsible for conducting the public
hearings set forth in Table 200-1.



   (B)   Planning Commission.



      (1)   The Planning Commission's responsibilities and duties
with respect to the implementation and interpretation of this Title 16 will
be as follows:



         (a)   Those responsibilities and duties described in the
state planning, zoning, and development laws contained in Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 65100 et seq.



         (b)   Such duties as may be designated by the City
Council.



      (2)   The Planning Commission will be responsible for
conducting the public hearings set forth in Table 200-1, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public Hearings) of this Title 16.



   (C)   Planning Director.  The Planning Director will have the
authority to approve certain discretionary permits, as set forth in Table
200-1.  The Director may designate a city staff member to act on his
behalf.  Thus, in this Chapter 16.200, the term Planning Director will mean
the Director or his designee, where such reference is made to a review,
discretionary action, or approval.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.202:  APPLICATIONS, PROCESSING, FILING, AND FEES



Section



   16.202.010      Application materials



   16.202.020      Requirements for complete application



   16.202.030      Application review and processing



   16.202.040      Concurrent applications



   16.202.050      Environmental review



   16.202.060      Fees



   16.202.070      Performance security



   16.202.080      Application denial - Reapplication



   16.202.090   Concurrent expiration of permits



§ 16.202.010  APPLICATION MATERIALS.



   (A)   Any person or authorized representative desiring a permit or
approval required by this Title 16 shall file an application with the
Planning Director or the designee.



   (B)   The Planning Director shall prescribe the form in which
applications shall be made permits and approvals pursuant to this Title 16. 
The Planning Director may prepare and provide blank forms for such purpose
and may prescribe the type of information to be submitted in the application
by the applicant.



   (C)   Information required as part of an application shall, at a
minimum, include:



      (1)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the
property owner and applicant;



      (2)   Proof of ownership;



      (3)   A letter of authorization from the property owner, if
the applicant is other than the owner; and



      (4)   Address and legal description of the properties involved.



   (D)   An application for a variance, planned development permit,
conditional use permit, or design review approval shall be accompanied by a
description of the proposed use or project and the information required on
the submittal requirements list available in the Planning Department.



   (E)   For applications requiring a public hearing as a scheduled
matter, the applicant shall submit a list of all persons or agents owning
properties within a 300-foot radius from the exterior boundaries of the
subject property, or as required by law.  Such list shall be accompanied by
copies of all Ventura County Assessor's maps used in preparing the list, and
an affidavit certifying that the list is true and correct and has been
obtained from the most recent assessment role of the Ventura County Assessor
no longer than 90 days prior to the filing of the application.



   (F)   For applications for projects involving the use of hazardous
materials, the handling of solid waste, or alcohol sales and service, the
applicant shall submit a list of all persons or agents owning properties
within a 1,000-foot radius from the exterior boundaries of the subject
property.  Such list shall be accompanied by copies of all Ventura County
Assessor's maps used in preparing the list and an affidavit certifying that
the list is true and correct and has been obtained from the most recent
assessment role of the Ventura County Assessor no longer than 90 days prior
to the filing of the application.



   (G)   The Planning Director may waive the filing of one or more of
the items listed in subparagraph (D) above or may require other pertinent
information to be submitted.



   (H)   The accuracy of all information submitted shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.



   (I)   In the event that delays are encountered in the processing of
an application, the list of surrounding property owners shall be updated to
be no older than 90 days prior to the scheduled hearing date.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.202.020  REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETE APPLICATION.



   No application shall be processed until it has been deemed complete by
the Planning Director or the designee.  No application shall be deemed
complete until all required information is provided in the required quantity
and format.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.202.030  APPLICATION REVIEW AND PROCESSING.



   (A)   Within 30 days after receiving an application for a
development project, the Planning Director shall determine in writing whether
an application is complete.  Such a determination shall be transmitted
immediately to the applicant at the address indicated on the application form.



   (B)   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Planning
Director shall specify those parts of the application that are incomplete,
and shall indicate the manner in which they can be made complete.



   (C)   After the Planning Director has accepted an application as
complete, the Planning Director shall not subsequently request of an
applicant any new or additional information that was not required as part of
the application originally determined to be complete.



   (D)   The Planning Director may in the course of processing an
application, require the applicant to clarify, amplify, correct, or otherwise
supplement the information required for the original application.



   (E)   Termination of incomplete application.  Upon written
notification to the applicant, processing of an incomplete application may be
terminated if no reasonable effort has been made by the applicant to complete
the application for a period of six months from the date of notification of
incompleteness.  All unused fees shall be refunded to the applicant.  An
extension to this six-month period may be granted by the Planning Director on
written request by the applicant showing good cause.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.202.040  CONCURRENT APPLICATIONS.



   Whenever more than one permit or approval is required for a proposed
development project or use, all applications shall be filed and processed
concurrently.  All such related applications shall be reviewed in accordance
with the procedures set forth for the application requiring the highest level
of review.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.202.050  ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.



   All applications deemed complete in accordance with Title 16 of this
Code and, if applicable, General Plan Sections III(F) or III(G), require
environmental review in accordance with the requirements of the California
Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq.) and the
regulations promulgated thereunder (14 Cal. Code of Regulations §§ 15000 et
seq.).



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



§ 16.202.060  FEES.



   (A)   Each applicant for a land use action authorized by this Title
16 shall pay those fees and costs as established by resolution of the City
Council.



   (B)   At any time prior to final action on any application filed
pursuant to this Title 16, the applicant, by written request filed with the
Planning Department or with the City Council, if action by the Planning
Department has been completed thereon, may withdraw the application and
terminate further consideration thereof.



   (C)   Where such written request has been filed and the application
withdrawn, the applicant may file a proper claim for refund of any fee paid
for the filing of such application.  Upon approval of the claim by the
Planning Director, the City Council may order the refund of such fee less any
costs the Council may determine to have been incurred by the city incidental
to action or proposed action on the application.



   (D)   Application for refund of fees shall be made in the manner and
on the form prescribed for refund authorized by the California Government
Code.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.202.070  PERFORMANCE SECURITY.



   (A)   Whenever a Variance, Planned Development Permit, or
Conditional Use Permit is granted by the Planning Commission or the City
Council upon any condition or limitation, or for a limited period of time,
the Commission or Council may require the applicant to furnish security in
the form of money or a surety bond in an amount fixed by the Commission or
Council to ensure compliance with the conditions and limitations, including
the limitation of time, upon which the Variance, Planned Development Permit,
or Conditional Use Permit is granted.



   (B)   Every such bond shall be a penalty bond in a form satisfactory
to the City Attorney, payable to the City of Santa Paula, and conditioned
upon compliance with the conditions and limitations, including the limitation
of time, upon which such Variance, Planned Development Permit, or Conditional
Use Permit is granted.



   (C)   Upon the breach of any condition or limitation, including the
limitation of time, upon which the Variance, Planned Development Permit, or
Conditional Use Permit is granted, the money or the bond furnished as
security shall be forfeited to the city, and such money or the money
collected on any such bond shall be paid into the general fund of the City of
Santa Paula.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.202.080  APPLICATION DENIAL - REAPPLICATION.



   (A)   Whenever an application or portion of an application has been
denied or revoked and the denial or revocation becomes final, no new
application for the same or similar request may be accepted within one year
of the date of the denial, unless the Planning Director finds that the
conditions surrounding the application have sufficiently changed to warrant a
new application. 



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, "changed conditions" shall
mean a substantial change in land use on properties in the vicinity, improved
infrastructure in the vicinity, altered traffic patterns, or any such similar
change resulting in a changed physical environment.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.202.090  CONCURRENT EXPIRATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   The grantee of a permit or variance shall be given a time
limit as specified in this Title 16 to establish a right to use the permit or
variance.  Failure to exercise the right within the specified time limit
shall render the permit or variance null and void.



   (B)   Should a property be granted with more than one permit or
variance, or combination thereof, failure to exercise the right of any permit
or variance within the specified time limit shall cause the concurrent
expiration of all permits or variances associated with the property.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.204:  PUBLIC HEARINGS



Section



   16.204.010      Noticing



   16.204.020      Evidence of notice



   16.204.030      Failure to send notice



   16.204.040      Hearing procedures



§ 16.204.010  NOTICING.



   (A)   For applications requiring a public hearing before the
Planning Commission, such hearings shall be set by the Planning Director. 
For applications requiring a public hearing before the City Council, such
hearings shall be set by the City Clerk.



   (B)   In all cases, the first hearing shall be held within 60 days
of the date on which the application has been deemed as complete, unless a
longer time is required to accommodate environmental review under the
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act.



   (C)   Notice of the time and place of public hearings shall be given
at least ten calendar days before the public hearing, as provided in this
Chapter 16.204.  Such notice shall include a general description of the
matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected.



      (1)   Notice of any public hearing to consider any proposed
amendment to this Title 16 or any general plan amendment shall be published
at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated
in the City of Santa Paula. 



      (2)   Notice of any public hearing to consider an annexation,
Planned Development permit, Variance, Conditional Use Permit, tentative map,
specific plan or Development Agreement shall be:



         (a)   Mailed or delivered to all persons including
businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities owning real
property within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the
property which is the subject of the proposed land use application as such
owners and their addresses are shown on the current assessment roll of the
Ventura County Assessor;



         (b)   Published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation, published and circulated in the city; and



         (c)   Posted in conspicuous places on the property
affected, in accordance with City Council Resolution 3404.



      (3)   Notice of any public hearing to consider any use
involving the use of hazardous materials, the handling of solid waste, or
off-site alcohol sales must be:



         (a)   Mailed or delivered to all persons including
businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities owning real
property within a radius of 1,000 feet of the exterior boundaries of the
property which is the subject of the proposed land use application as such
owners and their addresses are shown on the current assessment roll of the
Ventura County Assessor;



         (b)   Published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation, published and circulated in the city; and



         (c)   Posted in conspicuous places on and in the near
vicinity of the property affected, in accordance with City Council Resolution
3404.



   (D)   Where application is made for a change of zone, the Planning
Director or the Planning Commission shall have the discretion to include in
the notice of hearing on such application, notice that the Planning
Commission will consider classification of other than that for which
application is made.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.204.020  EVIDENCE OF NOTICING.



   When notice of a hearing is given pursuant to this Chapter 16.204, the
following documentation shall be deemed sufficient to serve as proof that
such notice was given:



   (A)   Publication.  When notice is given by publication, an
affidavit of publication by the newspaper in which the publication was made.



   (B)   Mailing.  When notice is given by mail or other delivery, an
affidavit or proof of mailing/delivery must be made, showing, at a minimum,
the date or dates of mailing/delivery and the list of persons and groups to
which the mailing/delivery was made.  Failure to send notice to any property
owner whose address is not on the most recent roll of the Ventura County
Assessor shall not invalidate any of the proceedings.



   (C)   Site sign posting.  When notice is posted on a property, an
affidavit certifying that a notice of public hearing sign was posted on the
project site must be completed at least 11 days prior to the date of the
public hearing.  The affidavit must also include a picture of the sign with
each date change.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.204.030  FAILURE TO SEND NOTICE.



   Failure to send notice to any property owner whose address is not on
the most recent roll of the Ventura County Assessor shall not invalidate any
of the proceedings.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.204.040  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Hearing body review.



      (1)   At the public hearing, the authorized hearing body shall
review the application and any pertinent materials submitted with the
application, and any report prepared by the Planning Director, the City
Engineer, or other city staff based on city staff's investigation of the
application.



      (2)   The hearing body shall cause such investigation of facts
on an application set for hearing, including an analysis of precedent cases,
to provide all necessary information to assure action on each case consistent
with the purpose of this Title 16 and with previous similar applications. 
Investigations may be made by members of the City Council, the Planning
Commission, or city staff.



   (B)   Right of persons to comment.



      (1)   During any public hearing, the applicant for the subject
application shall have the following rights:



         (a)   The right to be represented;



         (b)   The right to provide testimony; and



         (c)   The right to present evidence.



      (2)   All other persons shall have the right to comment on any
relevant aspect of the application under consideration.



   (C)   Action of hearing body and continuance of hearings. 
Following the completion of testimony at a public hearing, action shall be
taken to approve, conditionally approve, deny, continue, or take under
advisement the subject of the public hearing.



      If the action is taken to continue or take the matter under
advisement, before adjournment or recess the person presiding at such public
hearing shall publicly announce the time and place to which the hearing will
be continued.  No further notice shall be required.



   (D)   Effect of action.  The decision of the hearing body shall be
considered final unless a decision is appealed pursuant to Division 1,
Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title 16.  In all cases,
the City Council shall represent the final authority.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.206  APPEALS AND REVOCATIONS



Section




Division 1:  Appeals





   16.206.010   Jurisdiction and authorization





   16.206.020   Time limit for filing an appeal





   16.206.030   Stay of proceedings





   16.206.040   Form for filing





   16.206.050   Processing of appeals





   16.206.060   Review by City Council





   16.206.070   Findings





   16.206.080   Noticing requirements





Division 2:  Revocations




   16.206.070      Right of revocation



   16.206.080      Procedures



   16.206.090      Findings



DIVISION 1:  APPEALS



§ 16.206.010  JURISDICTION AND AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   Appeal of Planning Director actions.  All actions and
decisions of the Planning Director authorized by this Title 16 may be
appealed to the Planning Commission. All such appeals must be filed in
writing with the Planning Commission Secretary.



   (B)   Appeal of City Engineer and Building Official actions.  All
actions of the City Engineer and Building Official authorized by this Title
16 may be appealed to the Planning Commission. All such appeals must be filed
in writing with the Planning Commission Secretary.



   (C)   Appeal of Planning Commission actions.  All actions and
decisions of the Planning Commission authorized by this Title 16 may be
appealed to the City Council. All such appeals must be filed in writing with
the City Clerk.



   (D)   Persons eligible to file an appeal.  Any person may appeal a
decision or action of the Planning Director, City Engineer, Building
Official, or Planning Commission in accordance with the terms of this
Division 1 of Chapter 16.206.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1189, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.206.020  TIME LIMIT FOR FILING AN APPEAL.



   All appeals must be filed within 10 calendar days of the date of the
rendering of the decision.  If the tenth day occurs on a holiday or weekend,
the appeal period is extended to the next city workday.  No appeal can be
accepted after the appeal period expires.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1189, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.206.030  STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.



   The timely filing of an effective appeal or the timely adoption by the
City Council of an order of review stays a decision to which the appeal or
order of review relates, pending a review of the matter.



(Ord. 1189, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.206.040  FORM FOR FILING.



   (A)   All appeals must be submitted in writing on a form to be
provided by the city.  The appeal must specifically state the grounds for
the appeal and specifically state instances in which the reviewing official
or body erred in reaching the determination.



 



   (B)   An appeal fee must be paid concurrent with filing of the
appeal in accordance with the fee schedule established by City Council
resolution.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1189, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.206.050  PROCESSING OF APPEALS.



   Within 14 calendar days upon receipt of an appeal, the Planning
Commission Secretary (in the case of an appeal of a Planning Director, City
Engineer, or Building Official decision) or the City Clerk (in the case of an
appeal of a decision by the Planning Commission) must set the matter for
public hearing.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1189, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.206.060  REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Division 1, the City
Council may, by majority vote of its total membership and at any time before
a Planning Commission decision becomes final, issue an order for a de novo
review of a Planning Commission decision. Such an order must be entitled an
"order of review." The City Council may, by resolution, adopt policies and
procedures for implementing this section.



(Ord. 1189, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.206.070  FINDINGS.



   All actions to affirm, reverse, or modify in whole or part any decision
of the Planning Director, City Engineer, Building Official, or Planning
Commission must be made by resolution stating the findings for the
affirmation, reversal, or modification.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1189, passed 3-3-08)



§ 16.206.080  NOTICING REQUIREMENTS



   Notice of time and place of a public hearing for an appeal must be
given pursuant to Chapter 16.204 of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1189, passed 3-3-08)



DIVISION 2:  REVOCATIONS



§ 16.206.070  RIGHT OF REVOCATION.



   Upon determination that there has been a violation of the terms or
conditions of any permit or approval granted under this Title 16; or if a
determination is made that a permit or approval was obtained by deception or
fraud, or represents a public nuisance; or the use subject to the approval no
longer exists; or the permit or approval has not been activated in accordance
with the terms of this Title 16, the Planning Director shall have the
authority to initiate revocation proceedings.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.206.080  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Planning Director shall schedule a hearing before the
Planning Commission for the purpose of considering revocation of the permit
or approval.  In the case where the Planning Commission's original action
consisted of a recommendation to the City Council, the Planning Commission's
action on the revocation shall also consist of a recommendation to the City
Council, and the City Council shall have the authority to revoke the permit
or approval.



   (B)   At least 30 days prior to the revocation hearing, the
permittee subject to the revocation hearing shall be given written notice of
the city's intent to conduct the hearing.  The notice to the permittee shall
be served either in person or by registered mail, return receipt requested.



   (C)   At least ten calendar days prior to the revocation hearing,
public notice of the hearing shall be given in the same manner as was
required for the original permit or approval. 



   (D)   At the hearing, the Planning Director shall present evidence
supporting the motion for permit or approval revocation.  The owner of the
property, use, or business subject to the hearing shall be given the
opportunity to present reasons why the permit or approval shall not be
revoked.



   (E)   The public shall be given the opportunity for comment.



   (F)   The Planning Commission or City Council shall make a decision
regarding the revocation based upon the information presented at the hearing
and shall within 20 days of the hearing make findings and report its decision
in writing.  A copy of the decision shall be mailed via certified mail, or
similar method providing proof of delivery, to the party whose permit is
being revoked.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.206.090  FINDINGS.



   Prior to revoking a permit or an approval adopted under this
Development Code, the following findings must be made:



   (A)   The permit or approval was obtained by deception or fraud;



   (B)   The permit or approval represents a public nuisance;



   (C)   The use subject to the approval no longer exists; or



   (D)   The permit or approval has not been activated in accordance
with the terms of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.208:  DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS



Section



   16.208.010   Purpose and intent



   16.208.020   Initiation



   16.208.030      Proceedings - Planning Commission



   16.208.040      Proceedings - City Council



   16.208.050      Findings required



§ 16.208.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   In recognition of the fact that physical, economic, and other
conditions in the city may change over time, provisions are hereby made to
allow for amendments to the Development Code text in accord with the
procedures outlined in this Chapter 16.208.  All such Development Code text
amendments shall be adopted in the manner in which other city ordinances are
adopted.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.208.020  INITIATION.



   Amendments to this Development Code may be initiated by:



   (A)   An application by an owner or agent of such owner seeking an
amendment, supplement to, or change of the regulations prescribed for his
property or the reclassification of his property;



   (B)   The application of a person authorized to exercise the power
of eminent domain;



   (C)   The Planning Director;



   (D)   The Planning Commission; or



   (E)   The City Council.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.208.030  PROCEEDINGS - PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public
Hearings).



   (B)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed Development Code text amendment is consistent with the objectives of
this Title 16, the General Plan, and development policies of the city.



   (C)   The Planning Commission shall act by resolution to recommend
to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
proposed application. 



   (D)   The Commission's resolution shall include its recommendation
and shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the matter for
consideration by the City Council. 



   (E)   A proposed amendment to the Development Code that is not
consistent with the General Plan may not be recommended or adopted until the
General Plan is amended to eliminate such inconsistency.  Such a General
Plan amendment and any development proposal relying on the amendment shall be
considered concurrently.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.208.040  PROCEEDINGS - CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution recommending
approval or denial of a Development Code text amendment, the City Clerk shall
set the matter for hearing before the City Council, notice of which shall be
given as prescribed in Chapter 16.204 (Public Hearings) of this Title 16.



   (B)   At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Commission's
recommendation and receive evidence as to how or why the proposed Development
Code text amendment is consistent with the objectives of this Title 16, the
General Plan, and development policies of the city.



   (C)   If the Council proposes any substantial modification to the
application not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the Council
shall refer the matter back to the Commission for consideration.  No public
hearing shall be required.  Failure of the Commission to act within 40 days
of receiving the Council's request shall provide the Council with authority
to act without the Commission's recommendation.



   (D)   The Council shall order the amendment of this Title 16 or deny
the application or recommendation for the amendment by a majority vote of the
City Council.



   (E)   Following the decision of the City Council ordering amendment
of this Title or denying the application or recommendation for the amendment,
the city shall give notice of said decision in writing to the applicant at
the address shown on the application and to the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.208.050  FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   The City Council shall be required to make the following findings of
fact before approving a Development Code text amendment:



   (A)   That the proposed Development Code text amendment is
consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan; and



   (B)   That the proposed Development Code text amendment will not
adversely affect surrounding properties; and



   (C)   That the proposed Development Code text amendment promotes
public health, safety, and general welfare and serves the goals and purposes
of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.210:  ZONE CHANGE



Section



   16.210.010      Purpose and intent



   16.210.020      Initiation



   16.210.030      Proceedings - Planning Commission



   16.210.040      Proceedings - City Council



   16.210.050      Findings required



§ 16.210.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   In recognition of the fact that physical, economic, and other
conditions in the city may change over time, provisions are hereby made to
allow for amendments to the zoning map in accord with the procedures outlined
in this Chapter 16.210.  All such zone changes shall be adopted in the
manner in which other city ordinances are adopted.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.210.020  INITIATION.



   Amendments to the zoning map may be initiated by:



   (A)   An application by an owner or agent of such owner seeking an
amendment, supplement to, or change of, the regulations prescribed for his
property or the reclassification of his property;



   (B)   The application of a person authorized to exercise the power
of eminent domain;



   (C)   The Planning Director;



   (D)   The Planning Commission; or



   (E)   The City Council.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.210.030  PROCEEDINGS - PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public
Hearings).



   (B)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed zone change is consistent with the objectives of this Title 16, the
General Plan, and development policies of the city.



   (C)   The Planning Commission shall act by resolution to recommend
to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
proposed application. 



   (D)   The Commission's resolution shall include its recommendation
and shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the matter for
consideration by the City Council. 



   (E)   A proposed zone change that is not consistent with the General
Plan may not be recommended or adopted until the General Plan is amended to
eliminate such inconsistency.  Such a General Plan amendment and any
development proposal relying on the amendment shall be considered
concurrently.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.210.040  PROCEEDINGS - CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Denial of a zone change.  Upon receipt of a Planning
Commission resolution recommending denial of a zone change, the City Clerk
shall place the Commission's resolution on the City Council agenda as a
receive-and-file item.  The Commission's decision shall be considered final
and no further action by the Council will be required unless an appeal is
filed within ten calendar days of the Commission's decision in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title
16, or unless the Council chooses to set the matter for hearing.



   (B)   Approval of a zone change. 



      (1)   Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution
recommending approval of a zone change, the City Clerk shall set the matter
for hearing before the City Council, notice of which shall be given as
prescribed in Chapter 16.204 (Public Hearings) of this Title 16.



      (2)   At the hearing, the City Council shall review the
Commission's recommendation and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed zone change is consistent with the objectives of this Title 16, the
General Plan, and development policies of the city.



      (3)   If the Council proposes any substantial modification to
the application not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the
Council shall refer the matter back to the Commission for consideration.  No
public hearing shall be required.  Failure of the Commission to act within
40 days of receiving the Council's request shall provide the Council with
authority to act without the Commission's recommendation.



      (4)   The Council shall order the zone change to be enacted or
deny the application or recommendation for the zone change by a majority vote
of the City Council.



      (5)   Following the decision of the City Council ordering
enactment of the zone change requested by this application or recommendation
by the Planning Commission for denial of the zone change, the city shall give
notice of the decision to the applicant in writing at the address shown on
the application and to the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.210.050  FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   The City Council shall be required to make the following findings of
fact before approving a zone change:



   (A)   That the proposed zone change is consistent with the goals,
policies, and objectives of the General Plan; and



   (B)   That the proposed zone change will not adversely or
significantly impact surrounding properties; and



   (C)   That the proposed zone change promotes public health, safety,
and general welfare and serves the goals and purposes of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.212:  GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS



Section



   16.212.010      Purpose and intent



   16.212.020      Initiation



   16.212.030      Proceedings - Planning Commission



   16.212.040      Proceedings - City Council



   16.212.050      Findings required



§ 16.212.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This Chapter 16.212 is established pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
65358 to allow for amendment from time to time of the city's General Plan.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.212.020  INITIATION.



   (A)   Applications to amend the General Plan text or maps may be
initiated by any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in
the proposed application.  The authorized agent of any person with a legal
vested interest may also initiate an application.  The Planning Director may
request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance
of any application.



   (B)   In the case of a proposed amendment to the General Plan land
use policy map, if the property for which the amendment is proposed is in
more than one ownership, the majority of owners or their authorized agents
shall be required to sign the application.



   (C)   The City Council or the Planning Commission may initiate an
application to amend the General Plan.



   (D)   No more than four General Plan amendments may be initiated in
any one calendar year.  Applications by members of the public for such
amendments will be considered by the City Council in March, June, September
and December of each calendar year.  All applications will be processed
individually until being forwarded to the City Council.  Applications may be
combined as necessary to comply with the limited number of times amendments
may be considered under state law.  The Planning Commission or City Council
may initiate an amendment at any time provided the number of amendments to
any element of the general plan shall not exceed that allowed by state law.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.212.030  PROCEEDINGS - PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public
Hearings).



   (B)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed General Plan amendment is consistent with the objectives of this
Title 16, the balance of the General Plan, and development policies of the
city.



   (C)   The Planning Commission shall act by resolution to recommend
to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
proposed application.  A majority vote of the entire Planning Commission is
required to recommend approval or approval with modifications.



   (D)   The Commission's resolution shall include its recommendation
and shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the matter for
public hearing before the City Council.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.212.040  PROCEEDINGS - CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution, the City
Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council as provided
for in Chapter 16.204 (Public Hearings) of this Title 16.



   (B)   At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Commission's
recommendation and may receive evidence as to how or why the proposed General
Plan amendment is consistent with the objectives of this Title 16, the
balance of the General Plan, and development policies of the city.



   (C)   The City Council shall act to approve or deny the
application.  A majority vote of the entire Council is required to amend the
General Plan.  The Council's action to amend the General Plan shall be by
formal resolution.



   (D)   If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to
the application not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the
Council shall refer the matter back to the Commission for consideration.  No
public hearing shall be required.  Failure of the Commission to act within
45 days of receiving the Council's request shall provide the Council with
authority to act without the Commission's recommendation.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.212.050  FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   Before approving, or conditionally approving, a General Plan amendment,
the City Council must make the following findings:



   (A)   That the proposed amendment is in the public interest, and
that there will be a community benefit resulting from the amendment;



   (B)   That the proposed amendment is consistent with the other
goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan;



   (C)   That the proposed amendment does not conflict with provisions
of this Code;



   (D)   In the event that the proposed amendment is a change to the
land use policy map, that the amendment will not adversely affect surrounding
properties; and



   (E)   Whether the amendment requires voter approval in accordance
with either General Plan Section III(F) (the SOAR Initiative) or General Plan
Section III(G) (the 81 Acre Initiative).  Amendments  requiring voter
approval cannot become effective without an affirmative vote from a majority
of registered voters at a regular or special election.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



CHAPTER 16.214:  AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE AND LAND CONSERVATION CONTRACTS



Section



   16.214.010      Purpose



   16.214.020      Definitions



   16.214.030      Relationship to other laws



   16.214.040      Criteria for establishing, disestablishing or
altering agricultural preserves



   16.214.050      Land owner proposals to establish, disestablish
or alter an agricultural preserve



   16.214.060      Notice and hearing requirements



   16.214.070      Recording revised agricultural preserve map



   16.214.080      Application process and fees - conservation
contracts



   16.214.090      Report to City Council



   16.214.100      Criteria for evaluating land conservation
contract applications



   16.214.110      Recording of contracts



   16.214.120      General



   16.214.130      Compatible uses - Agricultural use contracts



   16.214.140      Compatible uses - Open space use contracts



   16.214.150      Compatible uses - Compatible use determination



   16.214.160      General provisions



   16.214.170      Notice of nonrenewal



   16.214.180      Contract cancellation



   16.214.190      Contract compliance monitoring



   16.214.200      Contract violations



   16.214.210      Judicial relief



§ 16.214.010  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers, as set
forth in the California Constitution, and in accordance with the California
Land Conservation Act of 1965 for the purpose of establishing the procedural
and substantive requirements to implement the Act.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.020  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the
meanings stated in the Act.



   ACT  means the California Land Conservation Act of 1965, also known as
the Williamson Act, set forth at Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 51200 et seq.



   AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY  has the same meaning as Cal. Gov’t Code §
51201 (a): any and all plant and animal products produced in California for
commercial purposes.



   AGRICULTURAL USE  has the same meaning as Cal. Gov’t Code §
51201(b): the use of the land for the purpose of producing an agricultural
commodity for commercial purposes.



   COMPATIBLE USE means any use determined by the city to be compatible
with the agricultural, recreational, or open-space use of land within the
preserve and subject to contract. COMPATIBLE USE includes agricultural use,
recreational use or open- space use unless Council finds after notice and
hearing that the use is not compatible with the agricultural, recreational or
open-space use to which the land is restricted by contract pursuant to this
chapter or the Act.



   CONTRACTED LAND  means real property restricted by a land conservation
contract pursuant to the Act and this chapter.



   INCIDENTAL  means related to or supporting the primary agricultural,
open space or recreational use of the land.



   NONPRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND  means any land capable of sustaining a
commercial agricultural use that is not prime agricultural land.



   OPEN-SPACE USE  has the same meaning as Cal. Gov’t Code § 51201(o).



   PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND  has the same meaning as Cal. Gov’t Code §
51201 (c).



   RECREATIONAL USE  has the same meaning as Cal. Gov’t Code §
51201(n).



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.030  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.



   If there is any irreconcilable conflict between any provisions of this
chapter and any federal or state law, the federal or state law prevails. Any
provision of this chapter that is more stringent than federal or state law is
intended to supplement, not conflict with, federal or state law and to apply
unless a court of law conclusively determines that the provision is preempted.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.040  CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHING, DISESTABLISHING OR ALTERING
AGRICULTURAL PRESERVES.



   All of the following criteria apply to the establishment,
disestablishment or alteration of an agricultural preserve, whether initiated
by the city or a land owner:



   (A)   Each agricultural preserve must contain at least 100
contiguous acres of land unless the City Council finds that a smaller
preserve is necessary due to the unique characteristics of the agricultural
enterprises in the area and that such preserve is consistent with the city's
general plan and zoning regulations.



   (B)   The use of any land within an agricultural preserve that is
subject to a land conservation contract must be restricted by zoning that is
compatible with the agricultural, open space or recreational use. Such zoning
restrictions include appropriate minimum parcel sizes consistent with the Act
and this chapter.



   (C)   All agricultural preserves must comply with the city's general
plan and zoning regulations.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.050  LAND OWNER PROPOSALS TO ESTABLISH, DISESTABLISH OR ALTER AN
AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE.



   (A)   A landowner whose property is devoted to agricultural, open
space or recreational use, but is not within an established agricultural
preserve, may apply to have the property included in a new or existing
agricultural preserve. To initiate this process, the land owner must file an
application with the City Clerk on a form prepared by the City Manager or
designee.



   (B)   A landowner whose property is included in an agricultural
preserve and who wishes to have that property excluded from an agricultural
preserve may apply to disestablish or alter the boundaries of the
agricultural preserve in which the property is located to exclude the
property. To initiate this process, the land owner must file an application
prepared by the City Manager, or designee, with the City Clerk.



   (C)   Any application submitted pursuant to this section must be
accompanied by a payment of all applicable fees prescribed by City Council
resolution.



   (D)   Within 30 days of receiving a complete application, the
Planning Director, or designee, will prepare a report for City Council
consideration regarding whether the landowner's proposal meets the Act's
requirements. The City Council will consider the report during a public
hearing held in accordance with this chapter.



   (E)   No application submitted pursuant to this section will be
approved by the City Council unless it meets all of the criteria in this
chapter and the Act.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.060  NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A noticed public hearing will be held before any final action
is taken to establish, disestablish or alter the boundary of any agricultural
preserve.



   (B)   Notice of the public hearing to establish or alter an
agricultural preserve must be provided as follows:



      (1)   By publication pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 6061;



      (2)   By written, mailed notice at least two weeks before the
hearing to the Ventura County Local Agency Formation Commission;



      (3)   By written, mailed notice at least two weeks before the
hearing to any city within one mile of the exterior boundaries of the
agricultural preserve proposed to be established, disestablished or altered;



      (4)   By written, mailed notice to the applicant; and



      (5)   If land under contract is to be removed from an
agricultural preserve or a preserve disestablished that contains land under
contract, notice must be given in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 51232.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.070  RECORDING REVISED AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE MAP.



   Whenever an agricultural preserve is established, disestablished or
altered, the City Clerk will file the adopted resolution and a map showing
all of the city agricultural preserves, as revised, with the County Recorder.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.080  APPLICATION PROCESS AND FEES - CONSERVATION CONTRACTS.



   (A)   A land owner whose property is devoted to agricultural, open
space or recreational use and is within an agricultural preserve may file an
application with the city clerk on a form prepared by the Planning Director,
or designee, to restrict the owner's land by a land conservation contract. An
application must be accompanied by all of the following:



      (1)   All applicable fees as prescribed by City Council
resolution; and



      (2)   A land conservation contract in a form prepared by the
City Attorney and approved by the City Council for the particular use
(agricultural, open space or recreational) with notarized signatures of all
land owners.



   (B)   The city may request additional information from the land
owner during the application review process to facilitate a thorough and
timely review of the application.



   (C)   Applications to simultaneously rescind a land conservation
contract and reenter into a new contract restricting the use of the land
pursuant to the Act or any other state law will be considered where
authorized by state law.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.090  REPORT TO CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a land conservation
contract, the City Clerk will transmit a copy of the completed application to
the Planning Director.



   (B)   The Planning Director, or designee, will prepare a report for
City Council consideration regarding whether the land subject to the proposed
land conservation contract meets the criteria in the Act and this chapter for
such a contract.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.100  CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING LAND CONSERVATION CONTRACT
APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   No application for a land conservation contract will be
approved unless all of the following criteria are met:



      (1)   Each parcel affected by the proposed contract is at
least 10 acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land and 40 acres in
size in the case of nonprime agricultural land or land in open space or
recreational use;



      (2)   All parcels affected by the proposed contract are
currently being used primarily for agricultural, open space or recreational
use; and



      (3)   There are no other existing or permitted uses or
development on the land that would significantly displace or interfere with
the agricultural, open space or recreational use of the land.



   (B)   Even if all of the above criteria are met, the City Council
may, in its discretion, choose not to approve the application.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.110  RECORDING OF CONTRACTS.



   The City Clerk must record any executed land conservation contract with
the County Recorder within 20 days after it is fully executed.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.120  GENERAL.



   The use and development of all land affected by a land conservation
contract must at all times comply with the Act, this chapter, the terms of
the land conservation contract, and any other applicable state or local law,
regulation or ordinance.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.130  COMPATIBLE USES - AGRICULTURAL USE CONTRACTS.



   (A)   All use or development of any contracted land for agricultural
use must comply with the following criteria:



      (1)   The proposed use or development must be compatible with
and not significantly compromise the long-term productive agricultural
capability of any contracted land within the agricultural preserve, including
the land upon which the use or development is proposed to occur;



      (2)   The proposed use of development will not significantly
displace or impair current or reasonably foreseeable agricultural operations
on the land upon which the use or development is proposed to occur. A use or
development that significantly displaces agricultural operations on the land
upon which the use or development is proposed to occur may, in the city's
discretion, be deemed compatible if the uses or development relate directly
to the production of commercial agricultural products on that parcel or
nearby parcels (e.g., harvesting, processing or shipping of locally produced
commercial agricultural products).



      (3)   The proposed use or development will not substantially
interfere with the agricultural use of the land upon which the use or
development is proposed to occur;



      (4)   The portion of the parcel to remain in agricultural use
must be capable of sustaining a commercially viable agricultural use. For
prime agricultural land, at least ten acres must remain devoted to
agricultural use. For nonprime agricultural land, at least 40 acres must
remain devoted to agricultural use;



      (5)   The proposed use or development will not hinder or
impair agricultural operations in the area by significantly increasing the
permanent or temporary human population in the area;



      (6)   The proposed use or development does not constitute a
residential subdivision; and



      (7)   The proposed use or development complies with all other
federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances, including the
city's general plan and this code.



   (B)   An agricultural preserve may contain land other than
agricultural land, but within two years of the effective date of any contract
on land within the preserve, the use of any land within the preserve and not
under contract must be restricted by zoning (including minimum parcel sizes
that are consistent with the Act) in such a way as not to be incompatible
with the agricultural use of the lands limited by contract within the
preserve.



   (C)   All permitted uses set forth in this code for the agricultural
zone (A-1) are deemed compatible with agricultural use if all of the criteria
in this section are also met.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.140  COMPATIBLE USES - OPEN SPACE USE CONTRACTS.



   (A)   All use or development of any contracted land for open space
use must comply with all of the following criteria:



      (1)   The proposed use or development must be compatible with
and not significantly compromise the agricultural, open space or recreational
value of any contracted land within the agricultural preserve, including the
land upon which the use or development is proposed to occur;



      (2)   The portion of the parcel to remain in open space must
be at least 40 acres;



      (3)   The proposed use or development does not constitute a
residential subdivision;



      (4)   The proposed use or development complies with all other
federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances, including the city
general plan and municipal code.



   (B)   All permitted uses set forth in this code for the open space
zone (O) are deemed compatible with open space use if all of the criteria in
this section are also met.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.150  COMPATIBLE USES - COMPATIBLE USE DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Before undertaking any development or use on contracted land
that is not the primary use (agricultural or open space) for which the land
conservation contract for the property was approved, the land owner must
apply for and obtain a compatible use determination. The land owner must file
an application with the Planning Director on a form prepared for this
purpose, accompanied by a fee in an amount prescribed by resolution of the
City Council.



   (B)   The Planning Director will determine whether the proposed use
or development is compatible with the land conservation contract for the
property, using the criteria established in Cal. Gov’t Code § 51238.1 and
any applicable provisions of this code.



   (C)   The Planning Director's decision may be appealed to the
Planning Commission by any interested person. Any appeal must be filed within
15 days of the decision and must be accompanied by payment of an appeal fee
in an amount prescribed by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.160  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   A land conservation contract may only be terminated in a manner
consistent with state law and this chapter.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.170  NOTICE OF NONRENEWAL.



   (A)   If either the landowner or the city desires in any year not to
renew a land conservation contract, the nonrenewing party must serve written
notice of nonrenewal of the contract upon the other party before the annual
nonrenewal date of the contract. A notice of nonrenewal served by the land
owner must be addressed to the City Clerk and be filed or postmarked at least
90 days before the annual renewal date of the contract, and must be
accompanied by a fee in an amount established by City Council resolution. A
notice of nonrenewal served by the city will be mailed to the address shown
on the latest assessment roll for the property, and must be postmarked at
least 60 days before the annual renewal date of the contract.



   (B)   If no notice of nonrenewal is filed in compliance with these
deadlines, the contract will be automatically renewed for another year.



   (C)   If a notice of nonrenewal is filed after the application
deadline, the notice will be deemed to apply to the next annual renewal
period.



   (D)   If a land owner objects to a contract nonrenewal initiated by
the city applicable to the owner's land, the owner may file a written protest
with the City Clerk. The City Council may, in its discretion, withdraw the
notice of nonrenewal at any time before the contract's annual renewal date.



   (E)   During November of each calendar year, the City Clerk will
provide a report to the City Council identifying all nonrenewal requests
received pursuant to this section.



   (F)   The City Clerk will record all notices of nonrenewal with the
County Recorder within 20 days after serving or receiving a notice of
nonrenewal.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.180  CONTRACT CANCELLATION.



   Any petition to cancel a land conservation contract must be filed with
the City Clerk. The petition will be processed in accordance with the Act.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.190  CONTRACT COMPLIANCE MONITORING.



   The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to investigate any
potential land conservation contract violations. If an investigation
concludes that a likely contract violation exists, the City Attorney may
prosecute such violations in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 15250 or
51251, and this code.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.200  CONTRACT VIOLATIONS.



   Land conservation contract violations include, without limitation, the
following:



   (A)   Construction of a commercial, industrial or residential
building that is not allowed by this chapter or the contract;



   (B)   Construction of a commercial, industrial or residential
building that is not related to an agricultural or compatible use where the
total area of all of the building or buildings exceeds 2,500 square feet for
all property subject to any contract or all contiguous property subject to a
contract or contracts owned by the same landowner or landowners.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



§ 16.214.210  JUDICIAL RELIEF.



   (A)   In addition to any other remedies provided by state law or
this chapter, if the city determines that a land conservation contract has or
is being violated, the City Attorney is authorized to bring an action on the
city's behalf for an appropriate remedy.



   (B)   An owner of contracted land may bring an action to enforce a
land conservation contract covering any land within one mile of the owner's
contracted land.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit a court's ability
to grant any relief or issue any order that it deems appropriate in its
discretion, including without limitation specific performance or injunctive
or equitable relief.



(Ord. 1108, passed 6-21-04)



CHAPTER 16.216:  SPECIFIC PLANS



Section



   16.216.010      Purpose and intent



   16.216.020      Initiation



   16.216.030      Pre-application conference required



   16.216.040      Preparation and content



   16.216.050      Proceedings - Planning Commission



   16.216.060      Proceedings - City Council



   16.216.070      Findings required



   16.216.080      Amendments to an approved Specific Plan



§ 16.216.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The city recognizes that certain parcels in Santa Paula may benefit
from focused planning efforts whereby infrastructure, land use relationships,
land use intensities, and public service needs can be carefully examined and
planned in a comprehensive manner.  The Specific Plan provides a mechanism
to carry out such planning efforts.  The purpose of this Chapter 16.216 is
to establish uniform procedures and guidelines for Specific Plans prepared
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 8.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.216.020  INITIATION.



   (A)   A Specific Plan application may be initiated by a majority of
the property owners in the area of a proposed Specific Plan.



   (B)   The City Council or Planning Commission may initiate an
application for a Specific Plan.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.216.030  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE REQUIRED.



   A pre-application conference with the Planning Director is required
prior to the formal submission of a Specific Plan application.  The purpose
of the meeting is to review with the applicant the city's requirements for
specific plan content, applicable policies, infrastructure needs, and other
information as determined by the Planning Director.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.216.040  PREPARATION AND CONTENT.



   In addition to a formal application completed pursuant to Chapter
16.202 (Applications, Processing, Filing, and Fees), the applicant shall:



   (A)   Submit a draft Specific Plan containing text and diagrams that
specify the following in detail:



      (1)   A boundary survey map of the property.  A tentative
subdivision map may be substituted if the applicant proposes to subdivide the
property.



      (2)   Topography of the property and the preliminary proposed
finished grade shown at contour intervals of five feet or less.



      (3)   The gross land area of the proposed development, the
present zoning classification of the proposed development, and the zoning
classification and land use of the area surrounding the proposed development,
including the location of structures and other improvements.



      (4)   A general land use map setting forth the proposed uses
of all sections or areas within the subject property and the approximate
acreage of each.



      (5)   An accompanying report setting forth the land use
regulations that constitute the standards of development designed to govern
those sections or areas specified in the Specific Plan.  These standards
shall contain definitions and information concerning the requirements for
building site coverage, building heights, building setbacks, off-street
parking, vehicular access, signing, lighting, storage, screening,
landscaping, conservation, utilization of natural resources, and other
information which the Planning Director shall require to insure compliance
with the purposes of this Development Code.



      (6)   The proposed distribution, location, and extent and
intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage,
water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, and other essential facilities
proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and needed to
support the land uses described in the plan.



   (B)   Include a statement in the Specific Plan indicating that the
Plan is either:



      (1)   Consistent with the Santa Paula General Plan; or



      (2)   Will be consistent with the Santa Paula General Plan if
amended to provide for this particular plan.  A statement as to how the
proposed zone change and General Plan amendment will further the goals and
objectives of the city's General Plan shall be included.



   (C)   Include any other information as may be required by the
Planning Director to permit complete analysis and appraisal of the proposed
Specific Plan.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.216.050  PROCEEDINGS - PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public
Hearings).



   (B)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed Specific Plan is consistent with the objectives of this Title 16,
the General Plan, and development policies of the city.



   (C)   The Planning Commission shall act by resolution to recommend
to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
proposed application.  A majority vote of the entire Planning Commission is
required to recommend approval or approval with modifications.



   (D)   The Commission's resolution shall include its recommendation
and shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the matter for
public hearing before the City Council.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.216.060  PROCEEDINGS - CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution, the City
Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council as provided
for in Chapter 16.204 (Public Hearings) of this Title 16.



   (B)   At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Commission's
recommendation and may receive evidence as to how or why the proposed
Specific Plan is consistent with the objectives of this Title 16, the General
Plan, and development policies of the city.



   (C)   The City Council shall act to approve or deny the
application.  A majority vote of the entire Council is required to approve a
Specific Plan.  The Council's action to approve a Specific Plan shall be by
ordinance.



   (D)   If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to
the application not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the
Council shall refer the matter back to the Commission for consideration.  No
public hearing shall be required.  Failure of the Commission to act within
45 days of receiving the Council's request shall provide the Council with
authority to act without the Commission's recommendation.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.216.070  FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   Prior to approving a Specific Plan, the City Council shall make the
findings:



   (A)   That the proposed Specific Plan or amendment promotes public
health, safety, and general welfare, and serves the goals and purposes of
this Title 16;



   (B)   That the proposed Specific Plan or amendment is consistent
with the goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan; and



   (C)   That the proposed Specific Plan or amendment will not
adversely affect surrounding properties.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.216.080  AMENDMENTS TO AN APPROVED SPECIFIC PLAN.



   (A)   An approved Specific Plan may be amended in the same manner
required for initial applications for a Specific Plan, as set forth in this
Chapter 16.216.



   (B)   No application for a Specific Plan amendment will be accepted
unless accompanied by a development proposal for all or a portion of the area
included within the proposed amendment area.



   (C)   The city may initiate amendments to any portion of a Specific
Plan.  In the case of such a city- initiated amendment, no associated
project is required.



   (D)   The following changes to a Specific Plan shall require a
Specific Plan amendment:



      (1)   Changes to the text or maps other than the addition of
information that does not change the effect of any regulation.



      (2)   Changes in any Specific Plan boundary.



      (3)   Increase or decrease in the specified density for any
area.



      (4)   Changes in standards or regulations, including
landscaping and design standards.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



CHAPTER 16.218:  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS



Section



   16.218.010      Purpose and intent



   16.218.020      Initiation



   16.218.030      Proceedings



   16.218.040      Required Findings



   16.218.050      Additional findings for specified uses



   16.218.060      Conditions of approval



   16.218.070      Conditional Use Permit attached to the property



   16.218.080      Suspension and revocation



   16.218.090      Time limit for implementing Conditional Use Permit



§ 16.218.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The city recognizes that certain uses, due to the nature of
use, intensity, or size, require special review to determine if the use
proposed, or the location of that use, is compatible with surrounding uses,
or through the imposition of development and use conditions, can be made
compatible with surrounding uses.  The Conditional Use Permit is provided
for this purpose. 



   (B)   To ensure consistency with land use regulations and
compatibility with surrounding properties, conditional uses require special
consideration.  The Planning Commission is empowered to grant and deny
applications for Conditional Use Permits and to impose reasonable conditions
upon the granting of such permit.



   (C)   Applications for Conditional Use Permits may be submitted only
for those uses specified as allowable conditional uses in the applicable zone
district, unless the Planning Director makes a preliminary finding that the
proposed uses are similar to a listed use.  A Conditional Use Permit is not
a substitute for a zone change or Development Code text amendment.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.218.020  INITIATION.



   (A)   An application for a Conditional Use Permit may be initiated
by any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the
proposed application.  The authorized agent of any person with a legal
vested interest may also initiate an application.  The Planning Director may
request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance
of any application.



   (B)   An application shall be filed pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 16.202 (Applications, Processing, Filing, and Fees) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.218.030  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Planning Director investigation.  The Planning Director or
the designee shall investigate the application and proposal, and shall
prepare a report outlining facts and a recommendation relating to the
application.  The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission prior
to any scheduled public hearing on the application.



   (B)   Planning Commission proceedings. 



      (1)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public
Hearings) of this Title 16.



      (2)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
review the application and proposal and receive evidence concerning the
proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or
maintained, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in §
16.218.040 (Required Findings).



      (3)   The Planning Commission shall act to approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the application.



      (4)   The decision of the Planning Commission shall become
effective immediately upon its rendering, unless an appeal is filed pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title
16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.218.040  REQUIRED FINDINGS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission may approve and/or modify a
Conditional Use Permit in whole or in part, with or without conditions,
provided that all of the following findings of fact are made:



      (1)   The proposed use at the particular location is necessary
or desirable to provide a service or facility that will contribute to the
general convenience or welfare of the neighborhood or the community;



      (2)   The characteristics of the proposed use are not
unreasonably incompatible with the types of use permitted in the surrounding
areas;



      (3)   The proposed use is consistent with the objectives,
policies, general land uses, and programs of the Santa Paula General Plan; and



      (4)   The proposed use will not, under the circumstances of
the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare
of persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property or
improvements in the vicinity.



   (B)   Additional findings shall be made for specific uses as
required by Chapters 16.54 through 16.76 (Standards for Specific Land Uses)
of this Title 16.



   (C)   In determining the presence of conditions specified in
subsection 16.218.040(A) above, the Planning Commission or, on appeal, the
City Council, shall consider the following factors:



      (1)   Possible damage or nuisance from noise, glare, smoke,
odor, fumes, dust, or vibration;



      (2)   Possible hazard to persons or property from explosion,
contamination, or fire; and



      (3)   Possible hazard or inconvenience caused by unusual
volume or character of traffic.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.218.050  ADDITIONAL FINDINGS FOR SPECIFIED USES.



   (A)   This section shall apply only to the uses identified in this
section.  This section shall not invalidate any Conditional Use Permit for
an operating facility, but shall be complied with prior to issuance of a
building permit for all projects for which no building permit has been issued
upon the effective date of this provision.



   (B)   In addition to findings required in subsection 16.218.040(A),
the Planning Commission shall find that the proposed use does not have a
disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effect on
minority and low-income populations.  Such findings must be made for the
following uses:



      (1)   Solid waste facilities, as defined in Cal. Pub. Res.
Code § 40194.



      (2)   Auto wrecking or salvage yards.



      (3)   Yards for the disposal and/or salvage of demolition or
construction waste.



      (4)   Recycling facilities.



      (5)   Incinerators of any type.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.218.060  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   In granting a Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Commission
may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the public
health, safety, and general welfare are protected and that the proposed
operation is not a detriment to the community. 



   (B)   All conditions shall be binding upon the applicant, heirs,
successors, or assignees and shall restrict the construction, location,
maintenance, and use of all land within the development.



   (C)   A deed restriction may be recorded with the County Recorder of
Ventura County, as approved by the City Attorney, regarding the conditions of
this section and other requirements of the Conditional Use Permit.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.218.070  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT ATTACHED TO THE PROPERTY.



   A Conditional Use Permit that is valid and in effect and granted
pursuant to the provisions of this Title 16 shall be valid only on the
property for which it was granted and shall continue to be valid upon change
of ownership of the property or any lawfully existing building or structure
on the property.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.218.080  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   The Planning Director shall have the authority to initiate proceedings
to suspend or revoke a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to provisions set
forth in Division 2 of Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title
16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.218.090  TIME LIMIT FOR IMPLEMENTING CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   (A)   The grantee of a Conditional Use Permit shall have one year
from the effective date of the permit to establish a right to use the permit;
otherwise, the Conditional Use Permit shall lapse and become void.  For the
purposes of this section, such a right shall be established if either:



      (1)   A building permit has been issued and construction
commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which the
Conditional Use Permit was approved; or



      (2)   In the event no building permit is required, a
certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure for which the
Conditional Use Permit was approved; or



      (3)   In the event no building permit or certificate of
occupancy is required, the site for which the Conditional Use Permit was
approved is occupied and used for the permitted purpose; or



      (4)   Prior to the date on which the Conditional Use Permit
will elapse, the grantee files an application to renew the permit pursuant to
subsection (B) below.



   (B)   A Conditional Use Permit subject to lapse may be renewed for a
single one-year period, provided that the application for renewal is filed
with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 16.222 (Minor Modifications) of this Title 16. 
Additional renewals shall require a public hearing before the Planning
Commission.



   (C)   The Planning Commission may grant or deny an application for
renewal of a Conditional Use Permit.  As part of its action, the Commission
may also modify existing conditions of approval or add new conditions to
reflect any change in circumstances related to the Conditional Use Permit and
surrounding properties.



   (D)   If any Conditional Use Permit fails to be actively exercised
for a continuous 180-day period, the permit shall lapse and become void.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.220:  VARIANCES



Section



   16.220.010      Purpose and intent



   16.220.020      Initiation



   16.220.030      Proceedings



   16.220.040      Required findings



   16.220.050      Variance attached to the property



   16.220.060      Revocation



   16.220.070      Time limit for implementing variance



§ 16.220.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The Variance procedure is provided pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65906 to grant relief from Development Code provisions when, because
of special circumstances applicable to a property, including size, shape,
topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application of this
Development Code deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other
property in the vicinity and under the identical zoning classification.  In
such case, a Variance may be granted to allow the following:



      (1)   A reduction or variance in setback regulations; parking;
and/or loading requirements; front, side, or rear yard regulations; height
regulations; or commercial screening wall requirements;



      (2)   A change in the required location of accessory buildings
and uses;



      (3)   A reduction or variation in area regulations including
limitations in the area covered by accessory buildings; or



      (4)   A modification or elimination of the utility service
undergrounding requirements.



   (B)   Variances shall not be granted to authorize a use or activity
on a property that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of
this Development Code governing that property.  A Variance is not a
substitute for a zone change, Development Code text amendment, or Conditional
Use Permit.



   (C)   Financial hardship in and of itself does not represent grounds
on which to file a Variance application to gain relief from Development Code
provisions.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.220.020  INITIATION.



   (A)   An application for a Variance may be initiated by any person
who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed
application.  The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested
interest may also initiate an application.  The Planning Director may
request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance
of any application.



   (B)   An application shall be filed pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 16.202 (Applications, Processing, Filing, and Fees) of this Title 16.



   (C)   In addition to the application filing requirements established
in Chapter 16.202, the applicant shall file a statement of the precise nature
of the Variance requested and the practical difficulty or unnecessary
physical hardship that would result from the strict or literal interpretation
of this ordinance, together with any other data pertinent to the application
and the making of requisite findings.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.220.030  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Planning Director investigation.  The Planning Director shall
investigate the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent
cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and a
recommendation relating to the application.  The report shall be provided to
the Planning Commission prior to any scheduled public hearing on the
application.



   (B)   Planning Commission proceedings.



      (1)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public
Hearings) of this Title 16.



      (2)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
review the application and proposal and receive evidence concerning the
proposed Variance and the conditions that make compliance with specific
provisions of this Development Code difficult. 



      (3)   The Planning Commission shall act to approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the application.



      (4)   The decision of the Planning Commission shall become
effective immediately upon its rendering, unless an appeal is filed pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title
16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.220.040  REQUIRED FINDINGS.



   In granting a Variance, the Planning Commission must make all of the
following findings:



      (1)   That the strict or literal interpretation and
application of this Title 16 would result in practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the general purpose and intent of
this Title 16, or would deprive applicants of privileges granted to others in
similar circumstances; and



      (2)   That there are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved or the
intended development of the property that do not apply generally to other
property in the same zone; and



      (3)   That the granting of such Variance will not constitute
the granting of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on
other properties in the vicinity classified in the same zone; and



      (4)   That the granting of such Variance will not be
materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare nor
injurious to property or improvements in the zone or neighborhood in which
the property is located; and



      (5)   That the granting of such Variance will not create any
inconsistency with any objective contained in the General Plan.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.220.050  VARIANCE ATTACHED TO THE PROPERTY.



   A Variance that is valid and in effect and granted pursuant to the
provisions of this Title 16 shall be valid only on the property for which it
was granted and only for the improvements for which it is granted and
further, shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the property
or any lawfully existing building or structure on the property. 



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.220.060  REVOCATION.



   The Planning Director shall have the authority to initiate proceedings
to suspend or revoke a Variance pursuant to provisions set forth in Division
1, Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.220.070  TIME LIMIT FOR IMPLEMENTING A VARIANCE.



   (A)   The grantee of a Variance shall have one year from the
effective date of the approval to establish a right to use the approval;
otherwise, the Variance shall lapse and become void.  For the purposes of
this section, such a right shall be established if either:



      (1)   A building permit has been issued and construction
commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which the
Variance was approved; or



      (2)   In the event no building permit is required, a
certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure for which the
Variance was approved; or



      (3)   In the event no building permit or certificate of
occupancy is required, the site for which the Variance was approved is
occupied in accordance with the Variance; or



      (4)   Prior to the date on which the Variance will elapse, the
grantee files an application to renew the permit pursuant to subsection (B)
below.



   (B)   A Variance subject to lapse may be renewed for a single
one-year period, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.222 (Minor
Modifications) of this Title 16,and provided that the application for renewal
is filed with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date. 
Additional renewals shall require a public hearing before the Planning
Commission.



   (C)   The Planning Commission may approve or deny an application for
renewal of a Variance.  As part of its action, the Commission may also
modify existing conditions of approval or add new conditions to reflect any
change in circumstances related to the Variance and surrounding properties.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.222:  MINOR MODIFICATIONS



Section



   16.222.010      Purpose and intent



   16.222.020      Initiation



   16.222.030      Proceedings



   16.222.040      Findings



   16.222.050      Approval attached to the property



   16.222.060      Revocation



   16.222.070      Time limit for using Minor Modification approval



§ 16.222.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Intent.  The Minor Modification procedure is established to
grant minor relief from development standards, under limited circumstances,
when the granting of such relief will provide for better design and function
of the structure, or addition to a structure, proposed.



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   For the purposes of this Chapter 16.222, a Minor
Modification application shall be filed whenever any one of the following
deviations from the provisions of this Title 16 is proposed to allow:



         (a)   A modification of distance or area regulations not
exceeding:



            i.   Twenty  percent of the required front, side,
rear, or courtyard distances or other open space requirements;



            ii.   Twenty percent of the height limitations for
antennas; or



            iii.   Ten percent of the lot coverage requirement.



         (b)   A modification of automobile parking space
requirements, whereby a reduction of not more than 10% of the required spaces
is proposed.



         (c)   In compliance with §16.46.040, when it can be
demonstrated that the parking demand will be reduced by one or more methods,
including, but not limited to carpools/vanpools, varied work shifts, company
owned buses, etc., parking may be reduced by not more than 50%.



         (d)   A modification of private usable open space
requirements.



         (e)   Additions to structures that are nonconforming as
to side yard, rear yard, or lot coverage, provided that the additions meet
the requirements of this Title 16.



         (f)   Walls, hedges, or fences to exceed the height
limits established in Chapter 16.44 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges) of this Title
16 and to permit them to be located within setback areas where consistent
with safety and neighborhood appearance.



         (g)   To allow a single extension of time not to exceed
one year of a current permit or variance where the use is not in conflict
with the adopted general plan, has not been prohibited by the Planning
Commission, and is not of a controversial nature.



      (2)   Modifications in excess of those cited in subparagraph
(1) above shall require a Variance pursuant to Chapter 16.220 (Variances) of
this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.222.020  INITIATION.



   (A)   An application for a Minor Modification may be initiated by
any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed
application.  The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested
interest may also initiate an application.  The Planning Director may
request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance
of any application.



   (B)   In addition to the application filing requirements established
in Chapter 16.202 (Applications, Processing, Filing, and Fees), the applicant
shall file a statement of the precise nature of the Minor Modification
requested and reasons for the request.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.222.030  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Planning Director investigation.  The Planning Director or
his designee shall investigate the application and proposal, including the
analysis of precedent cases as appropriate.



   (B)   Notice of receipt of application and comment period.  Upon
five days of deeming the application complete pursuant to the provisions of
§ 16.202.030 of this Title 16, the Planning Director shall mail or deliver
notice of the application to all persons, including businesses, corporation,
or other people or private entities owning real property within a radius of
300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of
the application.  Said notice shall describe the proposed application and
invite persons to comment in writing on the application.  The notice shall
provide for a 10-day comment period, commencing upon the delivery or mailing
of said notice.



   (C)   Planning Director action.



      (1)   Following the 10-day public comment period, and upon
considering all communications received, the Planning Director may:



         (a)   Render a decision to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the Minor Modification application;



         (b)   Continue the matter for a specified time to allow
for further investigation; or



         (c)   Decline to make a decision on the basis that the
matter requires consideration by the Planning Commission.



      (2)   The Planning Director shall notify the applicant and
appropriate public officials of the decision.



      (3)   Any applicant, interested person, or public official may
appeal any decision of the Planning Director regarding a Minor Modification
to the Planning Commission in accord with the procedures set forth in Chapter
16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.222.040  FINDINGS.



   A Minor Modification application shall not be granted unless all of the
following findings can be made:



   (A)   Modification is needed to allow property to be used in a more
beneficial manner; and



   (B)   Modification would not be detrimental to public health,
safety, or general welfare or to surrounding property owners or the
community; and



   (C)   The granting of the application is compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood and would not impair the character of the
neighborhood in which it is located.



   (D)   The Minor Modification is consistent with the objectives,
goals, and policies of the Santa Paula General Plan and intent of the zoning
regulations.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.222.050  APPROVAL ATTACHED TO THE PROPERTY.



   A Minor Modification that is valid and in effect and granted pursuant
to the provisions of this Title 16 shall be valid only on the property for
which it was granted and only for the improvements for which it is granted
and further, shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the
property or any lawfully existing building or structure on the property. 



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.222.060  REVOCATION.



   The Planning Director shall have the authority to initiate proceedings
to suspend or revoke a Minor Modification pursuant to provisions set forth in
Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.222.070  TIME LIMIT FOR USING MINOR MODIFICATION APPROVAL.



   (A)   The grantee of a Minor Modification shall have one year from
the effective date of the approval to establish a right to use the approval;
otherwise, the approval shall lapse and shall become void.  For the purposes
of this section, such a right shall be established if either:



      (1)   A building permit has been issued and construction
commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which the
Minor Modification was approved; or



      (2)   In the event no building permit is required, a
certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure for which the
Minor Modification was approved; or



      (3)   In the event no building permit or occupancy is
required, the site for which the Minor Modification was approved is occupied;
or



      (4)   Prior to the date on which the Minor Modification will
elapse, the grantee files an application to renew the permit pursuant to
subsection (B) below.



   (B)   A Minor Modification approval subject to lapse may be renewed
for a single one-year period, provided that the application for renewal is
filed with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date.  Minor
Modifications granted for time extensions (§ 16.222.010 (B)(1)(f)) shall not
be eligible for Minor Modification renewal.



   (C)   The Planning Director may approve or deny an application for
renewal of a Minor Modification.  As part of the action, the Director may
also modify existing conditions of approval or add new conditions to reflect
any change in circumstances related to the Minor Modification and surrounding
properties.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.224:  ZONING CLEARANCE



Section



   16.224.010      Purpose and intent



   16.224.020      Applicability



   16.224.030      Proceedings



   16.224.040      Record of decision



§ 16.224.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The Zoning Clearance procedure is established as a mechanism to verify
that a proposed land use complies with the use regulations applicable to the
zoning district in which the subject property is located.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.224.020  APPLICABILITY.



   Prior to the issuance of a business license or a building, grading, or
other construction permit for a proposed use for which no discretionary land
use permit is required by this Title 16, the applicant must obtain a Zoning
Clearance from the Planning Department and any other city department with
jurisdiction over the subject use.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.224.030  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   The Planning Director or designee shall determine whether the
proposed use complies with the land use regulations of this Title 16. 
Written findings and recommendations shall be provided to city staff
responsible for permit issuance.  Where the Planning Director or designee
determines that the proposed use fails to comply with the regulations of this
Title 16, no permit shall be issued.



   (B)   Other city departments with jurisdiction over the subject use
shall review the subject application for compliance with applicable
regulations.  Written findings and recommendations shall be provided to city
staff responsible for permit issuance.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.224.040  RECORD OF DECISION.



   Where no other authorization is required, a request for Zoning
Clearance shall be filed on the forms provided by the Planning Department.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.226:  DESIGN REVIEW



Section



   16.226.010      Purpose and intent



   16.226.020      Applicability



   16.226.030      Design Review Committee



   16.226.040      Plans and drawings to be submitted



   16.226.050      Proceedings



   16.226.060      Effective date of decision



   16.226.070      Time limit for implementing design review approval



§ 16.226.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The design review process is established to:



   (A)   Promote orderly, attractive, and harmonious development
throughout Santa Paula;



   (B)   Recognize neighborhood character and environmental limitations
in development;



   (C)   Ensure that the design and exterior architectural treatment of
proposed structures complement the design or exterior architectural treatment
of existing structures in the immediate neighborhood and do not conflict with
existing development in any manner that would cause a substantial
depreciation of property values in the neighborhood; and



   (D)   Promote the general welfare by preventing establishment of
uses or erection of structures having qualities which would not meet the
specific intent clauses or performance standards of this Title 16, or which
are not properly related to their sites, surroundings, traffic circulation,
or environmental setting.



   (E)   Assure conformance with the provisions of this Title 16 and in
particular, for conformance with the design, land use regulations and
development standards set forth in Chapters 16.07 through 16.76 and the
Design Review Guidelines set forth in City Council Resolution 5298.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.226.020  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development
requiring a building permit, including:



      (1)   Any commercial or industrial development.



      (2)   Multi-family residential projects.



      (3)   Second units (a.k.a. granny flats)



      (4)   Single-family homes that are reviewed concurrently with
a tentative subdivision map.



      (5)   Single-family homes including manufactured homes being
moved onto an existing lot.



      (6)   Carports.



      (7)   Signs, pursuant to Chapter 16.48.



      (8)   Fences or walls on commercially or industrially zoned
property.



      (9)   Development of any structures intended for educational
(as allowed by state law), institutional, or similar purposes.



      (10)   Habitable accessory structures.



   (B)   Exceptions to the application of this Chapter 16.226 include:



      (1)   Single-family homes on existing residentially zoned
legal lots.



      (2)   Additions to single-family homes on residentially zoned
legal lots.



      (3)   Non-habitable accessory structures other than carports
on single-family residential lots.



      (4)   Interior modifications to a building or structure that
do not result in a change to the exterior appearance of the building or
structure.



   (C)   For any development proposal requiring a discretionary permit,
design review shall be conducted in conjunction with the discretionary permit
application.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1172,
passed 7-2-07)



§ 16.226.030  DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   (A)   A Design Review Committee, comprised of the Planning Director
or designee, City Engineer or designee, and representatives from the City
Building and Safety, Fire and Police Departments, is hereby established for
the purpose of conducting design review.



   (B)   The Design Review Committee shall be responsible for reviewing
relevant applications for conformance with the provisions of this Title 16
and in particular, for conformance with the design, land use regulations and
development standards set forth in Chapters 16.07 through 16.76 and the
Design Review Guidelines set forth in City Council Resolution 5298.



   (C)   In performing design review, the Committee shall be guided by
the statement of purpose set forth in § 16.226.010 (Intent and Purpose)
above.  Further, the Committee shall work to bar the unsightly, the
inharmonious, the monotonous, and the hazardous to ensure that proposed
improvements will not impair the desirability of investment or occupancy
nearby.  However, originality in site planning, architecture, landscaping,
and graphic design shall not be suppressed.



   (D)   Review by the Committee shall include exterior design,
materials, textures, colors, means of illumination, landscaping, grading,
signs, ingress/egress, parking, and other improvements to ensure that adverse
aesthetic and environmental impacts on and surrounding the site are minimized.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.226.040  PLANS AND DRAWINGS TO BE SUBMITTED.



   In addition to meeting of the other application requirements of this
Development Code, projects subject to design review shall be required to have
the following materials submitted to the Planning Department:



   (A)   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of
structures and other improvements, including, where appropriate, driveways,
pedestrian walkways, off-street parking areas, landscaped areas, fences, and
walls.  The site plan shall indicate the locations of off-street parking
areas, including entrances and exits, and the direction of traffic flow into
and out of off-street parking areas.



   (B)   A landscaped plan, drawn to scale, showing the locations of
existing trees proposed to be removed and proposed to be retained on the
site; the location and design of landscaped areas and the varieties and sizes
of plant materials to be planted therein; and other landscape features,
including irrigation system.



   (C)   Architectural drawings or sketches, drawn to scale, including
floor plans in sufficient detail to permit computation of yard requirements
and showing all elevations of the proposed structures as they will appear
upon completion.  All exterior surface materials and colors shall be
specified.



   (D)   Accurate scale drawings of all signs indicating sign size,
material, color, and illumination, if any.



   (E)   Grading and drainage plans may be required by the City
Engineer.



   (F)   Such other data required on the Planning Department
Instructions for Submitting Applications for the Design Review Committee to
ensure that the purposes of this section are satisfied.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.226.050  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Within 30 days of the date the application is submitted and
deemed complete by the Planning Director, the Design Review Committee shall
act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans and drawings,
or shall request the applicant to make revisions.  Failure of the Committee
to act within 30 days shall be deemed approval of the application, unless the
applicant consents in writing to an extension of time.



   (B)   The Planning Director or designee shall notify the applicant
of the decision in writing.



   (C)   In the event that the Design Review Committee requires
revisions to plans and drawings, and the applicant chooses not to revise
plans as directed by the Committee, and further provided that the Committee
chooses neither to approve, conditionally approve, nor disapprove the plans,
the applicant may appeal the Committee's decision not to take action to the
Planning Commission.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.226.060  EFFECTIVE DATE OF DECISION.



   The effective date of the Committee's decision shall be the date
indicated on the city document delivered to the applicant informing the
applicant of the Committee's decision.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.226.070  TIME LIMIT FOR IMPLEMENTING DESIGN REVIEW APPROVAL.



   (A)   A Design Review approval shall be implemented within one year
from the effective date of the approval to establish a right to use the
approval.  The approval shall lapse and become void after that one year
unless either:



      (1)   A building permit has been issued and construction
commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which
Design Review approval was granted; or



      (2)   Prior to the date on which Design Review approval will
lapse, the permittee files a written request to renew the Design Review
permit pursuant to subsection (B) below; or



      (3)   Associated Planning permits that have a longer
expiration period are obtained at the same time as Design Review approval, in
which case the later expiration date shall be observed.



   (B)   A Design Review approval subject to lapse may be renewed for a
maximum one-year period, provided that a written request for renewal is filed
with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 16.222 (Minor Modifications).



   (C)   The Planning Director may approve or deny an application for
renewal of a Design Review approval.  As part of the action, the Director
may also modify existing conditions of approval or add new conditions to
reflect any change in circumstances related to the project and surrounding
properties.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.227:  SECOND UNIT PERMIT



Section



   16.227.010      Purpose and intent



   16.227.020      Initiation



   16.227.030      Proceedings



   16.227.040      Condition of approval



   16.227.050      Time limit for implementing the Second Unit permit



§ 16.227.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Intent and purpose.  The intent and purpose of this
subchapter is to provide a means by which the city's existing, under-utilized
housing resources and infrastructure may be utilized more effectively to
produce affordable housing through the creation of new secondary dwellings on
lots with single-family homes.  Other benefits of the creation of second
units include the provision of lower cost housing without public subsidy,
providing a means for purchasers of new or existing homes to meet mortgage
payments and providing security for homeowners who fear criminal intrusion
and personal accidents while alone.



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   For the purposes of this Chapter 16.227, a Second Unit
Permit application shall be filed for the construction of a second unit, also
known as dependent housing or granny flats.



      (2)   Second units shall comply with the development standards
identified within § 16.13.190 (Development Standards for Second Dwelling
Units) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.227.020  INITIATION.



   (A)   An application for a second unit permit may be initiated by
any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed
application.  The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested
interest may also initiate an application.  The Planning Director may
request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance
of any application.



   (B)   The application for a second unit permit shall be filed in
accordance with the application filing requirements established in Chapter
16.202 (Applications, Processing, Filing, and Fees).



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.227.030  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Permit required.  No second units shall be constructed unless
a second unit permit has been issued by the city.  The Planning Director
shall establish the format and information required for a second unit permit
consistent with this subchapter.



   (B)   Planning Director action.



      (1)   Within 30 days of the date the application is submitted
and deemed complete by the Planning Director, the Director shall act to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans and drawings, or
shall request the applicant to make revisions.  Failure of the Director to
act within 30 days shall be deemed approval of the application, unless the
applicant consents in writing to an extension of time.



      (2)   Applications for second unit permits shall be approved
by the Planning Director if the proposal conforms to all requirements of this
Chapter 16.227, and all development standards identified within § 16.13.190
(Development Standards for Second Dwelling Units) of this Title 16.



      (3)   The Planning Director or designee shall notify the
applicant of the decision in writing.



      (4)   Any applicant, interested person, or public official may
appeal any decision of the Planning Director regarding a Second Unit Permit
to the Planning Commission in accord with the procedures set forth in Chapter
16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title 16.  Decisions made by the
Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.227.040  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   The following conditions of approval shall be established for approved
Second Unit permits.



      (1)   The second dwelling unit shall comply with all
applicable building, health and safety, and other City codes and ordinances,
including all development standards identified within § 16.13.190
(Development Standards for Second Dwelling Units) of this Title 16. 



      (2)   A code compliance investigation by the Building
Department at the applicant's expense shall be required as part of the
application.  Any unpermitted or nonconforming features of the property
shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Official prior to the
issuance of the second unit permit.



      (3)   All terms of the approval shall be recorded in a notice
of land use restriction on the property title.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.227.050  TIME LIMIT FOR IMPLEMENTING THE SECOND UNIT PERMIT.



   (A)   A Second Unit permit shall be implemented within one year from
the effective date of the approval to establish a right to use the
approval.  The approval shall lapse and become void after that one year
unless either:



      (1)   A building permit has been issued and construction
commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which the
Second Unit permit was granted; or



      (2)   Prior to the date on which the Second Unit permit will
lapse, the permittee files a written request to renew the Second Unit permit
pursuant to subsection (B) below; or



      (3)   Associated Planning permits that have a longer
expiration period are obtained at the same time as the Second Unit permit, in
which case the later expiration date shall be observed.



   (B)   A Second Unit permit subject to lapse may be renewed for a
maximum one-year period, provided that a written request for renewal is filed
with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 16.222 (Minor Modifications).



   (C)   The Planning Director may approve or deny an application for
renewal of the Second Unit permit.  As part of the action, the Director may
also modify existing conditions of approval or add new conditions to reflect
any change in circumstances related to the project and surrounding properties.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.228:  TEMPORARY USE PERMIT



Section



   16.228.010      Purpose and intent



   16.228.020      Initiation



   16.228.030      Proceedings



   16.228.040      Conditions of approval



   16.228.050      Bonds may be required



   16.228.060      Specific conditions for Specific Uses



   16.228.070      Signage for temporary events



§ 16.228.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The Temporary Use Permit is established to allow certain uses
to operate for limited, defined periods at locations on private property
throughout the city, provided the uses are regulated so as to avoid adverse
impacts on the neighborhoods in which they occur.



   (B)   Temporary Use Permit applications may only be considered for
properties located within zoning districts where such temporary uses are
permitted.  The land use regulations contained in Chapters 16.07 through
16.33 (Zones, Land Use Regulations, and Development Standards) of this Title
16 indicate where such conditions apply.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.228.020 INITIATION.



   An application for a Temporary Use Permit may be initiated by any
person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed
application.  The authorized agent of any person with a legal vested
interest may also initiate an application.  The Planning Director may
request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance
of any application.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.228.030  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   An application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be submitted
no less than 14 days prior to the proposed first day of the event.



   (B)   Upon acceptance of a Temporary Use Permit application as
complete, the Planning Director or the designee shall review the application
for conformance with the provisions of this Title 16.  No public hearing
shall be required, unless determined appropriate by the Planning Director, in
accordance with section (D) below.  Based on this review, the Director shall
act to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application.



   (C)   Within ten days of receiving a completed application, the
Planning Director or designee shall issue a statement of decisions and
findings.  The statement shall recite, among other things, the facts and
reasons for granting or denying the application. 



   (D)   The Planning Director shall have the option to refer the
application to the Planning Commission for disposition of the request.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.228.040  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   In granting a Temporary Use Permit, the Planning Director may
impose conditions on a use to include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Number of days the event can occur;



      (2)   Hours of operation;



      (3)   Location or placement of temporary walls or fences;



      (4)   Type, size and number of signs;



      (5)   Lighting;



      (6)   Noise, including live entertainment, music or use of
amplifying equipment;



      (7)   Traffic circulation, ingress, and egress; or



      (8)   Other conditions deemed necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   Specific uses and activities listed in § 16.228.060 below
shall be subject to the conditions specified for that use or activity.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.228.050  BONDS MAY BE REQUIRED.



   Prior to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit, the city may require a
cash bond to be deposited with the city for the purpose of defraying the
costs of enforcement and property damage repair or cleanup by the city, in
the event the permittee fails to do so.  The amount of cash bond shall be
established by the Planning Director or Planning Commission in the permit
conditions of approval.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.228.060  SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES.



   (A)   General.  Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left
free of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use and shall
thereafter be used only in accordance with the requirements of the zone
district in which the site is located.



   (B)   Temporary structures and enclosures.  Temporary structures
and enclosures, including camping tents and framed vehicle covers, are
prohibited except as part of a festival, party or event for duration not to
exceed ten consecutive days.



   (C)   Art and craft shows and exhibits.  A Temporary Use Permit for
outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits, or any similar use is subject to
the following condition:



      (1)   Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits shall be
limited to 15 days of operation or exhibition at any one location within any
90-day period.



      (2)   The applicant shall agree to register the City of Santa
Paula as the point-of-sale for every sales transaction at the event, and all
sales taxes collected for such sales shall be registered as having been
collected in the city.



      (3)   A written report of all sales proceeds and the taxes
collected thereon shall be furnished to the Finance Department within one
week after the sales event.



   (D)   Construction office, real estate office or caretaker mobile
home.  A Temporary Use Permit for a construction office, real estate office,
temporary caretaker mobile home, or any similar use is subject to the
following condition:



      (1)   Such office or residence shall only be permitted on the
site of an active construction project.



      (2)   Only one construction office, one real estate office or
one temporary caretaker residence shall be permitted on a site.



      (3)   A building permit is required to install such
structures. 



      (4)   Such office or residence shall be removed upon issuance
of an occupancy permit for the primary permitted use.



   (E)   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, and similar uses.  A Temporary
Use Permit for a carnival, circus, fair, or any similar use is subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access shall be
provided.



      (2)   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.



      (3)   All noise, dust, and other objectionable elements shall
be abated.



      (4)   Animals that cause excessive noise, odor, or disturbing
elements shall not be permitted on the premises.



      (5)   The site shall be cleaned and restored within one week
of termination of the use.



      (6)   The applicant shall agree to register the City of Santa
Paula as the point-of-sale for every sales transaction at the event, and all
sales taxes collected for such sales shall be registered as having been
collected in the city.



      (7)   A written report of all sales proceeds and the taxes
collected thereon shall be furnished to the Finance Department within one
week after the sales event.



   (F)   Christmas tree, pumpkin, flower and similar seasonal outdoor
sales.  A Temporary Use Permit for a seasonal outdoor sale is subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   A temporary seasonal sales facility shall not be open
for business more than a total of 40 days during any one calendar year.



      (2)   A permitted temporary seasonal sales facility shall not
engage in the sale of any merchandise not directly associated with the
specific holiday for which the sale is being held.



      (3)   After the holiday, the facility shall be removed and the
premises cleared of all debris and restored to at least as good a condition
as existed prior to the establishment of the facility.



      (4)   A permitted temporary seasonal sales facility shall not
be located within the public right of way, within the required handicapped
access way, or on required parking for a property.



      (5)   The applicant shall agree to register the City of Santa
Paula as the point-of-sale for every sales transaction at the event, and all
sales taxes collected for such sales shall be registered as having been
collected in the city.



      (6)   A written report of all sales proceeds and the taxes
collected thereon shall be furnished to the Finance Department within one
week after the sales event.



      (7)   The Planning Director may impose any other conditions
deemed necessary to protect general health, welfare, and peace of the
surrounding area.



   (G)   Parking lot and other outdoor sales.



      (1)   Parking lot and sidewalk sales, not to include
automotive sales events as outlined under (H) below, shall be limited to one
sale per calendar quarter and not more than four sales events per year are
permitted outright on commercially zoned property, subject to the following
conditions.



         (a)   Sponsored by an established, fixed business on the
same property.



         (b)   The merchandise is normally sold by the business.



         (c)   Such events shall be limited to three consecutive
days of operation for a regular weekend, or four consecutive days for any
weekend that includes a national holiday.



         (d)   A Temporary Use Permit shall be required for more
than four such events in a calendar year on a single property.



      (2)   A Temporary Use Permit for outdoor rummage sales,
outdoor auctions and other outdoor sales, not to include parking lot and
sidewalk sales as discussed above, is subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Sponsored and operated by a local nonprofit
organization or a business on the same property.



         (b)   Such events shall be limited to one sales event
every six months.



         (c)   Such events shall be limited to three consecutive
days of operation for a regular weekend, or four consecutive days for any
weekend that includes a national holiday.



         (d)   The applicant shall agree to register the City of
Santa Paula as the point-of-sale for every sales transaction at the event,
and all sales taxes collected for such sales shall be registered as having
been collected in the city.



         (e)   A written report of all sales proceeds and the
taxes collected thereon shall be furnished to the Finance Department within
one week after the sales event.



         (f)   The Planning Director may impose any other
conditions deemed necessary to protect general health, welfare, and peace of
the surrounding area.



   (H)   Automotive sales events.  A Temporary Use Permit for an
automotive sales event, to include a "tent" event for the sale of
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, trailers, recreational vehicles or boats,
is subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Automotive sales events shall be permitted only on sites
that meet all of the following criteria:



         (a)   Commercially zoned property; and



         (b)   Site exceeds one acre in size; and



         (c)   Site has excess parking spaces available above the
number of parking spaces required for the existing uses on the property, in
accordance with Chapter 16.46 of this Title 16.  The event shall not be
located on any of the required parking spaces for the existing uses on the
property, unless such use is not operating at the same time as the event.



      (2)   Automotive sales events shall be limited to no more than
ten events in a calendar year on a single property, with a maximum of two
such events on a single property within the same 30 day period.



      (3)   Such events shall be limited to three consecutive days
of operation for a regular weekend, or four consecutive days for any weekend
that includes a national holiday.



      (4)   A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for more than
ten automotive sales events in a calendar year on a single property.



      (5)   The site layout for the event shall comply with current
building and fire codes for the State of California and the City of Santa
Paula, and shall be reviewed by the Building & Safety Department and Fire
Department accordingly.



      (6)   The applicant shall agree to register the City of Santa
Paula as the point-of-sale for every sales transaction at the event, and all
sales taxes collected for such sales shall be registered as having been
collected in the city.



      (7)   A written report of all sales proceeds and the taxes
collected thereon shall be furnished to the Finance Department within one
week after the sales event.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.228.070  SIGNAGE FOR TEMPORARY EVENTS.



   (A)   Signage for temporary uses is permitted, provided such signage
complies with regulations set forth in Chapter 16.48 (Signs) of this Title 16.



   (B)   All signage for a temporary use shall be removed within two
days of the termination of the use.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



Chapter 16.230:  HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT



Section



   16.230.010      Purpose and intent



   16.230.020      Initiation



   16.230.030      Proceedings



   16.230.040      Prohibited home occupations



   16.230.050      Conditions of approval



   16.230.060      Home occupation performance standards



   16.230.070      Fines and penalties



§ 16.230.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The city recognizes that an occupant of a residential property
has a limited right to conduct non-obtrusive business from a residence, and
that the average neighbor generally will prefer to have that business
conducted in such a fashion that neighbors are unaware of its existence. This
chapter is established to allow such home occupations to exist, provided the
residential character of residential neighborhoods is maintained and further
provided safeguards are established to prevent the use of home occupations
from transforming the use of a residence into a commercial use or a
residential neighborhood into a commercial one.



   (B)   Home occupations encourage and promote efforts to reduce
traffic congestion and the generation of pollutants by allowing and
recognizing changing work environments, including telecommuting and
work-at-home options. Such businesses are allowed in the city subject to the
regulations of this chapter.



(Ord. 1162, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.230.020  INITIATION.



   (A)   An application for a home occupation permit may be initiated
by any occupant of the residence. For



rental property, written authorization for the proposed use must be given by
the property owner or the property owner's representative.



   (B)   An application must be filed pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 16.202 (Applications, Processing, Filing, and Fees) of this Title 16.



   (C)   A business license tax must be paid pursuant to Chapter 110 of
the Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1162, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.230.030  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   The establishment of a home occupation within any residential
dwelling unit will be regulated by a one-time application and fee.



   (B)   An application for a  home occupation permit must be
submitted to the Planning Department on forms supplied by the Department. The
applicant must provide information required by the application and any
additional information requested by the Planning Department to assist in the
review of the permit request.



   (C)   The application must be referred to the Planning Director or
appointed designee for review and to determine compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Planning Director or designee will have the authority to
consult with other city departments regarding the proposed application. As
part of the application review an inspection by the Building and Safety
Department will be conducted.



   (D)   Within ten days of receiving a completed application, the
Planning Director will act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application. Any decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning
Commission pursuant to Chapter 16.206 (Appeals and Revocations) of this Title
16.



   (E)   The dwelling in which the home occupation is being conducted
shall be open for inspection to city personnel, at reasonable times during
normal business hours, for the purpose of inspecting to determine whether or
not the conditions of this section are being complied with.



(Ord. 1162, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.230.040  PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   The following uses, either by operation or nature, are not incidental
to or compatible with residential activities and shall not be permitted as
home occupations:



   (A)   Adult businesses including escort services, massage parlors
and the making of adult movies.



   (B)   Animal boarding, breeding or grooming facilities.



   (C)   Automotive and other vehicle repair (body or mechanical)
upholstery, painting or storage.



   (D)   Barber or beauty shop.



   (E)   Carpentry or cabinet making.



   (F)   Firearms/weapons dealerships.



   (G)   Retail sales.



   (H)   Welding or machine operation.



   (I)   Any other use, as determined by the Director not to be
incidental to or compatible with residential activities.



(Ord. 1162, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.230.050  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   The Planning Director or appointed designee will have the authority to
impose conditions on a home occupation permit to ensure compliance with the
intent of this Title 16, including compliance with the performance standards
contained in § 16.230.060 below.



(Ord. 1162, passed 6-19-06)



§ 16.230.060  HOME OCCUPATION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Home occupations are uses that do not interrupt or interfere
with the general nature or residential character of the residential
neighborhood in which they are located.



   (B)   All permitted home occupations must comply with the following
performance standards:



      (1)   A home occupation business must be clearly incidental to
the residential use of the property, and the dwelling unit must be the
principal residence of the home occupation business owner.



      (2)   Home occupations cannot generate pedestrian or vehicular
traffic beyond that considered normal within the surrounding residential
district.



      (3)   A home occupation must be conducted within a dwelling
unit, or within an approved accessory structure. Accessory buildings used for
home occupations must comply with the provisions of this Code, cannot contain
kitchen facilities, and may only be located within single-family residential
zones.



      (4)   Not more than 25% of the existing square footage of a
dwelling unit up to a maximum of 500 square feet may be used for the home
occupation business.



      (5)   The operation of a home occupation cannot interfere with
the maintenance of any required parking spaces, including spaces required to
be provided within a garage.



      (6)   The appearance of the dwelling or accessory structure
within which the home occupation is conducted cannot be altered (for example,
but without limitation, by using color, materials, construction, lighting,
signs, sounds, noises, vibrations, or equipment displays) to make it
recognizable as serving a nonresidential use.



      (7)   The home occupation permit applicant and other persons
who use the dwelling as their primary residence may be involved in the home
occupation use. All residents involved in the home occupation use must be
listed on the application. In addition, one nonresident employee or
independent contractor, whether paid or not for their services, may be
involved in the home occupation use on the property provided that there is
only one such person on the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., Monday through Friday. Off-street parking must be available on the site
for the nonresident employee. Home occupations conducted within an accessory
structure on the site are limited to resident employees only.



      (8)   If the business employs other persons whose work
activities are performed off the premises, such individuals are not allowed
to gather or congregate on the premises in connection with a home occupation.



      (9)   The home occupation permit is valid only for the person
to whom it is issued and is void when that person moves from the dwelling
unit or discontinues or alters the business so that the information provided
on the application is no longer valid. Property owner's are required to sign
the home occupation permit application. Home occupation permits must be
renewed every five years.



      (10)   A maximum of two home occupation permits may be issued
for any residence. However, the limitations set forth in the performance
standards are applied singularly not cumulatively.



      (11)   No direct retail or wholesale sales may be conducted on
the premises of any home occupation.



      (12)   Up to four customers or visitors related to the home
occupation are allowed daily, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
provided that the home occupation does not generate vehicle traffic beyond
that considered characteristic of the surrounding residential district.
Personal service uses involving the instruction or tutoring of an individual
may be allowed subject to approval by the Planning Director, if the use is in
keeping with the stated intent of the section and not determined to be
potentially detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood.



      (13)   Deliveries or pick-ups made by a courier or delivery
service as part of the home occupation are limited to two a day.



      (14)   Only one vehicle with a capacity not exceeding
three-quarter ton may be used directly or indirectly in connection with a
home occupation. No commercial vehicles may be used as part of the home
occupation. Off-street parking must be provided for any vehicle used in
connection with the home occupation.



      (15)   No signs identifying or advertising the home occupation
business may be posted on the property, on other nearby residential
properties, or on the public right-of-way.



      (16)   No merchandise or products can be visible from outside
the residence or accessory structure.



      (17)   No newspaper or other advertising is allowed which
identifies the address of the residence as a place of business.



      (18)   Outdoor storage, display of merchandise, products,
materials, supplies or operations are prohibited on the premises.



      (19)   Activities conducted and equipment or material used
cannot change the fire safety or occupancy classification of the premises.
The use cannot employ the storage of pesticides, explosives, flammable, or
hazardous materials, or waste of any kind brought onto the property as part
of the occupation.



      (20)   No use of utilities or community facilities is
permitted beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential
purposes.



      (21)   No refuse or trash can be generated in quantities or
types not normally associated with residential uses.



      (22)   No equipment or process can be used that creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable off the
premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process can
be used that creates visual or audible interference upon any radio or
television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage
off the premises.



(Ord. 1162, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 1192, passed 6-16-08)



§ 16.230.070  FINES AND PENALTIES.



   A permittee who violates any of the performance standards listed in §
16.230.050 above or any permit conditions may be subject to fines as
established by resolution of the City Council and/or permit revocation
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.206 of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1162, passed 6-19-06)



CHAPTER 16.234:  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS



Section



   16.234.010      Purpose and intent



   16.234.020      Initiation



   16.234.030      Applicability



   16.234.040      Contents of Development Agreement



   16.234.050      Proceedings - Planning Commission



   16.234.060      Proceedings - City Council



   16.234.070      Findings and adoption



   16.234.080      Recordation



   16.234.090      Amendment or cancellation



   16.234.100      Periodic review



   16.234.110      Separate procedure



   16.234.120      Effect of Development Agreement



   16.234.130      Construction



§ 16.234.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of a Development Agreement is to ensure
to the applicant for a development project that upon approval of the project,
the applicant may proceed with the project in accordance with clearly stated
policies, rules and regulations, and subject to specified conditions of
approval.  Development Agreements also ensure that all conditions of
approval, including the construction of off-site improvements made necessary
by such land developments, will proceed in an orderly and economical manner
to the benefit of the city.



   (B)   Intent.  This Chapter 16.234 is enacted to achieve the
maximum utilization of public and private resources in the development
process, and ensure, to the extent feasible, that appropriate measures to
enhance and protect the environment of the city are reached.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.020  INITIATION.



   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65865, any person having a legal or
equitable interest in real property for the development of such property, or
any person acting as the authorized agent for such property owner, may apply
to the city for a Development Agreement.  Applications must be filed
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.202 (Applications, Processing,
Filing, and Fees) of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.030  APPLICABILITY.



   The City Council finds that it may be in the city's best interest to
enter into a Development Agreement when a project is to:



   (A)   Be phased over a period of years;



   (B)   Receive a density bonus;



   (C)   Consist of 20 residential units or more;



   (D)   Occupy more than two acres;



   (E)   Be a project subject to development approval pursuant to this
Title 16;



   (F)   Involve the amendment of the General Plan of the city;



   (G)   Involve the formation of any assessment, benefit, maintenance,
or special benefit district, or for the installation of required or necessary
on-site or off-site improvements or infrastructure;



   (H)   Involve mitigation measures imposed upon a development project
as a consequence of the approval of an environmental impact report in which
such mitigation measures are a condition as a mechanism for eliminating or
reducing environmental impacts; or



   (I)   Proceed upon a determination by the City Council to be in the
best interests of the city.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.040  CONTENTS OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.



   (A)   All draft and final Development Agreements must contain the
following information:



      (1)   The duration of the Agreement;



      (2)   The permitted uses of the property;



      (3)   The density or intensity of permitted uses;



      (4)   The maximum height and size of proposed buildings; and



      (5)   Provisions for reservation or dedication of lands for
public purposes.



   (B)   The Development Agreement may also contain the following
information:



      (1)   Conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for
subsequent discretionary actions, provided such conditions, terms,
provisions, and requirements do not prevent development of land for the
purposes and level of use set forth in the Agreement.



      (2)   Requirements that construction be commenced within a
specified time period, and that



the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time frame.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.050  PROCEEDINGS - PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Upon receiving a Development Agreement application, the
Planning Director will make a determination as to whether the application is
complete.  If deemed incomplete, the application will be returned to the
applicant for further information.  In deemed complete, the Director will
review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to
complete the Agreement.



   (B)   The Director will prepare a report outlining facts and
recommendations relative to the application.  The report will be provided to
the Planning Commission prior to any scheduled public hearing on the
application.



   (C)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission will be
noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public
Hearings).



   (D)   The Planning Commission will make a recommendation to the City
Council to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the Development
Agreement application.



   (E)   As part of its recommendation to the City Council, the
Planning Commission may recommend use of a Development Agreement as a method
of implementing or providing standards and criteria for any development
approval so long as the development meets the applicability requirements set
forth in this Chapter 16.234.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.060  PROCEEDINGS - CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   A public hearing before the City Council will be noticed and
conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.204 (Public Hearings) of
this Title 16.



   (B)   At the hearing, the City Council will consider the Planning
Commission's recommendation together with any additional public testimony,
and may approve, disapprove, or modify any recommendation of the Planning
Commission.  If public testimony is presented on an issue that was not
considered by the Planning Commission, the City Council may refer the issue
back to the Planning Commission for further hearings and recommendations.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.070  FINDINGS AND ADOPTION.



   (A)   Findings required.  When acting to approve a Development
Agreement application, or approve in modified form, the City Council will be
required to make the following findings on the Agreement:



      (1)   The proposed Agreement is consistent with the
objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the General
Plan and any applicable specific plans;



      (2)   The proposed Agreement is compatible with the uses
authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the zone in which the real
property is or will be located;



      (3)   The proposed Agreement will promote public convenience,
general welfare, and good land use practice;



      (4)   The proposed Agreement will not adversely affect the
orderly development of property or the preservation of property values; and



      (5)   The proposed Agreement will promote and encourage the
development of the proposed project.



   (B)   Adoption by ordinance.  If the City Council approves the
Development Agreement, it will do so by adoption of an ordinance.  The city
may enter into the Agreement after the ordinance approving the Development
Agreement takes effect.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.080  RECORDATION.



   Within ten calendar days after the city enters into the Development
Agreement, the City Clerk will record the Agreement with the Ventura County
Recorder.  If the parties to the Agreement or their successors in interest
amend or cancel the Agreement as provided in § 16.234.090 of this Chapter
16.234, or if the city terminates or modifies the Agreement as provided in §
16.234.090 of this Chapter 16.234 for failure of the applicant to comply in
good faith with the terms or conditions of the Agreement, the City Clerk will
record notice of such action with the County Recorder.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.090  AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION.



   (A)   Initiation of amendment or cancellation.  Any Development
Agreement may be canceled or amended by mutual consent of the parties.



   (B)   Procedures.



      (1)   Cancellation or modification by mutual consent.  Any
proposal to cancel or modify a Development Agreement will be heard and
determined in accordance with the procedures specified by this Chapter 16.234
for approval of a Development Agreement.



      (2)   Cancellation by city.  If, at any time during the term
of a Development Agreement, it is found that the party to the Agreement has
not complied with the terms and conditions of the Development Agreement, a
public hearing will be held by the City Council at which time the party to
the Agreement will be given the opportunity to demonstrate otherwise.  The
burden of proof will be upon the party to the Agreement to show compliance by
substantial evidence.  If such compliance is not shown, the City Council may
either cancel the Development Agreement, or continue the Agreement on such
terms and conditions as it may consider appropriate under the circumstances.



   (C)   Rights of the parties after cancellation or termination.



      (1)   In the event that a Development Agreement is canceled or
otherwise terminated, unless otherwise agreed, all rights of the party to the
Agreement or successors in interest under the Development Agreement will
terminate.



      (2)   Any and all benefits, including money or land, received
by the city will be retained by the city.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, any termination of
a Development Agreement will not revoke a valid building permit previously
issued by the city for any improvement authorized by the Development
Agreement.  All such completed or completing uses will, to the extent
possible, be deemed nonconforming uses, and will be subject to the
nonconforming use provisions of this Title 16.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.100  PERIODIC REVIEW.



   (A)   Time for and initiation of review.  The city will review all
Development Agreements once every 12 months  after the city enters into such
Agreements.



   (B)   Applicant's submission.  Between 45 and 60 days prior to the
yearly anniversary of the date a Development Agreement was entered into, the
party to the Agreement or successors in interest will submit evidence to the
Planning Director of good-faith compliance with the Agreement and will notify
the Director in writing that such evidence is being submitted to the city
pursuant to the periodic review requirements of this section.  Said
notification will be accompanied by a processing fee as specified in the
city's fee schedule.



   (C)   Findings of compliance.  If the party to the Agreement or
successors in interest has complied with the terms of the Development
Agreement, a finding of compliance will be issued, which may be recorded by
the Party to the Agreement or successors in interest with the Ventura County
Recorder.



   (D)   Finding of noncompliance.  If, on the basis of substantial
evidence, it is found that the party to the Agreement or successor in
interest has not complied with the terms of the Development Agreement, the
party to the Agreement or successor in interest will be notified in writing
of the grounds of noncompliance.  A reasonable time period will be specified
in which the party to the Agreement or successor in interest must comply. 
If the party to the Agreement or successor in interest does not comply within
the time limits prescribed, the Development Agreement will be subject to
cancellation pursuant to § 16.234.090 of this Chapter 16.234.



   (E)   Appeal of determination.  Upon the payment of the required
fee, any interested person may file an appeal of the issuance of a finding of
compliance, or notice of noncompliance, to the City Council within ten
calendar days after the date of issuance or notice.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.110  SEPARATE PROCEDURE.



   The Development Agreement process set forth in this Chapter 16.234 will
be separate from other land use planning procedures.  If so specified in the
Development Agreement, it will constitute an approval pursuant to such
planning procedures as if separately enacted under city planning ordinances
or resolutions.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.120  EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.



   When approved, the Development Agreement and any development control
maps and all notations, references, and regulations that are a part of the
Development Agreement will be part of the Development Agreement ordinance. 
Development control maps include, but are not limited to, regulations
intended to carry out any plan respecting location or type of activities;
height, bulk, siding, or design of structures; location or design of open
areas; and landscaping and other comparable regulations.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



§ 16.234.130  CONSTRUCTION.



   This Chapter 16.234 and any subsequent Development Agreement will be
read together.  With respect to any Development Agreement enacted under this
Chapter 16.234, any provision of such a Development Agreement that is in
conflict with this Chapter 16.234 will be void.  Unless otherwise provided
by the Development Agreement, the city's rules, regulations, and official
policies governing permitted uses of land, governing density, and governing
design, improvement construction standards and specifications applicable to
development of the property subject to a Development Agreement will be those
City rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of the
approval, or modification, of the Development Agreement by the City Council;
provided, however, that the party to the Agreement or successor in interest
is subject to all increases in city- imposed fees, dedication requirements,
and charges with respect to subsequent applications for development and
construction within the property subject to a Development Agreement.



(Ord. 1104, passed 7-19-04)



CHAPTER 16.236:  ANNEXATIONS



Section



   16.236.010      Purpose and intent



   16.236.020      Relationship to other laws



   16.236.030      Definitions



   16.236.040      Initiation



   16.236.050      Annexation procedures



   16.236.060      Pre-application conference required



   16.236.070      Preparation and content



   16.236.080      School agreement



   16.236.090      Infrastructure improvement description



   16.236.100      Planning Commission review and action



   16.236.110      City Council review and action



   16.236.120      City Council findings required



   16.236.130      Proceed to LAFCO



§ 16.236.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This chapter is established in accordance with the Cortese-Knox Local
Government Reorganization Act of 2000 (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 56000 et seq.) to
address annexations, reorganizations, consolidations and similar procedures
of the city.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.020  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.



   Any provision of this chapter that is more stringent than federal or
state law is intended to supplement, not conflict with, federal or state law
and to apply unless a court of law conclusively determines that the provision
is preempted. Nothing in this section precludes the city from establishing
the time limits for completion of the annexation proceedings and initiation
of project requiring such approvals, provided such time limits are authorized
by law.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.030  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter.



   ACT means the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government Reorganization
Act of 2000 (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 56000 et seq.), and any subsequently
adopted amendments or successor statutes. Unless specified otherwise, all
citations in this chapter to an unspecified code are to the California
Government Code;



   CEQA means, collectively, the California Environmental Quality Act
(Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§21000, et seq.) the regulations promulgated
thereunder (14 Cal. Code of Regs. §§ 15000, et seq., the "CEQA
Guidelines"), and the city's Environmental Guidelines;



   LAFCO means the Ventura Local Agency Formation Commission.



   LCA CONTRACT means a contract entered into pursuant to the California
Land Conservation Act (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51200 et seq.)



   CURB BOUNDARY means a City Urban Restriction Boundary established in
accordance with the Santa Paula General Plan.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.040  INITIATION.



   (A)   Annexation applications with the city may be initiated by:



      (1)   An application by an owner or agent of such owner
seeking an annexation of property to the city's jurisdiction;



      (2)   The application of a public agency authorized to
exercise the power of eminent domain; or



      (3)   The City Council.



   (B)   An application must be filed in accordance with this Code.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.050  ANNEXATION PROCEDURES.



   Annexations, reorganizations, consolidations and similar procedures
must be processed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.060  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE REQUIRED.



   A pre-application conference with the Planning Director, or designee,
is required before the formal submission of an annexation application. During
the pre-application conference, the Planning Director, or designee, will
review with the applicant the city's requirements for application content;
anticipated plans, reports, and studies required for the annexation
application; applicable policies; infrastructure needs; and other information
determined by the Planning Director. In addition, the Planning Director will
inform the applicant whether a Specific Plan, Development Agreement, or
other, similar, discretionary approval is required for a proposed annexation.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.070  PREPARATION AND CONTENT.



   As part of an annexation application, the applicant must provide the
following:



   (A)   An application for pre-zoning;



   (B)   If applicable, an application for a zone change;



   (C)   Proof of ownership, legal description, and proof of consent or
dissent to the application of all persons with an ownership interest in the
real property proposed for annexation;



   (D)   An identification of LCA contracts; CURB boundary amendments;
Sphere of Influence boundary adjustments; or other applicable property
restrictions that may be required for annexation;



   (E)   Boundary map, prepared by a civil engineer or licensed
surveyor, in accordance with the requirements of the Ventura County
Surveyor's Office. At a minimum, a boundary map submitted to the city must
contain the following information:



      (1)   A sufficient legal description of the land to define the
boundaries of the proposed annexation of land.



      (2)   The date, north arrow, and scale.



      (3)   The name and address of the property owner(s), and the
civil engineer or licensed surveyor under whose direction the map was
prepared, including the registration number of the engineer or surveyor and
the names and addresses of all operators of the utility systems of the
subdivision.



      (4)   The existing topography of land proposed to be annexed
using contour intervals as follows: One foot when the slope of the ground is
less than 5%; two feet when the slope of the ground is between 5% and 10%;
five feet when the slope of the ground is between 10% and 25%; and ten feet
when the slope of the ground is greater than 25%.



      (5)   The approximate location and outline to scale of each
building or structure on each property proposed for annexation. Each building
shown must be identified by street address or other identifying feature, and
include a notation on whether each building, structure, fence, wall, or land
use will be retained.



      (6)   The locations of any existing water wells and septic
tanks, and descriptions of the proposed source of water supply and the
proposed method of sewage disposal.



      (7)   The width, purpose, and approximate location of all
easements or rights-of-way, whether public or private, within and adjacent to
the annexation.



      (8)   The approximate location of all areas subject to
inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width, and direction of
flow of each watercourse and existing flood control district channels within
one-half mile of the exterior boundaries of the proposed annexation.



      (9)   Through the application review process, the City
Engineer or Planning Director may require that additional information be
included on the map to provide important or necessary disclosures or other
information;



   (F)   A fiscal impact analysis unless the annexation application is
for public facilities, public open space and parkland, and island annexations
under five acres;



   (G)   Any memorandum of understanding with public school districts
("School Agreement") affected by the proposed annexation as required by this
chapter unless the proposed annexation includes public facilities, public
open space and parkland, and island annexations under five acres;



   (H)   Identification of any geologic hazards;



   (I)   A written commitment to transfer or otherwise dedicate to the
city, at an appropriate time



following the effective date of the annexation, all water rights associated
with the property;



   (J)   If required, a Specific Plan in conformance with this Code; and



   (K)   All applicable LAFCO fees.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.080  SCHOOL AGREEMENT.



   Before applying for annexation, an applicant must enter into a School
Agreement with each impacted public school district that addresses all issues
associated with a proposed project including, without limitation, any capital
costs associated with new or expanded school facilities.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.090  INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT DESCRIPTION.



   The annexation application must include a complete description of the
proposed source, distribution, location, extent and intensity of major
components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage,
solid waste disposal, energy, and other essential facilities proposed to be
located within the area covered by the annexation and needed to support the
land uses. Such information may be provided on a tentative map if a
subdivision is proposed.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.100  PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW AND ACTION.



   (A)   A complete annexation application will be considered by the
Planning Commission at a public hearing.



   (B)   By resolution, the Planning Commission may recommend that the
City Council approve, approve with modifications, or deny a proposed
annexation application.



   (C)   A proposed annexation inconsistent with the General Plan may
not be recommended or adopted until the General Plan is amended to eliminate
such inconsistency. Such a General Plan amendment and any development
proposal relying on the amendment must be considered concurrently with the
annexation application.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.110  CITY COUNCIL REVIEW AND ACTION.



   (A)   After receiving a Planning Commission resolution, the City
Clerk will set the matter for a public hearing before the City Council.



   (B)   Following the public hearing, the City Council will, by
resolution, approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed annexation
application along with any other discretionary approvals required for a
proposed annexation.



   (C)   If an application is approved, the City Council will direct
the City Manager or designee to forward the annexation application to LAFCO
for approval.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.120  CITY COUNCIL FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   The City Council must make the following findings before approving an
annexation:



   (A)   That the proposed annexation is consistent with the goals,
policies, and objectives of the General Plan;



   (B)   That the proposed annexation will not adversely or
significantly impact surrounding properties;



   (C)   That the proposed annexation promotes public health, safety,
or general welfare and serves the goals and purposes of this Code;



   (D)   That the city has sufficient capacity and ability for
providing all city services upon annexation, or within a reasonable time of
annexation; and



   (E)   That the proposed annexation will pay for itself and will not
bring any fiscal or economic burden onto the city.  The City Council may
deny annexation applications for projects which fail to demonstrate in the
fiscal impact analysis that projected annual total revenues generated by the
project will equal or exceed the projected annual aggregate costs for
municipal services.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



§ 16.236.130  PROCEED TO LAFCO.



   (A)   Upon City Council approval of the proposed annexation, the
City Manager or designee will file a certified copy of the City Council
resolution and application for reorganization with LAFCO, in accordance with
the provisions of the Act and LAFCO rules.



   (B)   The city will oppose any annexation application filed with
LAFCO that did not obtain approval in conformance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1133, passed 4-4-05)



CHAPTER 16.237:  81 ACRE INITIATIVE IMPLEMENTATION



Section




   16.237.010   Purpose





   16.237.020   Administration of chapter





   16.237.030   Definitions





   16.237.040   Applicability





   16.237.050   Exemptions





   16.237.060   Environmental assessment





   16.237.070   One vote required





   16.237.080   Sunset Clause




§ 16.237.010  PURPOSE.



   This chapter implements Section III(G) of the Santa Paula General Plan
by establishing specific procedures and parameters needed to approve proposed
development projects comprising 81 or more acres in size. The voters of the
city adopted Measure L6, the "Citizens Advocating Responsible Expansion
Initiative," on November 7, 2006 which amended the Land Use Element of the
General Plan. This chapter is intended to clarify the law to avoid needless
confusion, duplication of effort, and uncertainty for persons seeking city
approvals for large development projects and for city officials responsible
for enforcing applicable law.



(Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



§ 16.237.020  ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.



   The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to implement this chapter
in a manner consistent with the California Constitution and other applicable
law including, without limitation, Section III(G) of the Santa Paula General
Plan.



(Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



§ 16.237.030  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the
meaning set forth in the Initiative (as defined below) or, if neither set
forth in the Initiative or this chapter, other provisions of this Code.



   (A)   CEQA means the California Environmental Quality Act (Public
Resources Code §§ 21000, et seq.) and the regulations promulgated
thereunder (14 Cal. Code of Regulations §§ 15000, et seq.).



   (B)   CURB means the City Urban Restriction Boundary regulated by
Section III(F), and graphically depicted in Figure LU-4a, of the Santa Paula
General Plan.



   (C)   DATE OF DETERMINATION means the date upon which an application
for development is deemed complete in accordance with this Code.



   (D)   DENSITY means the one of the following:



      (1)   For residential development, density is the total number
of permanent residential dwelling units per acre of land, exclusive of all
existing public streets and rights-of-way.



      (2)   For commercial development, density is the total gross
area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area (known as floor area
ratio) or the total square feet designated by the General Plan or this Code
for a particular lot area.



   (E)   DEVELOPMENT means any activity which requires a discretionary
or ministerial permit to construct commercial, industrial, institutional, or
residential structures. DEVELOPMENT also includes the term "land use
designation" as defined by this chapter.



   (F)   GPA means an amendment to the Santa Paula General Plan.



   (G)   INTENSIFICATION OF USE means a GPA seeking to increase density
or land use intensity (or both) that is subject to the Initiative and this
chapter.



   (H)   INITIATIVE means Measure L6 as enacted by voters on November
7, 2006, and certified by Resolution No. 6358 on December 4, 2006, as
codified by Ordinance No. 1188, adopted on February 19, 2008.



   (I)   LAND USE DESIGNATION means a designation set forth in the
Santa Paula General Plan Land Use Map (Figure LU-5) and defined by Santa
Paula General Plan Table LU-7 or such other land use proposed by an
application for a GPA and not previously identified in the General Plan.



   (J)   LAND USE INTENSITY means those urbanized land uses identified
in General Plan Table LU-7 under the column captioned "Principal Use
Development Intensity/Density." Land use intensity does not include
non-urbanized uses such as agricultural, open space, recreational, golf, or
mining.



   (K)   PLANNING AREA means real property located within the city's
jurisdictional boundaries, its approved Sphere of Influence, and such
additional areas that are identified by the Santa Paula General Plan and
other applicable law.



   (L)   SOAR means Section III(F) of the Santa Paula General Plan,
added by Measure I as enacted by voters on November 7, 2000, and certified by
Resolution No. 5407, adopted on December 4, 2000.



(Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



§ 16.237.040  APPLICABILITY.



   The Initiative and this chapter apply to any application for a
development which meets all of the following criteria:



   (A)   The application seeks an Intensification of Use;



   (B)   The proposed Intensification of Use would regulate either:



      (1)   A development entirely located upon real property that
constitutes 81 or more contiguous acres; or



      (2)   A development located on real property which is
contiguous to other land for which the City Council previously approved an
Intensification of Use within the five calendar years preceding the date of
determination when all of the real property regulated by the previously
approved and proposed Intensification of Use equals 81 or more contiguous
acres;



   (C)   The real property affected by the proposed Intensification of
Use is located within the Planning Area;



   (D)   The 81 or more contiguous acres of real property are found by
the City Council, based upon substantial evidence, to be:



      (1)   Part of, or substantially related to, a development
previously approved by the City Council;



      (2)   Completely owned by the same person or persons; or



      (3)   Separately owned by persons who are part of a joint
venture, or similar cooperative enterprise, who are jointly seeking
development approvals for a single or multiple developments.



(Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



§ 16.237.050  EXEMPTIONS.



   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Initiative and this
chapter do not apply to an Intensification of Use required by California law
mandates including, without limitation, Government Code § 65588, if the
Intensification of Use would affect only real property located completely
within the city's jurisdictional boundaries as they exist on the date of
determination.



(Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



§ 16.237.060  ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT.



   GPAs subject to the Initiative and this chapter require environmental
review in accordance with § 16.202.050. If required by CEQA, a final
environmental impact report must be certified before the City Council can
consider placing a GPA on the ballot in accordance with Elections Code §
9222.



(Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



§ 16.237.070  ONE VOTE REQUIRED.



   To reconcile the Initiative with SOAR requirements; to implement both
SOAR and the Initiative; and to facilitate voter understanding of ballot
measures, the City Council can take the following actions regarding an
application for Intensification of Use:



   (A)   The City Council can deem an application which requires voter
approval to both change the CURB and approve an Intensification of Use as a
single GPA requiring one ballot measure for voter consideration;



   (B)   When voters previously approved a CURB change in accordance
with SOAR which also included an Intensification of Use in the ballot
measure, and an application for development does not propose an additional
Intensification of Use, then the City Council can approve a GPA upon its own
authority.



(Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



§ 16.237.080  SUNSET CLAUSE.



   This chapter is repealed and will become ineffective on December 31,
2025, unless a later adopted initiative measure approved by the voters at the
general election before or in November, 2025 deletes or extends the effective
date of the Initiative.



(Ord. 1188, passed 2-19-08)



CHAPTER 16.238:  SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT



Section



   16.238.01   Purpose



   16.238.02   Definitions



   16.238.03   Fees



   16.238.04   Administration by Director



   16.238.05   Initiation



   16.238.06   General application requirements



   16.238.07   Proceedings



   16.238.08   Action by the Director



   16.238.09   Findings



   16.238.10   Permit appeal and revocation



   16.238.11   Compliance with SDP



   16.238.12   Timeliness



   16.238.13   Action in writing



   16.238.14   Final determination



§ 16.238.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of a SDP is to provide for the administrative
review of detailed development plans for a proposed use.  Uses that require
a SDP are characterized by having a relatively low potential for adverse
impacts on the subject site or surrounding community.



   (B)   A SDP is a plan for development and must include the following:



      (1)   A description of the use(s) and operating
characteristics.



      (2)   A plot plan showing the location of all uses.



      (3)   Supplementary exhibits, as necessary, to show other
information which may be required such as building elevations, landscaping,
and grading.



      (4)   Conditions of approval.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:



   DIRECTOR - Means the Planning Director, or designee.



   SDP - Means a site development permit regulated by this chapter.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.03  FEES.



   Persons applying for a permit under this chapter must pay a permit fee
established by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.04  ADMINSTRATION BY DIRECTOR.



   The Director will administer this chapter, including, without
limitation, acting on all applications for a permit required by this chapter.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.05  INITIATION.



   An application for a SDP may be initiated by any person who is able to
demonstrate a legally vested real property interest in the real property
affected by a proposed application.  The authorized agent of any such person
may also initiate an application.  The Director may request proof of
ownership or authorization to apply before accepting any application.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.06  GENERAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Applications for a permit required by this chapter must be filed with
the Planning Department; be in a form and contain the information prescribed
by the Director; and be accompanied by the permit fee required by this
chapter.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.07  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Unless the Director determinates otherwise, issuing a SDP is
an administrative determination by the Director without the need for a public
hearing.



   (B)   Upon acceptance of a SDP application as complete, the Director
must review the application for conformance with the provisions of this Title
16.  Based on this review, the Director must act to approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the application.



   (C)   Within 30 days of receiving a completed application, the
Director must issue a statement of decisions and findings.  The statement
must recite, among other things, the facts and reasons for granting or
denying the application.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.08  ACTION BY THE DIRECTOR.



   The Director or, if applicable, the Planning Commission, may take one
of the following actions:



   (A)   Approval.  There are no conditions or requirements other than
those specified by the application.  After the date of final determination,
the proposed project may be developed in compliance with the SDP issued by
the Director.



   (B)   Disapproval.  When a SDP application is disapproved, an
application for the same project on the same property cannot thereafter be
accepted for a period of one year from the date of final determination,
except that the Director may specify that, if the action is due to details or
technical issues, this time limit does not apply.  This limitation is not
applicable to other discretionary permits.



   (C)   Conditional approval.  Any application may be approved
subject to conditions the Director deems necessary for compliance with city,
state and federal regulations related to the protection of general health,
welfare, and safety of the surrounding area.  After the date of final
determination, the proposed project may be developed in compliance with the
SDP issued by the Director along with applicable conditions of approval.



   (D)   Withdrawal.  With the concurrence of or at the request of the
applicant, any a permit application may be withdrawn.  When an application
is withdrawn, such action is effective immediately and is not subject to
appeal.  Thereafter, such application is null and void and the property must
have the same status as if no application had been filed.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.09  FINDINGS.



   The Director must make all the following findings to issue a SDP:



   (A)   CEQA.  The SDP complies with the California Environmental
Quality Act.



   (B)   General Plan.  The proposed use or project conforms with the
General Plan.



   (C)   Zoning.  The proposed use or project conforms with the zoning
regulations in this code.



   (D)   Development standards.  The SDP complies with Chapter 16.40
of this code.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.10  PERMIT APPEAL AND REVOCATION.



   A SDP may be appealed or revoked pursuant to Chapter 16.206 of this
code.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.11  COMPLIANCE WITH SDP.



   Establishment, maintenance and operation of the use or uses proposed by
the application must comply with the information and specifications shown on
the SDP.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.12  TIMELINESS.



   If the Director does not take action within one year from the date the
application is deemed complete, such application is considered to be
approved.  However, the applicant may request an extension of time up to 120
days.  This time limit period is not applicable with regard to the time in
which the Planning Commission or, if applicable, the City Council may act on
an appeal.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.13  ACTION IN WRITING.



   The determination on each application, including any required findings
and any other reasons that serve to explain the determination, and all
conditions of approval, must be in writing.  A copy of the written
determination must forwarded to the applicant following the date of final
determination and is made available, at cost, to any person desiring a copy
of such determination.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



§ 16.238.14  FINAL DETERMINATION.



   The determination of the Director is effective 15 days after the date
the decision is made and after all appeals, if any, are resolved.



(Ord. 1242, passed 5-7-12)



TABLE IV:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




747
 
1-5-81
 
Rezoning of two parcels of land located on Hallock Drive from R-E 1 acre to
M-1(PD) and from R-E 1 acre to R-A-10.


748
 
1-19-81
 
Rezoning certain property located on Saticoy and Santa Paula Streets from R-3
to R-1.


750
 
4-8-81
 
Rezoning of certain property located at the southwest corner of Telegraph
Road and Beckwith Road from R-E 1 acre (county) to I-P(PD) (city).


757
 
7-6-81
 
Rezoning of certain property located southerly of Santa Maria Street and
property located within the Santa Clara River Floodway from R-A, M-2, M-1-D,
K and M-1 to M-1-H(PD), M-1, and O.


758
 
7-6-81
 
Rezoning of certain property located at 224 West Santa Maria Street, from M-1
to M-1(PD).


759
 
8-3-81
 
Rezoning of certain property located at Hallock Drive from M-1 to M-1(PD).


760
 
9-9-81
 
Rezoning of certain property located on Telegraph Road from R-E 1 acre to
I-P(PD).


767
 
12-7-81
 
Rezoning certain property located at 217 North 10th Street and 220-224 North
Ojai Street from R-3 to C-1.


768
 
1-4-82
 
Rezoning certain property located at the southeast corner of Orchard and 13th
Streets from R-3 to R-3(PD).


771
 
1-18-82
 
Rezoning certain property located at Grant Line and Say Road from A-E
(county) to A-1(10) (city).


772
 
2-16-82
 
Rezoning certain property located at 530 West Main Street from R-A to R-3(PD).


780
 
8-2-82
 
Rezoning certain property located at 725 East Main Street from C-2 to C-2(PD).


791
 
6-6-83
 
Rezoning certain property located on Palm Avenue from C-2 to C-2(PD).


795
 
12-5-83
 
Rezoning certain property located on Ojai Road from R-A 5 acres zoning in the
county to R-A(20) and A-1(2) zoning in the city.


803
 
4-16-84
 
Rezoning certain property located on Orchard Street from R-3 to R-1.


807
 
7-2-84
 
Rezoning certain property located at 3615 Ojai Road from R-E 1 acre (county)
to R-1 (city).


810
 
8-20-84
 
Rezoning certain property located at 3615 North Ojai Road from R-E 1 acre
(county) to R-1(PD) (city).


814
 
9-17-84
 
Rezoning certain property located on Santa Barbara Street from R-3 and M-1 to
R-3(PD).


815
 
9-17-84
 
Rezoning certain property located on Ojai Road from R-E 1 acre (county) to
R-A(20), A-1(1), and A-1(2) (city).


821
 
12-17-84
 
Rezoning certain property located at 505-603 West Harvard Boulevard from R-A
to R-2(PD).


825
 
2-19-85
 
Rezoning certain property located at 111 Sheppard Road from M-1(PD) to R-2.


827
 
3-4-85
 
Rezoning certain property located at the northeast corner of Say and
Grantline Roads from A-1(10) to R-A(10)(PD), A-1(5)(PD) and A-1(10)(PD).


836
 
8-19-85
 
Rezoning certain property located at the easterly terminus of Santa Paula
Street from A-E (county) to M-1 and O (city).


837
 
8-19-85
 
Rezoning certain property located on the southerly side of Harvard Boulevard
between Palm Avenue and 5th Street from M-1 to C-2.


838
 
8-19-85
 
Rezoning certain property located on all those parcels lying northerly of the
alley lying approximately 125 feet southerly of Main Street from C-2 to CBD.


848
 
3-17-86
 
Rezoning certain property located at 500 W. Santa Barbara Street from M-1 to
R-4(PD).


855
 
7-7-86
 
Rezoning certain property on the majority of the property southerly of South
Alley, easterly of Seventh Street, westerly of Mill Street, northerly of
Harvard Boulevard, and also the properties on the easterly side of Mill
Street describes as 227 to 249 S. Mill Street from R-3, C-2 and C-O to C-1,
C-O, R-3 and R-2.


857
 
7-21-86
 
Rezoning certain property located at 254 West Harvard Boulevard from R-A to
C-2.


858
 
7-21-86
 
Rezoning certain property located at the southwest corner of Santa Anna
Street and Palm Avenue from R-3 to C-2(PD).


861
 
9-2-86
 
Rezoning certain property located on Harvard Boulevard from M-1 to C-2.


862
 
9-2-86
 
Rezoning certain property located on Main Street from R-A to R-1.


866
 
9-16-86
 
Rezoning certain property located on Steckel Drive from M-1 to M-1(PD).


868
 
1-20-87
 
Rezoning certain property located on Grant Line Street from A-E (county) and
A-1(10)(PD) (city) to A-1(1)(PD).


872
 
12-15-86
 
Rezoning certain property located within 200 feet in either direction of
Acacia Road between Harvard Boulevard and State Highway 126 from R-3 and R-4
to R-2(D).


880
 
3-2-87
 
Rezoning certain property located in the vicinity of Orchard and 14th Streets
from R-3(PD) to R-1(PD) and R-2(PD).


881
 
4-6-87
 
Rezoning certain property located at the northeasterly corner of Beckwith and
Telegraph Roads from R-E 1 acre (county) to R-2(PD) (city).


885
 
4-6-87
 
Rezoning certain property located between Ojai Road and Grant Line Street;
between Richmond Road and Santa Paula Street; and three parcels on Encino
Place from R-2 and R-3 to R-1 and R-2(D).


887
 
4-20-87
 
Rezoning certain property located in the vicinity of Ojai Street, Ventura
Street, Harvard Boulevard, and Highway 126 from R-3, C-2, M-1, and M-1-L to
R-2(D), C-2, R-2 and O.


890
 
5-18-87
 
Rezoning certain property located between 11th and 12th Streets and between
Santa Barbara Street and North Alley from R-4 and C-2 to R-1, R-2(D) and R-3.


892
 
7-6-87
 
Rezoning certain property located on Acacia Road from R-3, R-4 and C-2 to
R-2(D).


893
 
8-17-87
 
Rezoning certain property located on Faulkner Road from A-E (county) and
I-P(PD) (city) to C-1(PD) (city).


894
 
9-21-87
 
Rezoning certain property located on Foothill Road from A-E (county) to H(PD)
(city).


895
 
9-21-87
 
Rezoning certain property located in the vicinity of 10th Street, Ojai Road,
Virginia Terrace, Saticoy, Santa Paula and Ojai Streets, 12th Street, Ventura
and Garcia Streets from R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 to R-2, R-2(D)(PD), R-1,
C-1(PD), and R-3.


897
 
10-19-87
 
Rezoning certain property located in the vicinity of Palm Avenue, Palm Court,
and Santa Paula Union High School from R-3 and R-A to R-1.


900
 
12-2-87
 
Rezoning certain property located on Say Road and Cliff Drive from A-1(5)(PD)
to A-1(10)(PD), R-A(20)(PD), A-1(5)(PD), and A-1(2)(PD).


902
 
1-19-87
 
Rezoning certain property located on Santa Maria Street and Steckel Drive
from R-A and M-1 to M-1(PD).


905
 
1-19-87
 
Rezoning certain property located in the vicinity of Santa Paula Street from
R-1 and R-2(D) to R-1(HO) and R-2(D)(HO).


912
 
6-6-88
 
Rezoning certain property located at 228 N. Palm Avenue from R-2(D) to
R-2(D)(PD).


914
 
12-5-87
 
Rezoning certain property located on Craig Drive and Arthur and Warren
Avenues from R-1 to R-1(PD).


916
 
2-6-89
 
Rezoning certain property located on 416 E. Santa Maria Street from M-1 to
K(PD).


922
 
10-2-89
 
Rezoning certain property located on Steckel Drive from R-A to R-3(PD).


933
 
6-18-90
 
Rezoning certain property located at 18232 E. Hallock Drive from R-A(10) to
M-1(PD).


939
 
11-19-90
 
Rezoning certain property located at the northwest corner of 12th Street and
Harvard Boulevard, and southeast of Grace Thille School from C-2 to C-2(PD).


940
 
1-7-91
 
Rezoning certain property located southeast of Cliff and Forest Drives from
A-1(10)(PD) to R-A(20)(PD).


942
 
2-4-91
 
Rezoning certain property located at 445 Sycamore and 1238 Orchard Streets
from R-2(D) to R-2(D)(PD).


943
 
2-4-91
 
Rezoning certain property located at 3510 Ojai Road.


946
 
3-4-91
 
Rezoning certain property located at 301 Grant Line from O to R-A(20).


947
 
5-20-91
 
Rezoning certain property located at 933 Cliff Drive from A-1(5)(PD) to
R-A(10)(PD).


951
 
12-16-91
 
Rezoning certain property located at 400 and 500 E. Santa Barbara Street from
R-4(PD) to N-C(PD).


953
 
2-18-92
 
Rezoning certain property located at the southeast corner of Harvard
Boulevard and Laurie Lane between Harvard Boulevard and Santa Anna Streets
from R-A to R-1(PD).


959
 
7-20-92
 
Rezoning certain property located at 1050 E. Ventura Street from R-2(D) to
R-2(D)(PD).


960
 
10-19-92
 
Rezoning certain property located at 15433 Telegraph Road from R-A to R-A(PD).


961
 
12-7-92
 
Rezoning certain property located at 716 Encino Place from R-1 to R-1(PD).


972
 
10-4-93
 
Rezoning certain property located at 312-314 N. 11th Street from R-2(D) to
R-2(D)(PD).


989
 
9-5-95
 
Rezoning certain property located at 124 E. Main Street from C-2 to R-2(PD).


1012
 
1-6-97
 
Rezoning three properties located on March Street from Light Manufacturing
(M-1-L) to Commercial Office, Planned Development (C-O-PD).


1018
 
12-1-97
 
Rezoning Assessor's Parcel Number 101-0-273-095 located northwest of 12th
Street and Harvard Boulevard, more specifically described in Exhibit 1 to
Ord. 1018, from General Commercial Planned Development (C-2PD) to Low Density
Multiple-Family (Duplex)Zone (R-2).

10318-2-99Rezoning of property from C-2 to C-2 PD on the following property:
Parcel 1 in the City of Santa Paula, County of Ventura, State of California
as per map recorded in Book 7, page 39, of Parcel Maps in the office of the
County Recorder of said County. 


 
 
 
 
Rezoning of property from M-2 to C-2 PD  on the following property: Parcel 1
of Parcel Map Number 91-32 in the City of Santa Paula, County of Ventura,
State of California, as per map recorded in Book 53, pages 27 and 28 of
Parcel Maps in the office of the County Recorder of said County.


1038
 
7-17-00
 
Rezoning certain property located at the south west corner of Hallock Drive
and State Route 126 from no zoning designation to C-2 PD.


1041
 
4-2-01
 
Rezoning certain property located at the south east corner of Say Road and
Cliff Drive from County A-E to RA-20 PD.


1044
 
9-17-01
 
Amending the City's zoning map to apply the planned development additive
zoning designation to the parcel located at 1700 Montebello Street, known as
Assessor's parcel number 104-0-107-095.


1046
 
1-7-02
 
Rezoning certain property located north of the terminus of Grant Line Street
from R-A to R-A 10 PD.


1047
 
2-4-02
 
Rezoning certain property located on the southwest corner of March Street and
Dean Drive from C-O-PD to R-4 PD.


1062
 
4-7-03
 
Rezoning certain property located at the westerly terminus of West Santa Anna
Street from R-A to R-3 (PD).


1067
 
6-2-03
 
Rezoning certain property located at 416 Ojai Road from R-2 (D) to R-2 (PD).


1070
 
9-15-03
 
Rezoning certain property located at 611 E. Harvard Boulevard from C-2 to C-2
(PD).


1073
 
9-2-03
 
Rezoning certain property located at 134 N. Fourth Street from M-1 to R-4.


1074
 
9-2-03
 
Rezoning certain property located at 234 West Harvard Boulevard from C-2 to
C-2 (PD).


1083
 
11-17-03
 
Rezoning certain property located at 122 N. Fourth Street from M-1 to R-4.


1087
 
1-5-04
 
Rezoning certain property located at 320 West Harvard Boulevard from C-2 to
C-2 (PD).


1121
 
9-20-04
 
Rezoning certain property located at 247 Grant Line Street from R-A-20 to R-1.


1126
 
3-7-05
 
Rezoning property located at 622 E. Main Street from C-G to C-G (PD).


1131
 
2-22-05
 
Rezoning approximately 16 acres of the 29-acre Santa Paula Memorial Hospital
property located at the northern terminus of Tenth Street from IN to R2 with
a PD overlay.


1143
 
10-17-05
 
Implementing a prezone/zone change for approximately 48 acres, located south
of Highway 126 near Todd Lane, west and southwest of the existing Wastewater
Treatment Plant, as IN.


1149
 
12-19-05
 
Prezoning portions of the Fagan Canyon Expansion Area as SP-2.


1155
 
2-21-06
 
Prezoning approximately 22.5 acres, located south of Highway 126 near Todd
Lane, west of the existing Wastewater Treatment Plant and north of the
proposed water recycling facility and corporation yard, as A-1


1190
 
3-17-08
 
Prezoning portions of the East Area 1 Expansion Area as the East Area 1
Specific Plan (SP-3).


1220
 
10-5-09
 
Prezoning approximately 27.59 acres located at the Northern terminus of Grant
Line Street and East of Thelma Bedell Elementary School.


1227
 
5-17-10
 
Prezoning approximately 4.3 acres located east of Grant Line Street at its
souther terminus between Orchard Street and Saticoy Street as R-1.


1228
 
8-16-10
 
Prezoning approximately 40 acres located in the Santa Paula Creek Riverbed,
east of the current city limit and north of the Union Pacific Railroad
right-of-way as O.


1232
 
10-4-10
 
Prezoning approximately 5.29 acres located north of the terminus of Hallock
Drive and Telegraph Road, including a portion of the Union Pacific Railroad
right-of-way as O and C/LI.


1239
 
8-15-11
 
Rezoning approximately 4.93 acres located at 957 Faulkner Road from C-H to
C-G.


1240
 
11-7-11
 
Rezoning four parcels of land totaling approximately 43 acres A-1 and IN to I.


1246
 
9-4-12
 
Approving a zone change adding a planned development overlay for property
located at 615 E. Harvard Blvd.


1248
 
2-4-13
 
Prezoning portions of the East Area 2 Planning Area as the East Gateway
Project and East Gateway Specific Plan (SP-4).


1269
 
4-17-17
 
Approving a zone change of a single 0.93 acre parcel to Light Industrial
(from Highway Commercial) for a property located at 17902 E. Telegraph Road.


 
 
 
 
 




 


