CODE OF THE CITY OF SAN FERNANDO, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Published in 2000 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 5, 2001 
Effective: February 5, 2001 
____________ 
 
> 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SAN FERNANDO, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Joel Fajardo 
Mayor 
____________ 
Sylvia Ballin, Vice Mayor 
Robert C. Gonzales, Councilmember 
Antonio Lopez, Councilmember 
Hector A. Pacheco, Councilmember 
City Council 
____________ 
Alexander P. Meyerhoff 
City Manager 
____________ 
Rick R. Olivarez 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Elena G. Chávez 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of San Fernando, California. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1957 Code, as supplemented through January 5, 1998, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1957 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Code Attorney, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Wilma Miller, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of San Fernando, California. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of San Fernando, California. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of San Fernando, California. 2000. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1518 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SAN FERNANDO ADOPTING THE SAN FERNANDO MUNICIPAL CODE (2000 EDITION) WHICH IS A RECODIFICATION OF THE 1957 EDITION; TOGETHER WITH THE SECONDARY CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE AND A PART OF THE RECODIFICATION, INCLUDING THE UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE (1997 EDITION), THE UNIFORM HOUSING CODE (1973 EDITION) AND THE UNIFORM CODE FOR ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS (1994 EDITION), ALL PUBLISHED BY THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF BUILDING OFFICIALS, THE COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES ANIMAL CODE (TITLE 10, EFFECTIVE APRIL 18, 1995), HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE (TITLE 11, EFFECTIVE MAY 1, 1996) AND SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE CODE (DIVISION 2 OF TITLE 20, EFFECTIVE APRIL 18, 2000); THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES BUILDING CODE, ELECTRICAL CODE, MECHANICAL CODE, PLUMBING CODE, AND FIRE CODE (1999 EDITION, AS AMENDED JULY 1, 1999); PRESCRIBING CERTAIN PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE RECODIFIED CODE; AND REPEALING THE 1957 EDITION OF THE SAN FERNANDO CODE. 
The City Council of the City of San Fernando does hereby ordain as follows: 
Section 1. Findings and Intent. 
A.  The City Council desires to adopt a recodification of the 1957 San Fernando Municipal Code, as amended through January 4, 1999 (through and including Ordinance No. 1497); 
B.  Amendments to the San Fernando Municipal Code which have not been previously adopted are set out in Exhibit A to this Ordinance, which exhibit is attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance, and have been integrated into the newly codified Code and will take effect with adoption of the Code; 
C.  The City Council finds recodification of the existing Code along with the amendments set forth in Exhibit A to this Ordinance does not have any potential for significant environmental impact, and that adoption of this Ordinance is exempt from consideration under the California Environmental Quality Act; 
D.  The City Council desires to adopt current versions of the Secondary Codes designated herein as set forth in this Recodification; 
E.  The City has on file in the Office of the City Clerk, for public inspection, a copy of the San Fernando Municipal Code, 2000 Recodification, together with a copy of each of the secondary Codes adopted herein by reference, with each copy thereof certified as a true copy by the City Clerk; and 
F.  The City Council has conducted a duly noticed public hearing at which time it heard and considered public testimony regarding recodification of the Code. 
Section 2. The 2000 San Fernando Municipal Code is hereby adopted by reference as a Recodification of the comprehensive 1957 Code, as amended, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the California Government Code. 
Section 3. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance and the 2000 Recodification of the San Fernando Municipal Code, all provisions of the 1957 Code are hereby repealed on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Section 4. The Council hereby adopts by reference the following Secondary Codes as a part of this Recodification. 
(a)  The following Uniform Codes published by the International Conference of Building Officials: 
THE UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE (1997 edition) 
THE UNIFORM HOUSING CODE (1973 edition) 
THE UNIFORM CODE FOR ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS (1994 edition) 
(b)  The following Los Angeles County Codes: 
THE COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES ANIMAL CODE (Title 10, effective April 18, 1995) 
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE (Title 1, effective May 1, 1996) 
SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE CODE (Division 2 of Title 20, effective April 18, 2000) 
(c)  The following City of Los Angeles Codes: 
BUILDING CODE, 
ELECTRICAL CODE, 
MECHANICAL CODE, 
PLUMBING CODE 
FIRE CODE 
(All are 1999 edition, as amended June 30, 1999) 
Section 5. The penalty provisions in this Recodification are included as Chapter 1, Sections 1-10, 1-11 and 1-12, and in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4 are hereby set forth in this Ordinance: 
 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; infractions. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other city ordinance any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any other city ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or six months' imprisonment. Every day any violation of this Code or any other city ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Violations of the following Code sections shall constitute infractions: sections 10-34 through section 10-37, section 18-33, section 18-93, section 22-28, section 22-102, section 22-133, section 22-140, section 22-356, section 30-28 through 30-30, section 30-94, sections 34-26 through 34-33, sections 34-66 through 34-69, section 50-2, sections 50-133, 50-134, sections 54-1 through 54-25, sections 58-26 through 58-62, sections 58-91 through 58-97, sections 58-126 through 58-131, sections 58-161 through 58-164, sections 58-191 through 58-198, section 58-227, section 58-261, section 58-301, section 58-336, section 66-63, sections 74-2 through 74-11, sections 74-101 through 74-118, sections 74-146 through 74-155, sections 90-2 through 90-5, section 90-156, sections 90-158 through 90-166, sections 90-196 through 90-219, sections 90-246 through 90-253, sections 90-281 through 90-293, sections 90-321 through 90-327, sections 90-421 through 90-423, section 90-489, section 90-497, subsections 90-498(b) through (d), sections 90-527 through 90-530, sections 90-556 through 90-558, section 90-561, sections 90-586 through 90-590, sections 90-616 through 90-620, sections 90-646 through 90-650, sections 90-621 through 90-623, section 90-736, sections 90-741 through 90-748, sections 90-776 through 90-780, sections 90-782 through 90-784, sections 90-942 through 90-953, section 102-141. Any person found guilty of an infraction shall be fined in accordance with state law.  
Sec. 1-11. - Mandatory appearance in certain situations. 
Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this Code, the arrested person shall be taken without unnecessary delay before a magistrate who has jurisdiction of the offense and is nearest or most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest is made when the person is arrested: 
(1)  Fails to present his driver's license or other satisfactory evidence of his identity for examination. 
(2)  Refuses to give his written promise to appear in court. 
(3)  Demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate.  
Sec. 1-12. - Citation for infraction. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of state law, the city officers or employees designated by resolution of the city council may issue a citation without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to whom the citation is issued has committed an infraction in their presence which is a violation of those sections of the Code designated as such in section 1-10. 
(b)  Citations for infractions shall be processed, issued and handled as provided by state law. 
(c)  An officer or employee making an arrest under the authority of this section shall follow the citation release procedures prescribed in Penal Code 853.5 et seq., or such procedures enacted by the state." 
Section 6. Nothing contained in this Ordinance is intended to affect the validity of Ordinance Nos. 1498, 1500, 1501, 1502, 1503, 1504, 1505, 1509, 1510, 1511, 1512, 1513, 1515, 1516, 1517 and following, which Ordinances the City Clerk is hereby directed to cause to be incorporated into the San Fernando Municipal Code (2000 Edition). Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this Code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto. Duly certified copies of every Ordinance making changes in such code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference. The City Clerk is directed to incorporate in regular supplements to the San Fernando Municipal Code (2000 Edition) all amendments, additions or deletions adopted by the City Council. 
Section 7. The repealing provisions of this Ordinance shall not affect or impair any act done, or right vested or approved, or any proceeding, suit or prosecution which has occurred or commenced in any cause before the repealing provisions of this Ordinance shall take effect; but every such act, vested right, proceeding, suit or prosecution shall remain in full force and effect for all purposes as if the applicable provisions of the 1957 Code had remained in full force and effect. No offense committed and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the repeal or alteration of any applicable provision of the 1957 Code as amended, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal or alteration; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures shall be instituted and proceed in all respects as if the applicable provisions of the 1957 Code, as amended, had not been repealed or altered. 
Section 8. The table of contents appearing at the beginning of the 2000 Recodification and at the beginning of each Title thereof are not adopted as a part of this Recodification, but are included for convenience only, and shall be editorially changed from time to time to conform with amendments and additions to this Code. 
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED THIS 5th DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2001 
	/s/   
      MAYOR 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      CITY CLERK 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      CITY ATTORNEY 	
 	 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 	) 
COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES 	) 	SS 
CITY OF LOS ANGELES 	) 	
 
I, Wilma Miller, City Clerk of the City of San Fernando, do hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance was adopted at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of San Fernando held on the 5th day of February, 2001, and was carried by the following roll call vote: 
AYES: Robledo, Ramos, Di Tomaso, Hernandez, Montanez 5 
NOES: None 0 
ABSENT: None 0 
	/s/   
      CITY CLERK 
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PENALTIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1437, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, changed the title of ch. 1 from "General Provisions" to "General Provisions and Penalties". 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 3, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed former §§ 1-10—1-12 and § 5 enacted new sections 1-30—1-32. Section 6 of said ordinance states: "All references in the San Fernando City Code to former Sections 1-10, 1-11 and 1-12 shall be deemed references to new Sections 1-30, 1-31 and 1-32, respectively." 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of San Fernando, California" and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "San Fernando City Code." 
(Code 1957, § 1.1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "of San Fernando." 
Code. The term "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of the City of San Fernando, California. 
Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6800. 
Council. Whenever the term "council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of San Fernando. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Los Angeles. 
Day. A day is the period of time between 12:00 midnight and the 12:00 midnight following. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6806. 
Daytime, nighttime. The term "daytime" means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. The term "nighttime" means the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6807. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 12. 
In the city. The term "in the city" shall mean and include all territory over which the city has or over which it shall acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code § 12. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6804. 
Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 13. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 15. 
Officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or agencies. Whenever the title of an officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency is given, it shall be construed to refer to an officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency of the City of San Fernando, California. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 17, Civil Procedure Code § 17. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code §§ 14, 663. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Process. The term "process" includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 22. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code § 14, Civil Procedure Code § 17. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code §§ 14, 658. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory, and the term "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 14. 
Signature or subscription by mark. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 16. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of California. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 11. 
Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6805. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 8. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 6803. 
(Code 1957, § 1.2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1957, § 1.3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1957, § 1.4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of Code on prior offenses, rights, obligations, penalties or forfeitures. 
The repeal provided for in the ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may, by consent of the party affected, be applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.  
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 1.5)  
Sec. 1-7. - Official time. 
Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 1.6)  
Sec. 1-8. - Catchlines and headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code, printed in boldface or italic type, and the chapter, article, division and subdivision headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, subsection, chapter, article, division or subdivision and shall not be deemed or taken to be a title or a substantive portion of any such section, subsection, chapter, article, division or subdivision, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, subsections, chapters, articles, divisions or subdivisions, including the catchlines or headings, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1957, § 1.7)  
Sec. 1-9. - History notes, editor's notes, state law and cross references. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the editor's notes and state law and cross reference notes throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall not be considered as part of the text of the Code.  
Secs. 1-10—1-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 3, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed §§ 1-10—1-12, which pertained to general penalty and infractions, mandatory appearance in certain situations, and citation for infractions, and derived from Code 1957, §§ 1.8, 1.8.1, and 1.8.2, respectively. See the editor's note to art. I for further information.  
Sec. 1-13. - Description of city seal. 
The common seal of the city shall consist of a circular disc, 1 7/8 inches in diameter, having a design cut thereon showing the San Fernando Mission with a rising sun, surrounded by the words "City of San Fernando, California, Incorporated August 31, 1911." 
(Code 1957, § 1.9)  
Sec. 1-14. - Custodian of city seal. 
The city clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal described in section 1-13. 
(Code 1957, § 1.10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 40811.  
Sec. 1-15. - Datum plane. 
The sea level of the Pacific Ocean is declared to be the datum plane or baseline of the city for the purpose of designating the official grades of the streets, alleys, places, avenues, sidewalks, sewers and any other public work for the city and for measuring all elevations and surface points thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 1.11)  
Sec. 1-16. - Benchmark. 
The official benchmark or datum monument within the city shall be the United States Geological Survey benchmark located at the southwest corner of Brand Boulevard and San Fernando Road. This datum monument is elevated 1066.665 feet above the level of the Pacific Ocean, which is the city datum plane. 
(Code 1957, § 1.12)  
Sec. 1-17. - Limitations on judicial review. 
When any decision made after an adjudicatory administrative hearing suspending, demoting, or dismissing an officer or employee; revoking or denying an application for a permit or a license; or denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance is final, notice of the decision shall be mailed to the party affected by it at his last known address and shall advise the party that the time within which judicial review may be sought is governed by Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6. 
(Code 1957, § 1.13)  
Sec. 1-18. - Ordinances not affected by adoption of Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the adoption of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the city on any person or corporation. 
(5)  Any ordinance rezoning specific property. 
(6)  Any ordinance levying or relating to taxes not inconsistent with this Code. 
(7)  Any ordinance relating to compensation of city officers and employees. 
(8)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening or closing streets or establishing the grades thereof. 
(9)  Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered on or prior to the date of adoption of this Code. 
(10)  Any ordinance passed after the date of adoption of the last ordinance included in this Code prior to its adoption. 
(11)  Sections 25.10 through 25.51 of the 1957 Code, relating to a sales tax, as amended.  
Secs. 1-19—1-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PENALTIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to art. I. 
 
Sec. 1-30. - Misdemeanors, infractions and administrative remedies. 
(a)  No person shall violate or fail to comply with any provision or requirement of this Code or any other city ordinance. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision or requirement of this Code or any other city ordinance, or a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code or any other city ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless (1) such a violation or failure is designated as an infraction or is subsequently prosecuted as an infraction, in which case such person is guilty of an infraction; or (2) such a violation or failure is prosecuted as a civil administrative action pursuant to this chapter. Any person who fails to pay an administrative fine or to comply with an administrative order is guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Any violation of any provision of this Code or any other city ordinance may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor, as an infraction, or as a civil administrative action in the discretion of the city attorney or city prosecutor. 
(c)  Every day any violation of this Code or any other city ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code or by the city council, any person guilty of a misdemeanor under a provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided by city council, as prescribed by state law, any person who has committed an infraction shall be punished for a first violation by a fine not exceeding $100.00, and for committing the same offense a second time within one year by a fine not exceeding $200.00, and for committing the same offense a third or any subsequent time within one year, by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 5, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-31. - Mandatory appearance in certain situations. 
Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this Code, the arrested person shall be taken without unnecessary delay before a magistrate who has jurisdiction of the offense and is nearest or most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest is made when the person arrested: 
(1)  Fails to present his driver's license or other satisfactory evidence of his identity for examination. 
(2)  Refuses to give his written promise to appear in court. 
(3)  Demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 5, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-32. - Arrests and citations. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of state law, the city officers or employees designated by the city administrative officer may issue citations and make arrests without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person who is either arrested or to whom a citation is issued has committed an infraction or misdemeanor violation of this Code, or violation of any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this Code or violation of any other city ordinance or state statute which such officers or employees have the duty to enforce, and the violation has been committed in the presence of such officers or employees. 
(b)  Arrests for misdemeanors and citations for infractions shall be processed, issued and handled as provided by state law. 
(c)  In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this authority and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to appear, as prescribed by Penal Code, ch. 5(c), commencing with § 853.5. 
(d)  The officers and employees identified in subsection (a) of this section shall have the concurrent authority to issue administrative citations, as well as any other persons designated to do so by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 5, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 1-33—1-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES—CITATIONS 
 
Sec. 1-51. - Scope. 
This article provides an administrative remedy for any violation of this Code, which remedy may be exercised in place of, or in addition to, any other remedy which is allowed by law, whether administrative, criminal, civil, or equitable. The city attorney or city prosecutor shall have sole discretion to determine whether a violation will be prosecuted criminally. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-52. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in the context of this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Citing official. Any officer or employee authorized to issue citations pursuant to section 1-32 of this Code. 
City administrator. The administrative officer, as provided in this Code, or the administrative officer's designee. 
Legal interest. Any ownership interest of any person in property as evidenced by title or ownership documents or instruments which have been recorded with the county recorder's office or which are on file with, or in possession of, any other governmental entity. Legal interest shall also include the property interest of lessees or tenants of real property, as well as all sublessors thereof. 
Responsible person. Any person whom a citing official determines is responsible for causing, maintaining, permitting, or allowing a violation of the Code. Responsible person includes but is not limited to any person who has an ownership or possessory interest in property, or any agent thereof with actual or apparent authority, possession, or control of property, as well as any other person, who creates, permits, or allows a violation of this Code to be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-53. - Administrative citation. 
Any person violating any section of this Code that is subject to this article may be issued an administrative citation by a citing official as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-54. - Content of administrative citation. 
An administrative citation shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the violation and the approximate time the violation occurred or was detected. 
(2)  The Code section violated and a description of the violation. 
(3)  The amount of the fine imposed for the violation, and the time within which and the place at which the fine shall be paid. 
(4)  An order prohibiting another occurrence of the Code violation. 
(5)  A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which to contest the administrative citation and the place from which to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation. 
(6)  The name and signature of the citing official. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-55. - Procedure for serving administrative citation or compliance order. 
Except as provided below, the citing official may issue an administrative citation, on a form approved by the city administrator or, pursuant to this chapter, serve a compliance order to a responsible person using either of the following methods: 
(1)  Personal service. The citing official may issue the administrative citation or serve a compliance order by personal delivery thereof to a responsible person. The citing official shall attempt to obtain on the administrative citation or compliance order the signature of the responsible person. If the responsible person or person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation or compliance order, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation, the compliance order or of subsequent proceedings. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of delivery. 
(2)  Mail. The citing official may mail the administrative citation or compliance order to the responsible person by registered mail. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. 
(3)  Posting. If the citing official does not succeed in serving the responsible party personally or by registered mail, the citing official shall post the administrative citation or compliance order on any real property within the city in which the responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of posting. 
(4)  Publication. If the citing official does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally or by registered mail and the city is not aware that the responsible person has a legal interest in any real property within the city, the citing official shall cause the administrative citation to be published once a week for four successive weeks in a local newspaper published at least once a week. Service shall be deemed effective upon the final date of publication. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-56. - Administrative fine. 
(a)  For any violation of this Code for which there is no specific administrative penalty established in this Code or by the city council, the fine imposed pursuant to this article for the particular violation shall be in the amount of $100.00 for a first violation; $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision of this Code within a 12-month period; and $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision of this Code within a 12-month period. 
(b)  Administrative fines assessed pursuant to an administrative citation are a debt owed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-57. - Payment of administrative fine. 
The fine imposed pursuant to this article for a particular violation and for any subsequent violation of the same Code section, shall be in the amount set forth in the bail schedule established by resolution of the city council. The administrative fine shall be paid to the city clerk within 20 days from the date of service of the administrative citation. If, after a hearing requested pursuant to this chapter, the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be cancelled, the administrative fine shall be refunded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-58. - Request for administrative hearing. 
(a)  Any responsible person to whom an administrative citation is issued may contest the citation by (1) completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city clerk; and (2) either depositing the administrative fine with the city clerk or providing notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to this article. A request for hearing form may be obtained from the city clerk. 
(b)  The responsible person to whom an administrative citation is issued shall file with the city clerk a completed request for hearing form and the administrative fine or completed hardship waiver form pursuant to this chapter within 20 days from the date of service of the administrative citation. In the event of any dispute as to the date of filing, the date indicated on a file stamped copy in the city clerk's office or a file stamped copy in the control of the responsible party shall control. The responsible person's failure to file the request for hearing form and the fine or hardship waiver form within 20 days of the date of service of the administrative citation shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
(c)  The person requesting the hearing shall be notified by registered mail of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days before the date of the hearing. Any documentation, other than the administrative citation the citing official has submitted or will submit to the hearing officer shall be served on the person requesting the hearing by registered mail at least five days before the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-59. - Advance deposit hardship waiver. 
(a)  Any responsible person who requests a hearing to contest an administrative citation and who is financially unable to deposit the administrative fine as provided in this chapter may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. The request shall be filed with the city clerk on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available from the city clerk, no later than 20 days after service of the administrative citation. The responsible person's failure to file a completed form, with all supporting documents, within 20 days after service of the administrative citation shall constitute a waiver of the right to receive a hardship waiver. In the event of any dispute as to the date of filing, the date indicated on a file stamped copy in the city clerk's office or a file stamped copy in the control of the responsible party shall control. 
(b)  The city administrator may issue an advance deposit hardship waiver only if the person requesting the waiver submits a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city administrator, the person's financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. The city administrator shall issue a written decision specifying the reasons for issuing or not issuing the waiver. The decision shall be served upon the person requesting the waiver by registered mail. The decision shall be deemed served on the date of mailing. If the city administrator determines that the waiver is not warranted, the person shall remit the full amount of the fine to the city clerk within ten days of service of the city administrator's written decision. The city administrator's decision whether to issue a hardship waiver shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-60. - Time for administrative hearing. 
Only after a request for hearing form is received by the city clerk within the required period, and the responsible person requesting the hearing has either deposited the administrative fine in full or obtained an advance deposit hardship waiver (hereinafter a "perfected appeal"), shall the city set the date and time for the administrative hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date not less than 15 days nor more than 60 days after a perfected appeal. The city shall send notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing to the person requesting the hearing by registered mail at least ten days before the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-61. - Request for continuance of hearing. 
The responsible person requesting a hearing may request one continuance, and the city may continue the hearing on its own initiative, but in no event shall the hearing begin later than 90 days after the request for hearing form is filed, and the administrative fine is deposited with the city or an advance deposit hardship waiver is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-62. - Appointment of administrative hearing officer. 
The city administrator shall establish procedures for the selection of administrative hearing officers. In no event, however, shall the same person who issued the administrative citation be the administrative hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-63. - Procedures at administrative hearing. 
Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Each party shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support of that party's case and to cross-examine witnesses. The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish a violation of the City Code. Administrative citations, compliance order and any additional reports submitted by the citing official shall constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents. The administrative hearing officer must use preponderance of evidence as the standard of review in deciding the issues. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-64. - Failure to attend administrative hearing. 
If the responsible person fails to attend the scheduled hearing, the hearing will proceed without the responsible person, and the responsible person will be deemed to have waived the right to an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-65. - Decision of administrative hearing officer. 
The administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision entitled "administrative order" no later than 30 days after the date on which the administrative hearing concludes. The administrative hearing officer shall include a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation within the administrative order. The decision shall set forth the reasons for the decision. If the administrative hearing officer upholds the administrative citation, the city shall retain the fine deposited by the responsible person. If the administrative hearing officer upholds the administrative citation and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the administrative hearing officer shall specify in the decision a payment schedule for the fine. If the administrative hearing officer cancels the administrative citation, any fine deposited with the city shall be promptly refunded. The administrative order shall be served upon the responsible person by registered mail. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. The administrative order shall become final on the date of service, and shall notify the responsible person of the right to appeal as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-66. - Late payment charges. 
Any person who fails to pay to the city, on or before the due date, any administrative fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be liable for the payment of the applicable late payment charges as follows: 
(1)  For payments received within 30 days after the due date, a late fee in the amount of 50 percent of administrative fine due; 
(2)  For payments received more than 30 days after the due date, a late fee in the amount of 50 percent of administrative fine due, plus an additional ten percent of the overdue administrative fine for each month the payment is overdue. The maximum late fee shall be 100 percent of the overdue administrative fine. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-67. - Collection of administrative fine. 
The city may collect any past-due administrative fine or late payment charges by use of any available legal means, including the lien procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-68. - Appeal of decision of administrative hearing officer. 
Within 20 days after service of the decision of the administrative hearing officer upon the responsible person, the responsible person may seek de novo review of the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the Los Angeles Superior Court (North Valley District/San Fernando Division). The responsible person shall serve upon the city clerk, either in person or by regular first class U.S. mail, a copy of the notice of appeal. If the responsible person fails to timely file a notice of appeal, the administrative hearing officer's decision shall be deemed confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-69. - Appeal fee. 
The responsible person seeking review of the administrative order must pay a fee of $25.00 to the Los Angeles Superior Court (North Valley District/San Fernando Division). In the event that the court finds in favor of the responsible person, the city will refund this fee to the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-70. - Failure to comply with administrative order or pay administrative fine. 
Failure to comply with an administrative order after it becomes final, or to pay an administrative fine or late payment charges, is a misdemeanor. Filing a criminal misdemeanor action does not preclude the city from using any other legal remedy available to gain compliance with an administrative order, or to collect any past-due administrative fine or late payment charges. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-71. - Remedies cumulative. 
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve such person from paying any tax, fee, penalty, or interest due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment prevent a criminal prosecution or a civil or administrative penalty for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 1-72—1-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES: CONTINUING VIOLATIONS—COMPLIANCE ORDERS 
 
Sec. 1-101. - Scope. 
This article provides for an administrative remedy for any continuing violation of this Code related to building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other similar structural or zoning issues, that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety. This remedy may be exercised in place of, or in addition to, any other remedy which is allowed by law, whether administrative, criminal, civil, or equitable. The city attorney or city prosecutor shall have sole discretion to determine whether a violation will be prosecuted criminally. If a violation is not prosecuted criminally, the city may proceed with administrative proceedings pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-102. - Applicability of article III. 
The provisions of article III regarding the administrative citation procedure, administrative hearings and payment of administrative fines shall apply to this article IV. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-103. - Compliance order. 
Whenever the citing official determines that there exists a continuing violation of any provision of this Code related to building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other similar structural or zoning issues, that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the citing official shall issue or cause to be issued a written compliance order to any responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-104. - Content of compliance order. 
A compliance order shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the violation and the approximate time the violation occurred. 
(2)  The City Code section violated and a description of the violation. 
(3)  The action required to correct the violation and the date by which such action must be completed. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the date for compliance shall not be less than 30 days from the date the compliance order is served. 
(4)  The consequences of failing to correct the violation, including a description of the administrative hearing procedure and appeal process. 
(5)  The time period after which administrative fines will begin to accrue if there is no compliance with the order. 
(6)  The amount of the fine that will be imposed if there is no compliance with the order. 
(7)  The name and signature of the citing official. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-105. - Procedures in serving compliance order. 
The citing official may serve, or cause to be served, a compliance order as provided in article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-106. - Compliance order satisfied. 
(a)  If the citing official determines that all violations specified in the compliance order have been corrected within the time set forth in the order, no further action shall be taken against the responsible person regarding the violations. 
(b)  When a compliance order is issued, if the responsible person provides written notice that the violation has been corrected, and if the citing official finds compliance, the citing official shall deem the date the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the city official to be the date the violation was corrected. If, however, a final inspection confirms compliance before mailing or personal delivery of a written notice, or if no written notice is provided, the date of final inspection shall be the date the violation was corrected. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-107. - Failure to comply—Administrative citation. 
If the responsible person fails to fully comply with the compliance order within the time specified therein, the citing official may issue an administrative citation as provided in article III of this chapter. The issuance of the administrative citation does not obviate the responsible person's obligation to fully comply with the compliance order. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-108. - Decision of administrative hearing officer. 
(a)  If an administrative citation is appealed by the responsible person and an administrative hearing is held pursuant to article III of this chapter, the administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision entitled "administrative order" no later than 30 days after the date on which the administrative hearing concludes. The administrative hearing officer shall make findings within the administrative order regarding the existence of the violation(s) specified in the compliance order, and regarding whether the responsible person took the required corrective action within the time period set forth in the compliance order. If the administrative hearing officer concludes that the violation continues to exist, the administrative order shall set forth a schedule for correction. If the administrative hearing officer determines that the violation(s) set forth in the compliance order did not exist, or that the violation(s) was (were) timely corrected, all proceedings regarding the violation(s) shall immediately cease and the administrative citations shall be canceled. If the administrative hearing officer cancels the administrative citation, any fine deposited with the city shall be promptly refunded. The administrative order shall be served upon the responsible person by registered mail. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing. 
(b)  The administrative order shall impose administrative fines as provided in this chapter, and administrative costs as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  The administrative order shall become final on the date of service, and shall notify the responsible person of the right to appeal as provided in this chapter. The administrative order shall set a deadline for compliance with its terms in the event that the responsible person fails to file an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-109. - Administrative costs. 
The administrative hearing officer shall assess against the responsible person administrative costs for any violation found to exist, or for any violation which was not timely corrected. The administrative costs include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with prosecuting the violation, including but not limited to costs of investigation, staffing costs in preparation for the administrative hearing and for the hearing itself, attorneys' fees and costs and costs for all inspections necessary to enforce the compliance order and the administrative order. The administrative order shall specify the date by which the costs must be paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-110. - Collection of administrative fines and costs—Lien procedure. 
(a)  If the responsible person fails to satisfy in full the assessed administrative fines and costs by the time specified in the administrative order, and no timely appeal of the administrative order has been filed with the Los Angeles Superior Court (North Valley District/San Fernando Division), the city may recover the outstanding fines and costs by imposing a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred. 
(b)  Prior to the recording of the lien with the county recorder's office, the city council shall conduct a hearing to hear any protest or objection to the lien. The citing official shall serve notice of the hearing upon the owner of record of the real property, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice of hearing shall include the time, date, and place of the hearing, and shall be served upon the owner of record by certified mail return receipt and by first class mail at least ten days before the date of the hearing. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and by publication of the notice at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county. 
(c)  If the city council determines that the lien should be imposed, then the citing official shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating the amount due and owing. 
(d)  After the report is filed with the city clerk, the citing official may cause the lien to be recorded with the county recorder. Once recorded, the lien shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Civil Procedure Code § 697.340, and may be extended as provided in Civil Procedure Code §§ 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive. 
(e)  The remedies set forth in this section are not exclusive and may be used in addition to those set forth elsewhere in this Code or by law. The city may collect any past-due fines and costs by use of any available legal means. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 1-111—1-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 1-151. - Nuisances generally. 
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the city, and each day such condition continues shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1538, § 1, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-152. - Nuisance abatement. 
(a)  The abatement of any public nuisance by the city as prescribed in section 1-151 or elsewhere in this Code shall be at the sole expense of the persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining such nuisance. The cost of abatement of any public nuisance and related administrative costs shall include, but not be limited to: inspection costs; investigation costs; attorneys fees and costs; and costs to repair and eliminate all substandard conditions. All such fees and costs shall be a personal obligation against any person held responsible for creating, causing, committing or maintaining a public nuisance. 
(b)  The prevailing party in any action, administrative proceeding or special procedure to abate a public nuisance pursuant to this section may recover its reasonable attorneys' fees in those individual actions or proceedings wherein the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to any prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. 
(c)  The city may collect the cost of abatement of any nuisance and related administrative costs, including but not limited to inspection costs, investigation costs, attorneys' fees and costs, and costs to repair and eliminate all substandard conditions by either: (i) obtaining a court order stating that this reimbursement requirement is a personal obligation of any person held responsible for creating, causing, committing or maintaining a public nuisance, recoverable by the city in the same manner as any civil judgment; (ii) recording a nuisance abatement lien pursuant to this Code against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained; or (iii) imposing a special assessment pursuant to this Code against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1538, § 1, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-153. - Nuisance abatement lien. 
(a)  Prior to the recordation of the lien against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, the owner of record of the parcel of land shall receive notice. The notice of the recordation of the lien against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained shall be served on the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll, or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. Such notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Civil Procedure Code § 415.10 et seq. The date upon which service is made shall be entered on or affixed to the face of the copy of the notice at the time of service. However, service of such notice without such date shall be valid and effective. 
(b)  A nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
(c)  A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien, the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
(d)  In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (b) of this section of this Code shall be recorded by the city. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
(e)  A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by the city as a money judgment. The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien or as a condition of removing the lien upon payment. 
(Ord. No. 1538, § 1, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-154. - Special assessment. 
(a)  As an alternative to the recordation of a nuisance abatement lien, the city may make the cost of abatement a special assessment against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained. 
(b)  Notice shall be given by certified mail, to the property owner, if the property owner's identity can be determined from the county assessor's or county recorder's records. Notice pursuant to this section of this Code shall be given at the time of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice pursuant to this section of this Code. 
(c)  The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for with ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(d)  The city may conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of that assessment is delinquent, subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code § 3691. 
(e)  Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment shall be entitled to recordation. 
(f)  Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated as a nuisance pursuant to subsection (a) of this section of this Code, the court may order such person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. The recovery of treble the costs of abatement of such nuisances as provided in this section of this Code shall not apply to city efforts to abate violations of the building code pursuant to the Health and Safety Code § 17980. 
(Ord. No. 1538, § 1, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 1-155—1-170. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1581, §§ 1, 3, adopted Apr. 21, 2008, repealed §§ 1-155—1-157 in their entirety. Former §§ 1-155—1-157 pertained to Graffiti abatement—general provision; nuisance abatement lien and special assessment, and derived from Ord. No. 1538, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2002.  
ARTICLE VI. - ATTORNEYS' FEES AND COST RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 1-171. - General penalty. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city may recover any fee, cost or charge, including any attorneys' fees incurred in the enforcement of any provision of the zoning code, the housing code, building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code or the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings as provided in this Code. The amount of any such fee, cost, or charge, including any attorneys' fees shall not exceed the actual cost incurred performing the inspections and enforcement activity, including but not limited to permit fees, fines, late charges and interest. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section of this Code, shall not apply to any enforcement, abatement, correction or inspection activity regarding a violation of any provision of sections of the zoning code, the housing code, building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code or the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings as provided in this Code in which the violation was evident on the plans that received the building permit. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section of this Code shall not apply to owner-occupied residential dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 1538, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 1-172. - Recovery through lien. 
(a)  If any of the fees, costs, charges, and or attorneys' fees incurred pursuant to this article have not been paid to the city within 45 days of notice thereof, the city may make the amount of the unpaid fee, cost, charge and or attorneys' fees a proposed lien against the property that is the subject of the enforcement activity. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section of this Code, the amount of the proposed lien may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to the proposed lien, except that if any real property to which the lien would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of taxes would become delinquent, then the lien that would otherwise be imposed by this section shall not attach to real property and the costs of enforcement relating to the property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(c)  The city shall provide the owner of the property with written notice in plain language of the proposed lien, a description of the basis for the amounts comprising the lien, a minimum of 45 days after notice to pay the fee, cost, or charge, and an opportunity to appear before city council and be heard regarding the amount of the proposed lien. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the last known address of the owner of the property. 
(d)  The city council may delegate the holding of the hearing required by subsection (c) of this section of this Code to a hearing board designated by the city council. The hearing board may be the housing appeals board established pursuant to state law or any other body designated by the city council. The hearing board shall make a written recommendation to the city council which shall include factual findings based on evidence introduced at the hearing. The city council may adopt the recommendation without further notice of hearing, or may set the matter for a de novo hearing before the city council. Notice in writing of the de novo hearing shall be provided to the property owner at least ten days in advance of the scheduled hearing. 
(e)  If the city council determines that the proposed lien authorized pursuant to subsection (a) of this section of this Code shall become a lien, the body may also cause a notice of lien to be recorded. This lien shall attach upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of the county and shall have the same force, priority, and effect as a judgment lien, not a tax lien. The notice shall, at a minimum, identify the record owner or possessor of the property, set forth the last known address of the record owner or possessor, set forth the date upon which the lien was created against the property, and include a description of the real property subject to the lien and the amount of the lien. 
(Ord. No. 1538, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-18(3); civil emergencies, ch. 26; administration of civil emergencies regulations, § 26-31 et seq.; administration of health and sanitation regulations, § 42-26 et seq.; planning, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 82; administration of real property transfer tax, § 82-68; administration and enforcement of traffic and vehicles regulations, § 90-46 et seq.; administration and enforcement of bicycle regulations, § 90-706 et seq.; administrative costs for abandoned vehicles, § 90-817; utilities, ch. 94; administration of zoning regulations, § 106-46 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Removal of appointees. 
(a)  Any person appointed to any position in the city or to any board, committee, or commission, with or without compensation, excluding permanent employees under the personnel (civil service) system, serves at the will of the appointing authority. Any such person, if an employee, may be discharged summarily or, if a member of a board, committee, or a commission, removed summarily by such appointing authority. 
(b)  The term "appointing authority," as used in this section, means the department head of the department in which any such employee is serving and, for a department head or a member of any board, committee, or commission or other person not serving under a department head, means the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.9.1)  
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Council members—Salary. 
(a)  Pursuant to Government Code § 36516, each member of the city council shall receive a monthly salary in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. Such salaries shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as the salaries that are paid to other officers and employees of the city. The salaries prescribed in this section are exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties of the city. 
(b)  The monthly salary set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall become effective in the first full calendar month following the date upon which one or more members of the city council begins a new term of office. 
(Code 1957, § 2.3; Ord. No. 1515, § 1, 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 1636, § 2, 11-3-2014)  
Sec. 2-32. - Employment or contracting with city after termination. 
Unless otherwise provided under the law, no city councilmember shall accept employment with the city or any agency or department thereof or contract with the city or any agency or department thereof, in any capacity whatsoever, for a period of one year following the effective date of the termination of such councilmember's term of office, resignation or removal from office. Nothing in this section shall prevent a former councilmember from serving as an unpaid advisor to the city or any agency or department thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 2.3.1)  
Secs. 2-33—2-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1648, § 2, adopted Dec. 7, 2015, repealed former §§ 2-33—2-36 in their entirety. Subject matter and legislative history of these former sections follows. 
Section 	Subject 	Legislataive 
History 
2-33 	Appointments to commissions. 	Code 1957, § 2.3.2 
2-34 	Method of appointment to commissions. 	Code 1957, § 2.3.3; Ord. No. 1605, § 2, 5-16-2011 
2-35. 	Removal of commission members; vacancies. 	Code 1957, § 2.3.4; Ord. No. 1605, § 3, 5-16-2011 
2-36. 	Term of commissioners. 	Code 1957, § 2.3.5) 
  
Secs. 2-37—2-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Regular meetings. 
The regular meetings of the council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each month at 6:00 p.m. Whenever the date for such meeting falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next business day, unless otherwise ordered by the council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.1; Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 7-21-2003) 
State Law reference— Council meetings, Government Code §§ 54950—54962, 36805—36811.  
Sec. 2-62. - Location. 
The regular meetings of the council shall be held in the City Hall located at 117 Macneil Street, unless the council by unanimous vote determines to hold a regular meeting at another site within the city. Adjourned meetings, special meetings, and emergency meetings may be held in accordance with law at any location, within or without the corporate limits of the city, as set forth in the order of adjournment and/or notice of meeting. 
(Code 1957, § 2.2)  
Sec. 2-63. - Disclosure of information discussed in closed session. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any city official, employee, or member of the city council or any other person in attendance at a closed session of the city council to disclose, discuss, or in any way, manner or form make known to any person outside of the closed session any information discussed in a closed session of the city council, including information concerning any other city official or employee or any other person or any property or governmental affairs of the city, without prior formal authorization of the city council. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1957, § 2.2.1)  
Secs. 2-64—2-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Date of general municipal elections; consolidation with county. 
(a)  The city shall hold its general municipal elections on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year, commencing with a general municipal election to be held on November 6, 2018. 
(b)  General municipal elections held pursuant to this section be consolidated with the concurrent statewide election of the same date administered by the registrar-recorder for the County of Los Angeles unless the county board of supervisors denies such consolidation pursuant to Elections Code Section 10402.5. In the event the county board of supervisors denies consolidation in any given year, the city reserves the right to administer the election on its own, through the office of the city clerk, or in cooperation with any other public agency to the extent authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1668, § 4, 8-21-2017)  
Secs. 2-92, 2-93. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance relating to compensation of city officers and employees saved from repeal, § 1-18(7); officers of the emergency organization, § 26-62; health officer, § 42-51 et seq.; director of recreation and community services, § 54-96 et seq.; officers of the planning commission, § 62-29; city traffic engineer, § 90-46. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-94—2-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1627, § 2, adopted July 15, 2013, amended former Div. 2, §§ 2-116—2-132, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2 pertained to the city administrator and derived from the Code of 1957, §§ 2.10—2.26. 
 
Sec. 2-116. - Office established. 
The office of city manager is created and established, pursuant to Government Code section 34851, et seq. The city manger shall be appointed by the city council on the basis of administrative and executive ability and such other qualifications as the city council may deem necessary for the orderly conduct of the city's business and affairs. The city manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council and need not be a resident of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-117. - Administrative officer references. 
Any and all references in the San Fernando Municipal Code and other city agreements, policies, procedures, or other relevant city document to the city administrative officer, city administrator, or other administrative designee serving pursuant to the city's previous city administrator form of government shall now mean and refer the to the city manager as established in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-118. - Vacancies. 
When a vacancy occurs in the office of city manager, the council shall, within five (5) days after such office becomes vacant, appoint an acting city manager from the officers or department heads of the city, until a new permanent city manager is appointed by the city council in accordance with section 2-116. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-119. - Temporary city manager. 
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as acting city manager during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager and his failure to so appoint an acting manager, the city council may designate a qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-120. - Compensation and reimbursement. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council shall from time to time determine and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council shall designate. The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested has been presented to the city council or designee for approval. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-121. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this division. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city, which are under his or her control. In addition to the general powers as administrative head of the city government, and not as a limitation thereon, the city manager shall be expected to, and shall have the power to: 
(1)  Enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed; 
(2)  Appoint, remove, promote, and demote any and all officers and employees of the city (including city department heads) except elected officers, the city attorney, and the city clerk, subject to all applicable personnel rules and regulations which may be adopted by the city council; 
(3)  Control, order, and give directions to all department heads who are subject to his or her appointment and removal authority and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads; 
(4)  Conduct studies and effect such organization and reorganization of offices, positions, or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the city's business; 
(5)  Recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary; 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council as a whole, except when his or her removal is under consideration; 
(7)  Prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval; 
(8)  Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(9)  Make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof and any contract or other obligation of the city; and further to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city; 
(10)  Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city; 
(11)  Have the same authority as the mayor, as the convenience of the parties may dictate, to sign documents specified in Government Code section 40602 whenever such documents have been approved by the city council for execution by resolution, motion, minute order, or other appropriate action; and 
(12)  Perform such other responsibilities and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-122. - Policy for appointment of department heads. 
(a)  This section shall be subject to any and all policies, compensation schedules or other standard employment guidelines developed by the city council. 
(b)  The city manager's appointment of department heads authorized in subsection (2) of section 2-121 above, shall be subject to the policy set forth in this section. 
(c)  "Department heads" shall mean any executive/managerial employee of the city who is not a represented member of a bargaining unit, including all persons excluded from civil service pursuant to subsections (3) and (4) of section 2-243 of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(d)  It is the responsibility of the city manager to ensure that all applicants are treated fairly and to ensure that the procedures outlined herein are followed. The city manager shall be responsible for initiating department head recruitment. 
(e)  Upon the city manager's initiation of recruitment for a department head, he or she shall use all available, timely and cost effective means of recruiting qualified applicants, including the advertisement of a job announcement for the open position for a period of at least ten days through newspapers, trade publications and other media that the city manager may deem appropriate. 
(f)  Minimum qualifications shall be described in job announcements for each position advertised and shall be established by the city manager, in consultation with the human resources director or designee. 
(g)  If no applicant meets the minimum qualifications, the city manager may interview the most qualified candidates for the position or re-advertise the position. 
(h)  Applications timely submitted shall be screened within 60 days after the deadline for application submission, to determine if the applicant meets the minimum requirements. 
(i)  Within 30 days after the conclusion of the screening applications, the city manager shall conduct interviews of at least the top five candidates that are deemed by him or her to be the best qualified and shall, in his or her sole discretion, appoint the successful candidate. The city manager may select a candidate from among the initial five persons interviewed but reserves the right to interview others from the pool of persons who have submitted employment applications and may select a candidate from such other persons interviewed. 
(j)  Any agreements made pursuant to this section that exceed the city manager's contract authority set forth in Subdivision III (Contracts for Consultants or Special Services) of Division 6 (Purchasing) of Article VI (Finance) of Chapter 2 (Administration) of the San Fernando Municipal Code shall be subject to city council approval. 
(k)  The city council reserves he right to adopt additional policies for the recruitment and compensation of executive and managerial employees. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-123. - Relations with council. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member of the city council shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. For purposes hereof, "inquiry" means any and all communications short of giving orders, directions, or instructions to any member of the administrative staff. Such staff members shall provide all information reasonably requested by any councilmember. The city manager shall take orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. The city council shall instruct the city manager in matters of policy. Any action, determination, or omission of the city manager shall be subject to review by the city council. The city council may not overrule, change, or modify any such action, determination, or omission except by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-124. - Relations with council. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, the city attorney, city clerk and city treasurer to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-125. - Attendance at city council meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council, unless excused therefrom. He may participate in council deliberations but shall not have a vote. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-126. - Attendance at meetings of commissions, boards and committees. 
The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission and any other commission, board or committee created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At any such meeting which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commission, board or committee as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof. He shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council pertaining to that commission, board or committee, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-127. - Removal. 
The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the council as then constituted. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Sec. 2-128. - Agreements with council. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provision of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 7-15-2013)  
Secs. 2-129—2-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Office established; appointment. 
There shall be a city clerk who shall be appointed by the city administrator and included in the civil service system pursuant to division 5 of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 2.216)  
Sec. 2-162. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The city clerk or a duly authorized representative shall: 
(1)  Attend all regularly scheduled meetings of the council, and others as directed, and be responsible for the recording and maintaining of a full and true record of all of the proceedings of the council in books that shall bear appropriate titles and that shall be devoted to such purpose. 
(2)  Maintain separate books, in which shall be recorded respectively all ordinances and resolutions, with the certificate of the clerk annexed to each document stating that the document is the original or a correct copy, and with respect to an ordinance stating that the ordinance has been posted or published in accordance with this chapter. The books shall be properly indexed and open to public inspection. 
(3)  Maintain separate books in which a record shall be made of all written contracts and official bonds. 
(4)  Be the custodian of the city seal. 
(5)  Conduct all city elections. 
(6)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the council. 
(b)  The city clerk may administer oaths or affirmations, take affidavits and depositions pertaining to the affairs and business of the city, and certify copies of official records. 
(Code 1957, § 2.217)  
Sec. 2-163. - Bond. 
The city clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute and deliver to the city a bond in the penal sum of $25,000.00. Such bond shall conform to the provisions of the state Government Code relating to bonds for such officer. 
(Code 1957, § 2.4)  
Secs. 2-164—2-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY TREASURER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1663, § 2, adopted April 3, 2017, repealed div. 4, §§ 2-191 and 2-192 and enacted a new div. 4 as set out herein. Former div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1957; Ord. No. 1515, adopted April 3, 2000; and Ord. No. 1664, adopted January 17, 2017. 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Appointment of city treasurer. 
(a)  As authorized under Government Code § 36510, the power to appoint the city treasurer shall be vested in the city manager and such appointee shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The foregoing notwithstanding, the city council, by subsequent ordinance, reserves the right to vest all authority to appoint the city treasurer in itself to the fullest extent authorized under Government Code § 36510. 
(b)  Pursuant to Government Code §§ 36508 through 36510, San Fernando voters at the city general municipal election of March 7, 2017 approved a city-initiated ballot measure which converted the elected office of city treasurer to an appointive office. In so far as the voters of the city also elected a city treasurer one final time at the city's general municipal election of March 7, 2017, the first appointment to the office of city treasurer as authorized under subsection (a) of this section, above, shall be made upon the earlier the of the following: (i) upon the expiration of the term of office of the person elected to serve as city treasurer at the March 7, 2017 general municipal election; or (ii) upon the occurrence of a vacancy by such person prior the expiration of his or her four-year term of office. 
(Ord. No. 1663, § 2, 4-3-2017)  
Sec. 2-192. - Appointee qualifications. 
(a)  Any person appointed to serve in the capacity of city treasurer must be an employee of the city who meets such professional qualifications as may be established and from time-to-time modified by the city manager acting in consultation with the city council. 
(b)  As provided under Government Code § 36510, the person appointed to serve as city treasurer need not be a resident of the city. 
(c)  The city council by subsequent ordinance shall be authorized to amend and/or modify the qualification requirements set forth under this section, above, provided that any such requirements are not in conflict with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1664, § 2, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 1663, § 2, 4-3-2017)  
Sec. 2-193. - Duties of city treasurer. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall perform all such duties as may be imposed upon him or her as provided by state law or under the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(b)  Pursuant to Government Code § 36518, the city treasurer shall execute a bond in an amount to be fixed by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1663, § 2, 4-3-2017)  
Secs. 2-194—2-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CIVIL SERVICE 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Adoption of personnel (civil service) system. 
The personnel (civil service) system in this division is adopted in order to: 
(1)  Establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; 
(2)  Attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; 
(3)  Ensure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and 
(4)  Provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees. 
(Code 1957, § 2.40) 
State Law reference— Authority for cities to establish civil service system, Government Code § 45000 et seq.  
Sec. 2-242. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1545, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 2003, repealed § 2-242 in its entirety. Former § 2-242 pertained to administrative services director and derived from Code 1957, § 2.41.  
Sec. 2-243. - Categories of employment. 
This division shall apply to all officers, positions, and employments in the city's service except the following: 
(1)  All officers elected by the people. 
(2)  Members of all appointed boards, commissions, committees and agencies. 
(3)  The city administrative officer. 
(4)  Department directors. 
(5)  Reserve police officers. 
(6)  School crossing guards. 
(7)  Individuals appointed to part-time, seasonal or temporary classes. 
(8)  Individuals hired during a declared emergency such as an extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake. 
(9)  Those performing service for the city under contract. 
(10)  Employment of unemployed and underemployed persons under federal or state law. 
(11)  Volunteer personnel. 
(12)  Grant writer. 
(13)  At-will city employees authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.42; Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 3-1-1999; Ord. No. 1502, § 1, 3-16-1999; Ord. No. 1516, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 1663, § 3, 4-3-2017) 
State Law reference— Designation of officers and employees to be included in civil service system, Government Code § 45005.  
Sec. 2-244. - Adoption and amendment of rules. 
Personnel rules shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.43)  
Sec. 2-245. - Contracts to perform certain functions. 
The city council may contract with any qualified private person or entity or any governmental entity for the performance of technical services in connection with the operation and administration of the personnel system, including any of the services to be performed by the personnel officer. 
(Code 1957, § 2.44) 
State Law reference— Authorization for contracts, Government Code § 45008.  
Sec. 2-246. - Effect of reclassification of positions. 
Upon the adoption of a general reclassification of city positions by the council, each employee shall continue in his position with the same permanent, probationary, or temporary status in the new class which he had in the old class. 
(Code 1957, § 2.45)  
Sec. 2-247. - Temporary appointments. 
(a)  Temporary appointments to the civil service shall be appointments of a short duration when the needs of the civil service make it necessary to employ additional personnel for a temporary period. Such employees are not entitled to receive fringe benefits. 
(b)  Temporary appointments may be made by the department head with the approval of the administrative officer and confirmation of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.46; Ord. No. 1546, § 1, 11-17-2003)  
Sec. 2-248. - Provisional appointments. 
Provisional appointments to the civil service may be made by the department head with the approval of the administrative officer in accordance with the personnel rules. 
(Code 1957, § 2.47; Ord. No. 1546, § 2, 11-17-2003)  
Sec. 2-249. - Special provisional appointments. 
Special provisional appointments to the civil service may be made by the department head with the approval of the administrative officer pending final city action on proceedings to review a suspension, demotion or dismissal of an employee or officer. 
(Code 1957, § 2.48; Ord. No. 1546, § 3, 11-17-2003)  
Sec. 2-250. - Status of employees holding positions on effective date of division. 
Any person holding a position or employment in the classified service at the time this division takes effect (30 days after February 19, 1968) or at the effective date of any subsequently enacted ordinance placing positions or employment under the classified service who shall have served in such position for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in this division or in the personnel rules continuously, immediately prior to such effective date shall become a classified service employee without preliminary or working tests and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to this division. Any other person holding a position or employment in the classified service shall be regarded as holding the position or employment as a probationer who is serving out the balance of the probationary period before the appointment becomes complete. 
(Code 1957, § 2.49)  
Sec. 2-251. - Suspension, removal or demotion of employees. 
(a)  All persons holding positions in the classified service shall be subject to suspension, removal or demotion in accordance with the personnel rules. 
(b)  Pending final city action on proceedings to review the suspension, demotion, or discharge of an employee, the vacancy created may be filled only by special provisional appointment. 
(c)  A reduction in pay shall be deemed a demotion unless such reduction is a part of a plan to reduce salaries and wages of a classification as a part of an economy or curtailment program or is part of a position reclassification or reorganization of duties and responsibilities. 
(Code 1957, § 2.50)  
Sec. 2-252. - Improper political activity. 
The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law. 
(Code 1957, § 2.51) 
State Law reference— Political activity, Government Code § 3201 et seq.  
Sec. 2-253. - Discrimination. 
(a)  No person in the classified service or seeking admission thereto shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of race, religious creed, color, ancestry, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, gender expression, marital status, physical handicap, medical condition or age. 
(b)  Minimum or maximum age limits for any examination for a position in the classified service shall not be established, and a maximum age shall not be a qualification for any employment in the classified service. However, the city council may fix minimum and/or maximum age limits for the employment of police officers. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, any person possessing all the minimum qualifications for the position is eligible to take any civil service examination, regardless of age, and the personnel manager shall not adopt any rule prohibiting the employment of any person, otherwise qualified, in any city employment solely because of age. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated herein: 
(1)  Gender identity means a person's actual or perceived gender-related identity, whether or not stereotypically associated with the person's assigned sex at birth. 
(2)  Gender expression means a person's actual or perceived gender-related appearance and behavior whether or not stereotypically associated with the person's assigned sex at birth. 
(3)  Sexual orientation means actual or perceived heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. 
(Code 1957, § 2.52; Ord. No. 1545, § 2, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 1643, § 2, 8-17-2015)  
Sec. 2-254. - Certain absences not break in continuous service. 
Any period of time during which an employee is required to be absent from the employee's position because of an injury or disease for which the employee is entitled to receive compensation under Labor Code § 3201 et seq., is not a break in the employee's continuous service for the purpose of that employee's right to salary adjustments, sick leave, vacation, or seniority. 
(Code 1957, § 2.53) 
State Law reference— Required, Government Code § 45010.  
Secs. 2-255—2-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Police department's powers and duties, § 90-101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Cooperation by department heads with city commissions. 
City department heads shall cooperate and render all reasonable and necessary assistance to all city commissions. All commissions are exclusively advisory, except the planning commission, which is governed by state law. 
(Code 1957, § 2.3.6)  
Secs. 2-302—2-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES DEPARTMENT  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 2-331—2-350. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Finance Division 
 
Sec. 2-351. - Created. 
In accordance with Government Code § 40805.5 and in order to establish a central agency for the uniform processing and development of all fiscal, accounting and budgetary functions within the city government, there is established a "finance department," which shall be administered by the finance director. For purposes of this division, the finance director shall be considered the director of finance for the purpose of duties imposed by the statutes referred to in section 2-353. 
(Code 1957, § 2.88; Ord. No. 1545, § 3, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-352. - Bond of director. 
The finance director shall furnish a corporate surety bond, to be approved by the city council, in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and which shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the finance director as described in this division, provided that such bond shall be at least equal to the bond required of the city clerk under the provisions of Government Code § 36518. 
(Code 1957, § 2.90; Ord. No. 1545, § 4, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-353. - Assumption of financial duties of city clerk. 
In accordance with the provisions of Government Code §§ 37209 and 40805.5, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk under Government Code §§ 37201—37208 and 40802—40805 are transferred to the finance director. 
(Code 1957, § 2.92; Ord. No. 1545, § 5, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-354. - Powers and duties generally. 
The finance department shall be vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Develop, maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city and of each of the respective departments, divisions and services thereof. 
(2)  Perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting practices. 
(3)  Keep and maintain or prescribe and require the keeping and maintaining of inventory records of municipal properties necessary in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices. 
(4)  Establish and maintain adequate billing and collection procedures for the utilities. 
(5)  Assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to the preparation, auditing and disbursement of claims and demands against the city, including payroll. 
(6)  Assist the administrative officer in the purchase of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required by the city. 
(7)  Assist the administrative officer in the preparation of the annual city preliminary budget. 
(8)  Supervise and maintain all necessary budgetary controls to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded. 
(9)  Assume, maintain and perform all functions and duties prescribed by ordinance relating to the administration of taxes, licenses and permit fees levied or charged by the city and the collection thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 2.93; Ord. No. 1545, § 6, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-355. - Reports and statements. 
The finance division shall prepare and present to the administrative officer for submission to the city council, in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the city: 
(1)  Monthly, or at such other times as may be requested by the city council or city administrative officer, statements of all receipts, disbursements and balances of the city. 
(2)  An annual statement or report of the financial condition of the city. 
(3)  Such other financial reports as may be required by the city council or by the administrative officer. 
(Code 1957, § 2.94; Ord. No. 1546, § 4, 11-17-2003)  
Sec. 2-356. - Additional duties. 
The finance division shall perform such additional duties and functions as may be prescribed or required by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.95)  
Sec. 2-357. - Appointment of subordinate employees. 
The director of administrative services shall recommend to the city council the appointment of such subordinate employees as may be necessary in the conduct of the finance division. 
(Code 1957, § 2.96)  
Sec. 2-358. - Cooperation with other officials. 
The finance division shall cooperate with other city officials in establishing and maintaining sufficient and satisfactory procedures and controls over municipal revenues and expenditures in all city departments, divisions and services in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices. 
(Code 1957, § 2.97)  
Secs. 2-359—2-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES, AGENCIES AND AUTHORITIES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Disaster council, § 26-91 et seq.; recreation and community services commission, § 54-56 et seq.; advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners, § 58-92; planning commission, § 62-26 et seq.; transportation and safety commission, § 90-71 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-401. - Appointment of city commissioners. 
(a)  The city council shall have the authority to appoint individuals to city commissions. 
(b)  Appointed members of boards and commissions serve at the pleasure of the city council, pursuant to Government Code Section 36506. 
(c)  For purposes of this Division 1, "commissions" shall include, but not be limited to, city commissions, boards, committees, and other bodies comprised of members appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1648, § 3, 12-7-2015)  
Sec. 2-402. - Method of appointment to commissions. 
Unless otherwise specified in this code, each city councilmember will be assigned a position that will correlate to a position on each commission. That councilmember will have the authority to nominate an individual to serve in the assigned position on the commission. Each such nomination shall require ratification by a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1648, § 3, 12-7-2015)  
Sec. 2-403. - Removal of commission members; vacancies. 
(a)  All commissioners serve at the pleasure of the city council and any commissioner may be removed, with or without cause, either by a majority of the entire membership of the city council or by the councilmember who individually appointed such commissioner. 
(b)  If vacancies in any commission occur, other than by expiration of the term, such vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. The city council member who nominated the vacating commission member shall nominate a replacement commissioner, subject to ratification by a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1648, § 3, 12-7-2015)  
Sec. 2-404. - Term of commissioners. 
The term of office for each commission member shall be one year; however, each member shall continue in the position beyond one year until replaced by the assigned city councilmember or until the member resigns. 
(Ord. No. 1648, § 3, 12-7-2015)  
Sec. 2-405. - Rules of decorum for commissions. 
(a)  Decorum and order—Commissioners. 
(1)  Commissioners shall accord the utmost courtesy to each other, to city employees, and to the public appearing before the commission and shall refrain at all times from rude and derogatory remarks, reflections as to integrity, abusive comments, and statements as to motives and personalities. 
(2)  Every commissioner desiring to speak shall address the chair of the commission and, upon recognition by such chair, shall confine discussion to the question under debate. 
(3)  Every commissioner desiring to question administrative staff should address questions to the city manager who may answer the inquiry directly or designate the appropriate staff member to timely respond to such inquiry. 
(4)  A commissioner, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while speaking, unless called to order by the chair of the commission, or a point of order is raised by another commissioner, or the speaker chooses to yield to questions from another commissioner. 
(5)  Any commissioner may move to require the chair of the commission to enforce the rules. A majority of the commission shall require enforcement of the rules if the chair of the commission has refused. 
(b)  Decorum and order—Employees. Members of administrative staff and city employees shall observe the same rules of procedure and decorum applicable to members of commissions. The city manager shall ensure that all city employees observe such decorum. Any staff member, including the city manager, desiring to address the commission or members of the public shall first be recognized by the chair of the commission. All remarks should be addressed to the chair of the commission and not to any one individual commissioner or member of the public. 
(c)  Decorum and order—Public. Members of the public attending commission meetings shall observe the same rules of order and decorum applicable to the commission. Each person who addresses the commission shall not make personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks to any member of the commission, staff or general public. Any person who makes such remarks, or who utters loud, threatening, personal or abusive language, or engages in any other disorderly conduct which disrupts, disturbs or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of the commission meeting shall, at the discretion of the chair of the commission or a majority of the commission, be barred from further audience before commission during that meeting. 
(d)  Personal interest. No commissioner disqualified from participation under state or local law shall remain at the commission dais during the debate or vote on such matter. The commissioner shall publicly state the grounds for disqualification on the record and, upon acceptance by the chair of the commission, leave the dais during the debate or vote on the issue. 
(e)  Limitations on debate. No commissioner shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject until every commissioner choosing to speak has spoken. Merely asking a question, or making a suggestion, is not considered speaking. 
(f)  Dissents and protests. Any commissioner shall have the right to express dissent from, or protest to, any action of the commission and request that the reason be entered into the minutes. 
(g)  Procedures in absence of rules. In the absence of a rule to govern a point or procedure, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1648, § 3, 12-7-2015)  
Secs. 2-406—2-425. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-426. - Created. 
There is created and established a cultural arts commission in and for the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2.270)  
Sec. 2-427. - Composition. 
The cultural arts commission shall consist of five members. Each member will be selected by the city council on the basis of an application process, which requires, at minimum, the submittal of: 
(1)  A letter of interest; 
(2)  Resume; and 
(3)  Biography or other material related to the personal, educational and/or professional background of the applicant. 
Each member selected will represent one of the following areas: 
(1)  Performing arts—Theatre and dance; 
(2)  Music; 
(3)  Visual arts/public arts; 
(4)  Media arts; and 
(5)  Art education. 
Preference shall be given to persons that live and/or work in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2.271; Ord. No. 1586, 7, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 2-428. - Officers. 
The members shall organize the cultural arts commission and shall select a chair and vice-chair. In the absence of the chair and the vice-chair, any other member shall call the meeting to order, whereupon a chair shall be elected from the members present to preside for that meeting. 
(Code 1957, § 2.274)  
Sec. 2-429. - Compensation of members. 
The council shall fix the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the cultural arts commission. 
(Code 1957, § 2.275)  
Sec. 2-430. - Meetings generally. 
Members of the cultural arts commission shall meet at such time and place as may be fixed by resolution. 
(Code 1957, § 2.276)  
Sec. 2-431. - Quorum. 
Three members of the cultural arts commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time for want of a quorum until a quorum can be obtained. 
(Code 1957, § 2.277)  
Sec. 2-432. - Absence from meetings. 
Absence from three regular meetings of the cultural arts commission in a 12-month period by a member without the consent of the commission or absence from four regular meetings of the commission within a 12-month period by a member with the consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute retirement of such member, and the office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city councilmember so assigned of a successor to fill the unexpired term. 
(Code 1957, § 2.278)  
Sec. 2-433. - Duties and powers. 
The duties and powers of the cultural arts commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  The commission will be a working commission and is charged with planning and implementing cultural special events and planning and commissioning art in public places (e.g., murals, sculptures, city monuments, etc.). 
(2)  The commission would annually develop a list of activities that would be presented for council approval. The activities would address a diverse and broad approach to culture, not any one culture. The activities would introduce the community to all cultures in this city and beyond. 
(3)  The commission is charged with seeking outside funds to implement its activities, thereby saving city resources. 
(4)  It is expected that from time to time activities of the cultural arts commission may intersect with the duties and authority of other commissions. When this occurs, an ad hoc committee of two commissioners from each commission involved will be formed to meet and discuss the issue or project. An ad hoc report will be generated and forwarded back to each commission. The commissions will then make a recommendation to the city council, who will make the final decision. 
(Code 1957, § 2.279)  
Sec. 2-434. - Rules and regulations. 
Subject to the approval of the city council, the cultural arts commission may make and alter such rules and regulations for its organization and procedures as are consistent with this chapter and other city ordinances and with state laws. 
(Code 1957, § 2.281)  
Sec. 2-435. - Reports and records. 
The cultural arts commission shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings and transactions and shall render annually, on a calendar basis, a full report of the commission's transactions and recommendations to the council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.282)  
Sec. 2-436. - Incurring financial liability. 
Neither the cultural arts commission nor any person connected with the commission shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2.283)  
Secs. 2-437—2-465. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1586, § 5, adopted Mar. 16, 2009, repealed Div. 3, §§ 2-466—2-480, which pertained to historical commission and derived from Ord. No. 1583, § 3, 11-17-2008. 
 
Secs. 2-466—2-505. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
Sec. 2-506. - Established; powers and duties. 
It is found and declared, pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 33101, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency, created by Health and Safety Code § 33100, to function in the city. Such redevelopment agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code § 33000 et seq.). 
(Code 1957, § 2.98)  
Sec. 2-507. - Authority of city council. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Health and Safety Code § 33200, the city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency provided for in section 2-506 and declares that all of the rights, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the state Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code § 33000 et seq.) in such agency shall be and are vested in the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.99)  
Secs. 2-508—2-535. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-536. - Statutory authority; declaration of need. 
In accordance with the California Industrial Development Financing Act (Government Code § 91500 et seq.), the city council finds and declares that there is a need for an industrial development authority to function in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2.100) 
State Law reference— Necessity of declaration of need to function, Government Code § 91520.  
Sec. 2-537. - Establishment; purpose and objectives. 
The city council further declares that an industrial development authority shall function in the city in accomplishment of the purpose provided in the California Industrial Development Financing Act (Government Code § 91500 et seq.) and shall carry out and complete projects and perform and exercise derivative obligations and powers as set forth in such act. 
(Code 1957, § 2.101)  
Sec. 2-538. - Board of directors; powers. 
The city council declares itself to be the board of directors of the industrial development authority, and all the rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities, disabilities and immunities vested in such a board under the California Industrial Development Financing Act (Government Code § 91500 et seq.) shall be vested in the city council as such board. 
(Code 1957, § 2.102)  
Sec. 2-539. - Title of authority. 
The industrial development authority established in the city by the California Industrial Development Financing Act (Government Code § 91500 et seq.) and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under such act by this division shall be known as the Industrial Development Authority of the City of San Fernando. 
(Code 1957, § 2.103)  
Secs. 2-540—2-565. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - SAFETY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-566. - Established; composition; chair and secretary. 
(a)  There is established a safety committee to act as an advisory board to develop and recommend to the city council and administrative officer policies and procedures affecting the administration of the city safety programs, which safety committee shall consist of seven members who shall serve without compensation. The safety committee shall consist of the heads of each department, including the director of public works, the director of recreation and community services, the finance director, and the chief of police; one representative from each of the two employee groups; the San Fernando Police Officers Association; and the miscellaneous employees' organized group. 
(b)  The committee shall, by majority vote, select from its membership a chairperson who shall serve for a one-year term. The finance director shall serve as secretary to the committee. 
(Code 1957, § 2.251; Ord. No. 1545, § 7, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-567. - Meetings generally. 
The safety committee shall meet at least once each month at such time and place as it shall fix by resolution. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or four members of the committee, by written notice served upon each member of the committee at least 24 hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting. 
(Code 1957, § 2.252)  
Sec. 2-568. - Powers and duties generally. 
The powers and duties of the safety committee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Recommend citywide safety rules and policies. 
(2)  Review accidents and recommend such action as seems necessary to prevent or at least minimize future accidents of a similar nature. 
(3)  Review trends and statistics. 
(4)  Recommend financial commitments for carrying out the city safety program. 
(5)  Review safety training programs and make recommendations. 
(6)  Review inspection training programs, and make impromptu inspections. 
(7)  Recommend enforcement policies. 
(Code 1957, § 2.253)  
Secs. 2-569—2-599. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - TREE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-600. - Created. 
There is established a tree commission in and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-601. - Composition and appointment of members. 
The tree commission shall consist of five members. The commission shall include one councilmember, the public works director, the community development director, a certified arborist, horticulturist, landscape architect or other similarly-trained professional (the "professional"), and one at-large member from the community (the "at-large member"). 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-602. - Terms of members. 
Terms of office of the councilmember, the professional, and the at-large member shall be three-years, at the will of the city council. The public works director and community development director shall serve indefinitely at the will of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-603. - Vacancies; removal. 
(a)  If a vacancy occurs in the tree commission for any reason, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the city council. 
(b)  Whenever, in the discretion of the city council, the best interests of the city will be served thereby, any member of the tree commission may be removed from office by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-604. - Officers generally. 
(a)  Chair. The members of the tree commission shall annually in June elect one of its number as chair to serve for a one-year term or until a successor is elected. 
(b)  Vice-chair. The members of the tree commission shall annually in June elect one of its number as vice-chair to serve for a one-year term or until a successor is elected. 
(c)  Secretary. The public works director or his or her designee shall serve as secretary to the commission. 
(d)  Absence of chair, vice-chair and/or secretary. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair, and/or the secretary, any other member shall call the meeting to order, whereupon a chair and/or a secretary shall be elected from the members present to preside for that meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-605. - Compensation. 
The city council shall fix the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-606. - Meetings generally. 
The members of the tree commission shall meet at least once a quarter at such time and place as it may fix by resolution. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chair of the commission or four members thereof by written notice served upon each member of the commission at least 48 hours before the time for the proposed meeting. Proper posting and Brown Act procedures will be followed. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-607. - Quorum. 
Three members of the tree commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time for want of a quorum until a quorum can be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-608. - Absence from meetings. 
(a)  Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the tree commission by a member with or without consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and his office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city council of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(b)  Absence from three regular meetings of the commission in a 12-month period by a member without consent of the commission or absence from four regular meetings of the commission within a 12-month period by a member with the consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and his office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city council of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(c)  Any member whose absences from regular meetings of the commission are deemed to constitute a retirement of such member under this section shall have the right to appeal the deemed retirement. The city council may overturn the deemed retirement if it determines that the absences of the member were the result of unusual circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-609. - Powers and duties generally. 
The powers and duties of the tree commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  To act in an advisory capacity to the city council on matters pertaining to the improvement and beautification of the city's urban forest, and to provide an official entity through which the city may organize and implement plans. 
(2)  To establish procedures and rules of operation, as it deems necessary to give effect to the intent and purpose of this ordinance, subject to the approval of the city council, and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(3)  To oversee the preparation of, the reviewing of, and the recommendation of a city-owned tree inventory, master plan, and work plan/budget to the city council for implementation. 
(4)  To be instrumental in evaluating needs, setting goals, and establishing policies for the community forestry program. 
(5)  To recommend legislation to the city council regarding the urban forest. 
(6)  To provide information regarding the selection, planning and maintenance of trees on public property. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-610. - Rules and regulations. 
Subject to the approval of the city council, the tree commission may make and alter such rules and regulations for its organization and procedure as are consistent with this chapter, other city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-611. - Reports and records. 
The tree commission shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings and transactions and shall render annually, on a calendar basis, a full report of the commission's transactions and recommendations to city council. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-612. - Cooperation by other officers and departments. 
All city officers, departments and department heads shall cooperate and render all reasonable and necessary assistance to the tree commission. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
Sec. 2-613. - Incurring financial liability. 
Neither the tree commission nor any person connected with the commission shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 5-20-2002)  
DIVISION 8. - EDUCATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-614. - Created; composition; appointment; qualifications. 
(a)  There is established an education commission in and for the city. 
(b)  The education commission shall consist of five members. 
(c)  Each member shall be appointed in accordance with section 2-34 of this Code. 
(d)  Each member shall, at all times during their incumbencies, be a resident and registered voter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 2-615. - Officers; compensation. 
(a)  The members of the education commission shall annually in June elect one of its number as chair and one of its number as vice-chair, each to serve for a one-year term or until a successor is elected. The city clerk shall serve as secretary to the education commission. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair, and/or the secretary, any other member shall call the meeting to order, whereupon a chair and/or a secretary shall be elected from the members present to preside for that meeting. 
(b)  The city council shall fix the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the education commission. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 2-616. - Meetings; quorum. 
(a)  The members of the education commission shall meet at least once a quarter at such time and place as it may fix by resolution. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chair of the commission or four members thereof by written notice served upon each member of the commission at least 48 hours before the time for the proposed meeting. Proper posting and Brown Act procedures will be followed. 
(b)  Three members of the education commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time for want of a quorum until a quorum can be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 2-617. - Absence from meetings. 
(a)  Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the education commission by a member with or without consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and his office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by a successor to fill the unexpired term of office pursuant to section 2-35 of this Code. 
(b)  Absence from three regular meetings of the education commission in a 12-month period by a member without consent of the commission or absence from four regular meetings of the commission within a 12-month period by a member with the consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and his office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by a successor to fill the unexpired term of office pursuant to section 2-35 of this Code. 
(c)  Any member whose absences from regular meetings of the commission are deemed to constitute a retirement of such member under this section shall have the right to appeal the deemed retirement. The city council may overturn the deemed retirement if it determines that the absences of the member were the result of unusual circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 2-618. - Powers and duties; rules and regulations; reports and records. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the education commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Establish and act as a liaison between the city and local school administrations, the city's school board representative for the Los Angeles Unified School District and representatives from other public and private schools operated in the city. 
(2)  Initiate studies, investigations, surveys and make recommendations to the city council regarding local K-12 education and local higher learning, educational grant and educational scholarship opportunities. 
(3)  Coordinate with the city police chief on the implementation of the School Resource Officer Program in local Los Angeles Unified School District schools and the deployment of a school resource officer at those schools. 
(b)  Subject to the approval of the city council, the education commission may make and alter such rules and regulations for its organization and procedure as are consistent with this chapter, other city ordinances and state law. 
(c)  The education commission shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings and activities and shall render annually, on a calendar basis, a full report of the commission's activities and recommendations to city council. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 2-619. - Incurring financial liability. 
Neither the education commission nor any person connected with the commission shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 2-620. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-18(2); any ordinance levying or relating to taxes not inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal, § 1-18(6). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-621. - Procedure for deposit of city money received by officers or employees. 
(a)  In accordance with provisions of Government Code § 36522, any officer or employee collecting or receiving any money belonging to or for the use of the city shall forthwith deposit the money with the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall issue receipts for such deposits in triplicate; one for the officer or employee so depositing funds and one copy of which shall be filed forthwith with the city clerk. The receipt shall show from whom the deposit is received, the date received, the fund to which the deposit is to be credited, and the source of the purpose of such deposit. 
(b)  The city clerk, upon receiving the copy of the receipt, shall enter the deposit on the city's books and accounts, charging the treasurer with the amount so deposited with him. 
(Code 1957, § 2.87)  
Secs. 2-622—2-645. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FISCAL ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 2-646. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year shall begin on July 1 of each year and shall end on June 30 of the following year. 
(Code 1957, § 2.220)  
Sec. 2-647. - Public hearing on budget. 
After reviewing the preliminary budget and making such revisions as it may deem advisable, the city council shall determine the time for the holding of a public hearing thereon and shall cause to have published a notice thereof at least once, not less than ten days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. At the time advertised, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget. At this time interested persons desiring to be heard shall be given such opportunity. 
(Code 1957, § 2.221)  
Sec. 2-648. - Adoption of budget. 
At the conclusion of the public hearing as provided in section 2-647, the city council shall further consider the proposed budget and make any revisions it may deem necessary, and on or before July 20 it shall, by resolution, adopt the budget by the affirmative votes of at least three members. Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the ensuing fiscal year. A copy thereof, certified by the city clerk, shall be filed with the person retained by the city council to perform auditing functions for the council. A certified copy of the adopted budget shall also be placed on file in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for inspection. The budget so certified shall be reproduced and copies made available for the use of all city departments and offices. 
(Code 1957, § 2.222)  
Sec. 2-649. - Appropriations from budget. 
From the effective date of the city's budget, the separate and several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be appropriated by fund to the several departments, offices and agencies for the respective objects and purposes therein named. All appropriations unexpended or unencumbered at the end of each fiscal year shall expire and revert to the unappropriated fund balance or the fund from which appropriated. Any encumbering funds from the next preceding fiscal year shall likewise expire and revert to the respective fund balances. 
(Code 1957, § 2.223)  
Sec. 2-650. - Amendment of budget. 
At any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the city council may amend or supplement the budget by a resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of the majority of the council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.224)  
Sec. 2-651. - Transfers from budget. 
The finance director is authorized to transfer budget amounts within salary accounts and within M and O accounts at his discretion. Budget transfers between funds, departments or divisions, transfers affecting assets and transfers between capital outlay accounts shall first be approved by the city council. Transfers requiring city council approval shall be submitted as agenda items and approved in accordance with section 2-650. 
(Code 1957, § 2.225; Ord. No. 1545, § 8, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-652. - Independent audit. 
The city council shall retain, for a contract period not to exceed three years, a qualified independent certified public accountant who, at such times as may be specified by the city council, shall examine annually the financial records and procedures of such officers, employees or departments as the council may direct. As soon as practical after the end of the fiscal year, a final audit and report shall be submitted by such certified public accountant to the city council, city treasurer, administrative officer, finance director, city clerk and city attorney, respectively, with five additional copies to be placed on file in the office of the finance director where they shall be available for inspection by the general public. 
(Code 1957, § 2.226; Ord. No. 1545, § 9, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-653. - Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. 
(a)  To comply with the provisions of Streets and Highways Code § 2113, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. 
(b)  All monies received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein or for engineering or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city shall be paid into such fund. 
(c)  All monies in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of Streets and Highways Code §§ 2106—2116. 
(Code 1957, § 2.230)  
Sec. 2-654. - Traffic Safety Fund. 
(a)  To comply with the provisions of Vehicle Code § 42200, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the Traffic Safety Fund. 
(b)  All monies received by the city under Penal Code § 1463 in accordance with provisions of Vehicle Code § 42200 shall be paid into such fund. 
(c)  All monies in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of Vehicle Code § 42200. 
(Code 1957, § 2.231)  
Sec. 2-655. - Prop A Local Transit Assistance Fund. 
(a)  To comply with the requirements of the Metropolitan Transit Authority, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be designated as "The Prop A Local Transit Assistance Fund." 
(b)  All monies received by the city from the Metropolitan Transit Authority as the city's share of the transportation sales tax imposed for local transportation purposes, including any interest earned through the investment of Prop A local return funds, shall be paid into this fund. 
(c)  Before expenditures are made from this fund, all such expenditures shall be budgeted in accordance with the fiscal procedures established in this Code and with such other budget procedures as may be adopted by the city council. 
(d)  Any and all unexpended balances remaining in the fund at the end of the fiscal year shall be carried forward from year to year and shall be rebudgeted for any use authorized for Prop A local return funds. 
(Code 1957, § 2.233)  
Sec. 2-656. - Refuse and Environmental Services Fund. 
(a)  There is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the Refuse and Environmental Services Fund. 
(b)  All monies received by the city from billings made in accordance with sections 70-33 and 70-34 of this Code shall be paid into such fund. 
(c)  All monies in the fund shall be expended exclusively as follows: 
(1)  Payment of the charge to the city per household unit by the residential collector pursuant to a collection agreement authorized under Article II of Chapter 70 of this Code. 
(2)  Costs of providing street sweeping services. 
(3)  Administrative costs of billing and collecting residential charges and the NPDES/street sweeping fee as defined by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.234; Ord. No. 1551, § 1, 7-6-2004)  
Secs. 2-657—2-680. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REFUND OF MONEY RECEIVED BY CITY 
 
Sec. 2-681. - Refund of claims generally. 
Whenever any money is collected or received by the city, it may be refunded, in whole or in part, if a claim in writing therefor is filed with the city clerk within 180 days after the date of such collection or receipt. The claim shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 2.58)  
Sec. 2-682. - Conditions. 
A refund under section 2-681 may be made only under the following conditions: 
(1)  Where a refund is specifically authorized by the provisions of law requiring payment of the money, but no refund procedure is contained in this division. 
(2)  Where the money was either paid by the claimant or received by the city through mistake as to the legal necessity for making the payment in order to exercise or enjoy the privilege, permission or service applied for. 
(3)  Where the applicant for any license, permit or service has not, at any time after the commencement of a period or term during which the requested license, permit or service would have been effective or rendered, commenced or engaged in the business or occupation or performed any act for which the license or permit was required, or received any of such service; provided, however, the license or permit has not expired prior to the date upon which the claim for the refund is made and provided, further, that the license or permit, if the license or permit has in fact been issued, must be submitted with the refund claim and canceled when and if the refund is made, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the city council that the license or permit has been lost or destroyed. 
(Code 1957, § 2.59)  
Sec. 2-683. - Action on claims. 
When a claim is filed with the city clerk under section 2-681 of this division, it shall be transmitted to the head of the department which collected or received the money and to the city attorney for their recommendations, and then to the city council. The city council shall then consider such claim and recommendations and, upon finding that there exists one of the conditions specified in section 2-682, shall, by order, authorize the refund; otherwise such claim shall be denied. 
(Code 1957, § 2.60)  
Sec. 2-684. - Deductions. 
There shall be deducted from each refund made under this division a sum equal to 25 percent of the amount otherwise refundable, not to exceed, however, a maximum of $25.00 and not less than a minimum of $3.00 to be applied for clerical and other expenses entailed by the transaction, unless the council finds that the money was collected or received primarily through a mistake of the city, when the council may determine that no deduction from such refund shall be made. 
(Code 1957, § 2.61)  
Sec. 2-685. - Quarterly reports. 
The city clerk shall make and transmit to the council, quarterly, a detailed report of any refunds made under this division, showing the names and addresses of the persons receiving such refunds, the amounts thereof, the type or kind of payments refunded and the reasons why such refunds were made. 
(Code 1957, § 2.62)  
Sec. 2-686. - Applicability to refunds under other ordinances. 
This division shall not apply to money collected or received or to refunds provided for under any other ordinance providing a refund procedure. 
(Code 1957, § 2.63)  
Secs. 2-687—2-710. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CLAIMS AND DEMANDS; WARRANTS; PAY PERIODS 
 
Sec. 2-711. - Claims for money or damages. 
(a)  The presenting and processing of claims and demands to which Government Code § 900 et seq. is applicable shall be governed by the provisions therein contained. All other claims and demands for money due from the city shall be presented in writing and shall be filed with the division of finance at the times and in accordance with the procedures established in the city's purchasing manual. The claim or demand shall be approved by the endorsement of the officer or employee certifying receipt of the claim or demand. 
(b)  Pursuant to Government Code § 935, claims against the city for money or damages which are excepted from the California Tort Claims Act by Government Code § 905 and which are not governed by any other statute or regulation expressly relating thereto shall be governed by the procedures contained in Government Code §§ 900 et seq., and 910 et seq. as a prerequisite to bringing any lawsuit or action for money or damages against the city or any city officer, department, board, or council. 
(Code 1957, § 2.83)  
Sec. 2-712. - Approval of demand register by council; issuance and signing of warrants. 
The finance director shall present the claims or demands against the city, after the procedure established by section 2-711 is carried out, to the city council in the form of a demand register, attaching thereto an affidavit by the finance director or the director's deputy, certifying to the accuracy thereof and availability of funds for the payment thereof, all in accordance with Government Code § 37202 and other laws pertaining thereto. Upon approval of the register by the city council, warrants or checks in payment of demands allowed shall be drawn in accordance with a method prescribed by resolution of the city council. Any method for drawing warrants or checks shall require the manual or mechanical signature of at least one city officer who has executed an official bond to the city, covering the faithful performance by such officer of the duties of his office, as provided by the state Government Code. 
(Code 1957, § 2.84; Ord. No. 1545, § 10, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-713. - Exceptions to presentation of claims or demands to council for approval. 
Notwithstanding sections 2-711 and 2-712, the following claims or demands need not be presented to the city council for approval prior to payment, provided that all such claims or demands are presented in accordance with section 2-711 and are approved by the finance director, that all checks and warrants drawn for payment of such claims or demands are drawn in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 2-712, and that all such demands and claims are presented to the city council for ratification and approval at the first city council meeting after payment of the following: 
(1)  Payroll warrants or checks. 
(2)  Warrants or checks drawn in payment of demands certified by the finance director as conforming to a budget approved by ordinance or resolution of the city council, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Claims or demands from an approved budget when the finance director determines that delay in payment of any such claim or demand would cause an undue hardship on the claimant. 
b.  Claims or demands for payment of moneys due under a written contract between the city and the claimant, which contract was previously approved by the city council. 
c.  Claims or demands for payment of moneys due for expenditures of an emergency nature or which are necessary to the normal functioning of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 2.85; Ord. No. 1545, § 11, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 2-714. - Pay period for officers and employees. 
(a)  The pay period for all city officers and employees, excepting members of commissions, shall be biweekly, ending on every other Friday, and the pay, wages or salary earned during such biweekly period shall become due and payable on the next succeeding Friday. 
(b)  Salaries of members of commissions shall be paid monthly and shall become due and payable not later than the tenth day of the next succeeding month. 
(Code 1957, § 2.86)  
Secs. 2-715—2-740. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 2-741. - Imposed. 
There shall be charged in connection with the provision by the city of enumerated public safety services, regulation and products a fee or charge sufficient to recover some or all of the costs reasonably borne by the city in providing such public safety services, regulation and products. Public safety services, regulation and products provided by the city subject to a fee or charge under this division shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall include only public safety services, regulation or products which the city council finds are provided to small segments of the city's citizens or to nonresidents of the city. The amount of any such fee or charge shall be set by resolution of the city council, and no such fee or charge shall exceed the costs reasonably borne by the city in providing such public safety services, regulation or products. 
(Code 1957, § 2.261)  
Sec. 2-742. - Determination of costs reasonably borne. 
The costs reasonably borne by the city in providing public safety services, regulation and products as provided in this division shall be determined by reference to the following elements: 
(1)  All applicable direct costs, including but not limited to salaries, wages, fringe benefits, services and supplies, operating expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred. 
(2)  All applicable indirect costs, including but not restricted to building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance, communication, printing and reproduction, and like indirect expenses. 
(3)  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city administrative officer, finance department, city treasurer, city clerk, city attorney's office, police department, and all other staff and support services. 
(4)  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and each department head's supporting expenses. 
(Code 1957, § 2.262; Ord. No. 1545, § 12, 11-3-2003)  
Secs. 2-743—2-770. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PURCHASING[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), adopted April 18, 2016, repealed the former Div. 6, §§ 2-771—2-773, 2-796—2-812, 2-836—2-838, and enacted a new division as set out herein. The former Div. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1957, §§ 21A.1—21A.18, 21A.27, 21A.28; Ord. No. U-1598, § 2, adopted March 1, 2010; Ord. No. 1599, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 15, 2010; Ord. No. 1601, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2010; Ord. No. U-1635, §§ 2, 3, adopted Sep. 2, 2014; Ord. No. 1641, § 1, adopted April 6, 2015; Ord. No. 1643, § 2, adopted Aug. 17, 2015. 
State Law reference— City to adopt procedures, Government Code, § 54202. 
 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 2-771. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to establish an efficient procedure for the purchase of supplies, services, and equipment, and to establish a procedure for performing or contracting for the construction of public works consistent with state law. These procedures shall not be overly time consuming and cumbersome, while allowing the city to obtain the best professional services, and acquire quality supplies, general services, and equipment in an overall economic manner, and also to construct public works at the lowest reasonable cost. The purpose of this ordinance is to emulate best practices in the purchasing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-772. - Definitions. 
(a)  Bidder's list. "Bidder's list" shall mean a list of responsible prospective vendors capable of providing the items being bid upon. 
(b)  Cooperative bid. "Cooperative bid" is when several government agencies join together to create one bid document combining all agencies product volume for consideration of the bidder in determining the unit cost. 
(c)  Emergency. As determine l, including, but not limited to, states of emergency defined in Government Code Section 8558, when repair or replacements are necessary to permit the continued conduct of the operation of city services, or to avoid danger to life or property, repair or replace any public facility without adopting plans, specification, or working details or give notice for bids to let a contract or public works construction contract. 
(d)  Equipment. "Equipment" shall mean furnishings, machinery, vehicles, rolling stock, and other personal property used in the city's business. 
(e)  General services. "General services" are services which do not require any unique skill, special background, training, and obtaining such services at the lowest cost should be the single most important factor in selection, as opposed to personal performance. Examples of general services include uniform cleaning and maintenance services. 
(f)  Local vendor. "Local vendor" means a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity which: (a) has its principal place of business within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City; and (b) has continuously maintained a business license with the City for a period of at least 12 months from the date bids are due. 
(g)  Lowest responsive and responsible bidder. The term "lowest responsive and responsible bidder" means a bidder who has submitted the lowest monetary bid in response to bid solicitation and who is also a responsible bidder and a responsive bidder. If a bid solicitation has additive or deductive items the lowest monetary bid shall be determined by the city in the bid solicitation documents in any of the manners prescribed under California Public Contract Code Section 10126, Subdivision (c). 
(h)  Maintenance work. "Maintenance Work" shall mean: 
(1)  Routine, recurring, and usual work for the cleaning, preservation, or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes. 
(2)  Minor repainting. 
(3)  Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch. 
(4)  Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems. 
(5)  Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of 230,000 volts and higher. 
(i)  Multiple awarded bid. When a bid is awarded to more than one vendor for the same or similar products. A multiple awarded bid schedule is usually set up and provides information of product type/brand and vendor who is providing the product. 
(j)  Piggyback. Use of another public agency's existing contract to purchase the same product(s) as outlined in the awarding bid document. 
(k)  Professional, management, or special services. "Professional," "management," or "special services" shall mean any work performed by an attorney, doctor, architect, engineer, land surveyor, construction manager, appraiser, expert, accounting firm, consultant or those services such as computer services, golf course operating services, concession services, parking garage operation services, and transportation/transit operator services. Factors for determining whether professional, management, or special services are needed include but, are not limited to, services which require special performance criteria, specific experience and training, professional judgment, licensing, qualified expertise in a specific area of work, or other unique factors other than simply obtaining the service at the lowest cost to the city. 
(l)  Public works. "Public works" shall mean a type of public construction project subject to the regulation of the State Public Contract Code and State Labor Code and as defined in California Labor Code Division 2, Chapter 1, Article 1, Section 1720 and as further amended. Examples of a Public Works Project include: 
(1)  The erection, construction of, alteration, major painting, repair, or demolition of public buildings, streets, walkways, water and sewer facilities, drainage facilities, or other public facilities, whether owned, leased, or operated by the city. 
(2)  Furnishing supplies or materials for any of the above works or projects. 
(3)  A public work does not include maintenance work as defined in this subdivision. 
(m)  Public project. "Public Project" shall have the meaning as set forth in the California Public Contract Code Division 2, Part 3, Chapter 1, Article 4, Section 20161 and Division 2 Part 3, Chapter 2, Article 1, Section 22002, or as hereinafter amended. 
(n)  Purchase. "Purchase" shall include the renting, leasing, purchasing, licensing, or a trade of equipment or supplies. 
(o)  Purchasing agent. The "purchasing agent," for the purposes of this division, shall be the finance director or his/her designee and is responsible for managing the decentralized purchasing program. 
(p)  Purchasing officer. The "purchasing officer," for the purposes of this division, shall be the city manager or his/her designated representative. The purchasing agent, as defined above, shall be presumed to be the designated representative of the purchasing officer unless otherwise directed by the purchasing officer in writing. 
(q)  Responsible bidder. "Responsible bidder" means a bidder determined by the awarding department: 
(1)  To have the ability, capacity, experience and skill to provide the goods, services, professional services, and/or construction projects in accordance with bid specifications, and if applicable; 
(2)  To have the ability to provide the goods, services, professional services, and/or construction projects promptly, or within the time specified, and if applicable; 
(3)  To have equipment, facilities and resources of such capacity and location to enable the bidder to provide the required goods, services, professional services, and/or construction projects, and if applicable; 
(4)  To be able to provide future maintenance, repair, parts and service for the use of the goods and/or construction projects purchased, and if applicable; 
(5)  To have a record of satisfactory performance under prior contracts with the city or other purchasers where such bidder has previously been awarded such contract. 
(r)  Responsive bidder. "Responsive bidder" means one that is in substantial conformance with all requirements of the invitation to bid, including specifications and the city's contractual terms and conditions. Bidders who substitute terms and conditions or who qualify their bids in such a manner as to nullify their liability may be considered nonresponsive bidders. This may also include provision of insurance requirements, bonds, completion of all forms, inclusion of references and additional information as requested in bid documents. 
(s)  Special equipment/supplies. "Special equipment/supplies" shall mean unique supplies, machinery, computers, or other equipment which are not generally and regularly ordered in bulk by the city and which must perform complex tasks, or integrate efficiently with existing equipment or supplies. 
(t)  Supplies. "Supplies" shall mean office supplies, janitorial supplies, materials, goods, tools, or other commodities used in the general conduct of the city's business, excepting supplies or materials for a public work which is regulated under the California Public Contract Code Sections 20160 et seq. 
(u)  Uniform construction cost accounting procedures. "Uniform Construction cost accounting procedures" shall mean those procedures and rules established by the State Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission pursuant to California Public Contract Code Section 22010, et seq. or as amended. 
(v)  Urgency. Urgency shall exist when the service, repair, or replacements are immediately necessary to permit the continued performance of the operations or services of the city, or to avoid the immediate danger to life, health, or property. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-773. - Purchasing agent: powers and duties. 
The duties of the purchasing agent may be combined with those duties of any other officer or position in the city. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Purchase or contract for needed city supplies, general services, equipment, and special equipment/supplies which are not included within a construction contract or proposed specifications for a construction contract of a public work being administered by any other city department; 
(2)  Investigate, keep knowledgeable about, negotiate, and recommend on the execution of contracts or the purchasing of supplies, general services, and equipment pursuant to the procedures of this division, and such administrative rules and regulations as prescribed by the city manager; 
(3)  Keep informed of current developments concerning purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products; 
(4)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as necessary for the proper operation of this purchasing system; 
(5)  Supervise the inspection of all supplies, general services, and equipment purchased under this division to assure conformance with city specifications; 
(6)  Supervise the transfer of surplus and unused supplies and equipment for sale or disposal of such; 
(7)  Maintain up-to-date bidder's list, vendors' catalogs, files, and such other records as needed to perform these duties; 
(8)  Ensure that purchasing specifications are written to encourage full competition; 
(9)  Perform such other tasks as may be necessary for the proper conduct of purchasing of supplies, services, construction services, and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-774. - City council authorizes city manager to implement administrative regulations. 
City council authorizes city manager to establish and maintain written administrative regulations and standards consistent with this division, which incorporate and implement the city's purchasing and contracting procedures, including an implementation of the purpose, goals and requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-775. - Purchase orders. 
(a)  Except for departmental purchases as authorized in section 2-800(a), the purchase of equipment and supplies shall include the execution of a purchase order and no such purchase order shall be issued without the prior written approval of the purchasing agent or designated representative. The city shall issue a purchase order 1) to each vendor who agrees to provide equipment, goods, supplies and materials to the city, and 2) to accompany every contract for the performance of services and public projects unless otherwise authorized by the city manager or the rules and regulations adopted by the city pursuant to this division. Except as otherwise provided herein, no contract shall be deemed to be an authorization to proceed with work unless accompanied by a properly authorized and executed purchase order nor shall any vendor or contracting party be authorized to perform any service, perform any public project, or provide any supplies or equipment without first receiving a properly authorized and executed purchase order issued by the purchasing agent upon verification of sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance. 
(b)  The purpose of a purchase order is to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-776. - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in cases of urgency as described in sections 2-804, 2-828, and 2-850, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order, for purchase of supplies, services or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged or city council has authorized said purchase. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-777. - Solicitation exceptions. 
(a)  The competitive bid and RFP processes are not applicable to certain purchases. The following are exempt from bid processes subdivision II and subdivision IV herein. 
(1)  Department purchases, as defined in section 2-800(a); 
(2)  Travel/expense advances; 
(3)  Subscriptions; 
(4)  Trade circulars or books; 
(5)  Insurance premiums; 
(6)  Insurance claims; 
(7)  Reimbursement of expenses; 
(8)  Petty cash reimbursement; 
(9)  Medical payments; 
(10)  Newspaper advertisements and notices; 
(11)  Dues to approved organizations; 
(12)  Payments to other government units; 
(13)  Utility service payments, utility connection and/or installation charges; 
(14)  Attorney services; 
(15)  Postage, courier/delivery messenger services; 
(16)  Land; 
(17)  Buildings; 
(18)  Debt services; 
(19)  Grants; 
(20)  Claim settlements; 
(21)  Collection agreements referenced under section 70-11 of article II of chapter 70 of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-778. - Contracts. 
(a)  All written contracts shall be approved by city attorney as to form. Contracts shall be prepared for professional, management, general or special services, and construction for $2,500.00 and over. Contracts for an amount of $25,000.00 and less shall be approved/awarded by the city manager, following any required selection process outlined in subdivisions III and IV of this division. Contracts with a dollar amount exceeding $25,000.00 shall be approved/awarded by city council following a selection process outlined in subdivisions III and IV of this division. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to issue contract amendments as follows: 
(1)  If the contract was originally executed for an amount of $25,000.00 or less, the city manager shall have the authority to issue contract amendments, provided that the sum of all amendments, plus original contract amount, shall not exceed $25,000.00. If the amended contract will exceed $25,000.00, city council shall approve the contract amendment. 
(2)  For a contract originally executed for an amount in excess of $25,000.00 and originally approved by city council, the city manager shall have authority to issue contract amendments, provided that the sum of all contract amendments for any single contract shall not exceed the limit approved by city council. If the amended contract will exceed the limit previously approved by city council, the contract amendment must be approved by city council. 
(c)  Master professional services contracts. For those professional services as defined in Government Code Section 4526 (and as otherwise amended), master multi-year contracts with several consultants with a general scope of work may be set up for a total not-to-exceed dollar amount as approved by city council. 
(1)  A formal request for qualification process shall be used in accordance with city Code section 2-840(d) and awarded based on qualifications. 
(2)  Task orders shall be issued pursuant to the master contract with a specific scope of work and the city manager shall have authority to execute such task order for individual projects up to the city council approved budget appropriation. 
(d)  Master general services contract. 
(1)  A bid or a request for proposal/qualification process may be used to procure general services and may be awarded based on qualifications plus reasonableness of cost. 
(e)  Public works contracts shall be established for work in an amount of $2,500.00 and over. city manager may award and execute contracts for individual projects in an amount of $25,000.00 or less. Individual projects in an amount exceeding $25,000.00 shall be approved by city council. 
(f)  Change orders. A change order shall be used to modify the contract documents regarding contract price, schedule of payments, completion date, plans and specifications, expanding scope of work due to change in conditions, and for unit price overruns and under runs, as specified in the contract. Work description and justification should relate to the original project and should be necessary to achieve original scope of project. After a determination that costs is merited by developments in a specific project, the city manager is authorized to issue change orders up to the contract contingency amount approved by the city council for the individual contract as follows: 
(1)  Contracts in the amount $25,000.00 or less: 
(i)  City manager may approve change orders until the contract reaches $25,000.00. 
(ii)  Once the original contract plus all accumulated change orders is in an amount that is equal to $25,000.00, subsequent change orders must be approved by city council prior to commencing the work. 
(2)  Contracts in an amount exceeding $25,000.00. 
(i)  City manager may approve cumulative project change orders up to the contingency established and approved by city council for each individual contract. 
(ii)  Any single change order exceeding $25,000.00 must be approved by city council prior to commencing with the work. In urgency situations where stopping the work will result in severe repair or replacement delays and subject the city to excessive additional costs due to the delay in the project, city manager may approve such change order and shall give notice to city council at the next city council meeting. 
(g)  Master maintenance service contracts. 
(1)  Request for qualification process shall be used to establish master contracts. The purpose which is to award discrete small projects which in no event exceed $25,000.00 per task order. 
(2)  Master single or multi-year contracts may be set up with several vendors, and will include a general scope of work and will establish an annual not-to-exceed dollar amount as approved by city council. 
(3)  Task orders shall be issued pursuant to the master contract with a specific scope of work and the city manager shall have authority to execute such task order for individual projects for an amount of $25,000.00 or less. 
(h)  Multi-year professional, management, general or special services, and construction contracts. 
(1)  The city manager may approve multi-year contracts for professional, management, general or special services, and construction contracts; provided, the annual value of the multi-year contract is $25,000.00 per year or less. 
(2)  Multi-year contracts exceeding $25,000.00 per year shall require the approval of the city council. 
(3)  In the event the same supplier, contractor or consultant has been utilized for a period of five years, the city shall not renew or extend the professional, management, general or special services contract without following the formal or informal bidding procedures as set forth in section 2-800, unless otherwise approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Secs. 2-779—2-799. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Supplies, General Services and Equipment 
 
Sec. 2-800. - Bidding procedures. 
Except as authorized in section 2-777(a), 2-801, 2-802, or in the case of urgencies as described in section 2-804, the purchase of supplies, equipment and special equipment/supplies, not included in the construction contract or bid specification for a public works project, shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Department purchases. A department may purchase specified and limited supplies, and equipment, special equipment/supplies independently of the purchasing agent of a value less than $2,500.00, provided such department keeps a record of such purchases and exercises reasonable prudence in seeking price quotes when purchasing such items. All such purchases shall be made with funds in an unencumbered appropriation. 
(2)  Direct purchase order. The purchase of supplies, equipment, or special equipment/supplies with the estimated value of $2,500.00 but not more than $25,000.00 shall be made by a written bidding procedure as follows: 
a.  The responsible department shall prepare a written product specification describing the minimum requirements of the purchase. 
b.  The department shall obtain at least three written responses to the informal request for bid. This requirement may be waived for good cause in writing by the department head and purchasing agent in consultation with one another. 
c.  Written responses may be made by mail, fax, or e-mail directly to the department representative requesting the item. Further negotiation with a vendor to negotiate a lower price based on the bid responses received from other vendors is prohibited. A written record and tabulation shall be made at that time the bid response is received and opened. All written responses must be retained by the department for three years. 
d.  Bid evaluation procedures. All bids shall be analyzed by the department for compliance with bid specifications, and the department shall prepare an analysis of the bid process. 
1.  Award will go to the lowest responsive/responsible bidder. 
2.  When two or more bids are the same, in unit, quality, service and total cost, preference shall be given to the local vendor, as defined. 
3.  If a local vendor, as provided in section 2-805 submits a bid, if the bid is within five percent of the lowest responsible and responsive bidder's bid, and if the local vendor is a responsible bidder and responsive bidder, the local vendor shall be given the opportunity to match the bid of the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. Local vendor preference is based on Public Contracts Code 6107 and does not apply to public works projects as defined by the Public Contracts Code Section 22002 or federal grant funded purchases. 
4.  If the department head determines that all the bids received are unacceptably high, or specifications were unclear, the department may reject any bids received and the item may be rebid. 
e.  No bids received. In the event no bids are received, the department head requesting the purchase shall have the option of any of the following: 
1.  Abandon the purchase; 
2.  Rebid the purchase; or 
3.  Request purchasing agent approval to obtain the item, supply, service, or equipment on a direct negotiated contract. 
f.  The department shall prepare a written recommendation to the purchasing officer for award or rejection of bids. 
g.  Award. The purchasing officer shall reject all bids or award the purchase contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid or proposal fulfills the purpose intended according to criteria designated in the bid and the contract award amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for that item. Purchasing officer may waive any minor bid irregularities and shall award informal bids up to $25,000.00. 
(3)  Formal bid procedures. For supplies, equipment, or special equipment/supplies with an estimated value in an amount exceeding $25,000.00 purchases shall be made in accordance with the following formal written procedures: 
a.  Published notices. A notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten calendar days before the date of the opening of bids. The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the city, and in appropriate trade publications, if any, circulated within the general area and posted on the city's purchasing website. Such other notice as the purchasing agent deems appropriate shall be made. 
1.  Notices inviting bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the goods, articles, services, or equipment to be purchased or required, state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, describe any performance or bid security required, and the time and place for the opening of bids; 
2.  Bidder's list. The purchasing agent shall maintain a list of responsible bidders for various categories of supplies or equipment. A notice of the solicitation for a bid shall be sent to all responsible prospective contractors or suppliers whose names are on the bidder's list for the category or equipment, supplies or general services subject to the bid request or posted on the city's purchasing website and distributed through mass e-mail notifications; and 
3.  Bulletin board. The bid invitation shall be posted on a public bulletin board in City Hall. 
b.  Bidder's security/failure to sign contract. If the city requires a bidder's bond or other form of security, the bidder's security shall be prescribed in the notice inviting bids in an amount equal to the lesser of the following: (i) ten percent of the amount bid or (ii) such lesser percentage of the amount of the bid as may be required under the California Public Contract Code or other applicable law. Bidder's security shall be either a cash deposit with the city, a cashier's or certified check payable to the city, or a bidder's bond. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security within 60 days of the date of the award. However, the lowest responsive and responsible bidder shall forfeit all or part of his/her bid security, as may be determined by the city council, upon the bidder's refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the date of the award of the contract. On the refusal or failure of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder to execute the contract, the city council may award the contract to the next lowest responsive and responsible bidder. 
c.  Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk and shall be identified as to bidder, project, and "bid" on the envelope. Bids shall be opened by city staff in public at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. A written record and tabulation shall be made at the time of all bids received. 
d.  Bid evaluation procedures. All bids shall be analyzed by the purchasing agent and department for compliance with bid specifications. The department shall prepare a recommendation for award or rejection to the city council. 
1.  If a local vendor, as provided in section 2-805 submits a bid, if the bid is within five percent of the lowest responsible and responsive bidder's bid, and if the local vendor is a responsible bidder and responsive bidder, the local vendor shall be given the opportunity to match the bid of the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. Local vendor preference is based on Public Contracts Code 6107 and does not apply to public works projects as defined by the Public Contracts Code Section 22002 or federal grant funded purchases. 
e.  Rejection of bids. If the city council determines that bids are excessively high or that specifications were unclear, or if no bids are received, the city council may reject all bids presented and use whatever method it deems appropriate, such as rebid, abandon acquisition, or negotiate a contract to complete the purchase. 
f.  Award of contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid fulfills the purpose intended according to the criteria designated in the solicitation, and provided the award amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for that item. The city council may waive any minor bid irregularities. 
g.  Tie bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept either bid or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tied bidders. 
h.  Performance bonds. The city may require a performance bond in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the public interest. If the city requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-801. - Special equipment/supplies; sole source purchases. 
(a)  Special equipment/supplies. In purchasing any special equipment or supplies needed to be compatible with existing equipment, or to perform complex or unique functions, the purchasing agent and department head in consultation with one another may: 
(1)  Limit bidding to a specific product type, or a brand name product; or 
(2)  Utilize a request for proposal approach where warranties, service and/or maintenance obligations, and product performance will be evaluated in addition to the price of the product. The award of the contract should be to the proposer staff deems is in the best public interest. 
(b)  Sole source purchases. Unique commodities or services that can be obtained from only one vendor, or one distributor authorized to sell in this area, with singular characteristics or performance capabilities or which have specific compatibility components with existing city products are exempt from the competitive bidding requirements in section 2-800 and are deemed sole source purchases. Sole source purchases may include proprietary items sold direct from the manufacturer. 
(1)  All sole source purchases shall be supported by written documentation indicating the facts and nature supporting the determination of a sole source, signed by the department head and forwarded to the purchasing agent. The purchasing officer shall approve sole source acquisitions in an amount of $25,000.00 or less. 
(2)  Approval of any sole source acquisition shall be obtained from city council for an award of a contract for an amount exceeding $25,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-802. - Cooperative, piggyback, and multiple awarded bid purchasing with other agencies. 
Approval and award of cooperative, "piggy-back" or multiple awarded purchases shall be obtained from the purchasing officer for an amount of $25,000.00 or less and by the city council for purchases in an amount exceeding $25,000.00. 
(1)  Cooperative purchasing. The bidding requirements of section 2-800 shall not apply to the purchasing of any equipment or supplies which the purchasing agent determines to be in the best interest of the city to obtain through a cooperative competitive bidding procedure being prepared by and processed through another local, state, or federal governmental agency. 
(2)  Piggyback. If the purchasing agent determines it to be in the best interest of the city, the purchasing agent is authorized to "piggyback" onto or join into an existing written purchase contract obtained through a competitive bidding process prepared by and awarded by another local, state or federal government agency. 
(3)  Multiple awarded bids. Multiple awarded bids are generally conducted by larger government agencies. A competitive bidding process is conducted for a specified product. Several vendors whose product meets the specification are awarded the contract. Maximum item price and contract terms are established. If the purchasing agent determines it to be in the city's best interest, the purchasing agent is authorized to use federal, state, or other governmental agency multiple awarded contracts. Staff must obtain quotes from at least three vendors on the awarded contract list and award the bid to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-803. - Recycled supply products specification. 
If in procuring supplies, a recycled product can achieve the necessary city performance standard, and if such recycled product is readily available, specifications should, if economically feasible, require products made with recycled materials be bid. If the department head determines that (1) a recycled product lacks performance capabilities or needed quality levels, or (2) a sufficient amount of said recycled or reusable product is not currently available in the market, then a reduced percentage can be required, or the supply specification can be limited to non-recycled or virgin materials. When recycled products are required, reasonable efforts shall be made to label the products as containing recycled materials. As used in this section, recycled products does not mean used products, but is limited to new products made with materials which have been recycled. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-804. - Urgencies. 
The bidding procedures of section 2-800 or solicitation procedures in section 2- 840 may be dispensed with in the case of urgency. An urgency shall exist when the service, repair, or replacements are immediately necessary to permit the continued performance of essential operations or services of the city, or result in excessive costs if not immediately remedied, or to avoid the immediate danger to life, health, or property. The city council delegates authority to the City Manager to declare a public urgency. If the purchase is $25,000.00 and over, the city manager shall give notice of the purchase process to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-805. - Local preference. 
To promote economic development and maintain a healthy economic base in the city, as well as encourage businesses to move into the city's jurisdiction, the city supports employment and local business opportunities which in turn promote the city's economic growth. As such, the city has determined it is in its best interest to provide a preference to local businesses. 
(a)  Local preference in purchasing. In the bidding of, or contracting for procurement of supplies, materials, and equipment as provided in these sections, the purchasing officer may give a preference to responsive, responsible, local businesses located in the city. If the local vendor's bid is within five percent of the lowest responsible and responsive bidder's bid and if the local vendor is a responsible bidder and responsive bidder, the local vendor shall be given the opportunity to match the bid of the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. The granting of this local preference shall be approved or not based on a determination by the purchasing officer that quantity and quality of the local product is equal to that of the next lowest bidder. In order for a local business to be eligible to claim the preference, the business must provide a copy of its current business tax certificate issued by the city. This local preference is not applicable to: 
(1)  Bids for public projects as defined by Public Contracts Code Sections 20161 and 22002; 
(2)  Bids funded by grants which prohibit its use; and 
(3)  Contracts for professional, management, general, and special services. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-806. - Staging of purchases prohibited. 
Purchases and public works contracts shall not be knowingly staged or separated into smaller units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the competitive formal or informal bidding requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-807. - Inspection and tests. 
The purchasing agent or department requesting the item shall inspect all deliveries of supplies and equipment to assure conformance with the contract or order specifications. The purchasing agent, at his/her discretion, may require chemical and physical tests of samples or supplies and equipment as he/she deems necessary to determine the quality in conformance with those specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-808. - General services. 
(a)  General services as defined in subdivision I, section 2-772(e) shall be procured either through the bid process outlined in subdivision II, section 2-800 with the emphasis on awarding to the "lowest responsive responsible bidder" or through the request for proposal process outlined in subdivision IV, section 2-840 with emphasis on factors other than price. 
(b)  Factors to consider. If it is determined by the department in consultation with the purchasing agent that all vendors providing a service classification can equally provide the service satisfactorily, a bid process would be appropriate. However, if factors other than price need to be considered in awarding the contract, the request for proposal (RFP) process may be used. Examples of areas other than price that may be important in awarding the contract include: experience level, competence, resources/equipment, staffing levels, services available/time factors, and other qualifications determined by each city department responsible for recommending the service contract that may be important to consider. 
(c)  Master general services single or multi-year contracts may be awarded to multiple service providers following a formal request for proposal/qualification process using the procedures set forth in section 2-840. Award of master contracts and negotiating task orders should follow the procedure set out in section 2-778. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Secs. 2-809—2-820. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Public Works Projects 
 
Sec. 2-821. - Uniform construction cost accounting procedures. 
The city council has elected to become subject to the Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Procedures as established by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-822. - Bidding procedures for various project amounts. 
(a)  A public project of $30,000.00 or less may be performed by city employees by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order, provided such action is first authorized by the purchasing officer or the purchasing agent. 
(b)  A public project of an estimated amount exceeding $30,000.00 but not more than $125,000.00 may be let to contract by informal bid procedures as set forth in this subdivision. 
(c)  A public project in an amount exceeding $125,000.00 shall, except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, be let to contract by formal bidding procedures. The described project cost limits of (a) through (c) in this section shall be increased automatically as authorized pursuant to the adjustments made by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission under Public Contract Code Section 22020. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-823. - Adoption of plans. 
The city council shall approve and adopt the plans, specifications, and working details, as well as authorize the bid request for all public works projects for an amount exceeding $125,000.00. The city engineer is delegated authority to approve and adopt the plans, specifications, and working details for all public works projects less than $125,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-824. - Negotiate contract or purchase order procedures. 
For those projects qualifying under subsection (a) of section 2-822, the project manager shall obtain a cost estimate from the project engineer or architect prior to issuing a purchase order or negotiating a contract with a responsible contractor. For any city force account work, the project manager shall first comply with the guidelines established by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in determining the cost of the public project. The city manager shall have the authority to award and to execute any contract for the public project qualifying under subsection (a) and (b) of section 2-822. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-825. - Informal bidding procedures. 
For those projects which qualify under section 2-822(b) for informal bidding, the following procedures shall be used: 
(1)  Bidder list. The city shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work. Minimum criteria for development and maintenance of the contractors' list shall be consistent with the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting rules. 
(2)  Notice. Unless the product or service is proprietary, all contractors on the city's list for the category of work being bid shall be mailed a notice inviting informal bids, or an announcement/ advertisement shall be placed in all construction trade journals specified in this section, or both such mailing and advertising. The trade journals shall be those identified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission as appropriate for this area. In addition, notice shall be posted on the city's purchasing website. 
(3)  Bidder's security/failure to sign contract. Bidder's security shall be prescribed in the notice inviting bids in an amount equal to ten percent of the amount bid. Bidder's security shall be either a cash deposit with the city, a cashier's or certified check payable to the city, or a bidder's bond. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security within 60 days of the date of the award. However, the lowest responsive and responsible bidder shall forfeit all or part of his/her bid security, as may be determined by the city council, upon the bidder's refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the date of the award of the contract. On the refusal or failure of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder to execute the contract, the city council may award the contract to the next lowest responsive and responsible bidder. 
(4)  Minimum time period. All mailing of notices to contractors and announcements/ advertisements published in the construction trade journals pursuant to subdivision (b) shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due. 
(5)  Notice contents. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. 
(6)  Performance/labor/materials bonds. A labor and materials bond, plus a performance bond shall be required, from a surety company licensed to do business in California and acceptable to the city, in amounts equivalent to the total contract amount. 
(7)  Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk and shall be identified as to bidder, project, and "bid" on the envelope. Bids shall be opened by the city clerk's staff in public at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. At that time, a written record and tabulation shall be made of all bids received, and shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of one year after the bid opening. The project manager shall make an analysis of the bids for compliance with bid specifications, and thereafter, make a recommendation for award or rejection. 
(8)  Award. The city manager shall award the contract or reject the bids. The purchasing officer may waive minor bid irregularities. 
(9)  Change orders. A change order shall be used to modify the contract documents regarding contract price, schedule of payments, completion date, plans and specifications, and for unit price overruns and under runs, as specified in the contract. Work description and justification must relate to the original project and must be work necessary to achieve original scope of project. After a determination that costs are merited by developments in a specific project, the city manager is authorized to issue contract amendments or change orders up to the contract contingency approved by the city council as awarded for the individual contract as follows: 
a.  City manager may approve project change orders until the contract reaches $125,000.00. 
b.  Once the original contract plus all accumulated change orders are in an amount that is equal to $125,000.00, the contract and subsequent change orders must be approved by city council prior to commencing with the work. 
c.  Any single change order exceeding $50,000.00 must be approved by city council prior to commencing with the work. In urgency situations, where stopping the work will result in severe repair or replacement delays and subject the city to excessive additional costs due to the delay in the project, city manager may approve such change order and shall give notice to city council at the next city council meeting. 
(10)  Bids in excess of statutory amount. If all bids received are in excess of $125,000.00, the city council may, by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths (4/5) vote, award the contract up to $137,500.00 or less to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder without formal bidding if it determines the cost estimate of the city was reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-826. - Formal bidding procedures. 
For those projects requiring formal bidding under section 2-822(c), the following procedures shall be used: 
(1)  Publication. A notice shall be published, at least once, 14 calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the jurisdiction of the city. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be mailed to all construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission as appropriate for the area. The notice shall be mailed at least 30 calendar days before the date of opening the bids. The notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. In addition to notice required by this section, the city may give such other notice as it deems proper. 
(2)  Bidder's security/failure to sign contract. Bidder's security shall be prescribed in the notice inviting bids in an amount equal to ten percent of the amount bid. Bidder's security shall be either a cash deposit with the city, a cashier's or certified check payable to the city, or a bidder's bond. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security within 60 days of the date of the award. However, the lowest responsive and responsible bidder shall forfeit all or part of his/her bid security, as may be determined by the city council, upon the bidder's refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the date of the award of the contract. On the refusal or failure of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder to execute the contract, the city council may award the contract to the next lowest responsive and responsible bidder. All bids must be signed by person authorized to bind company to bid terms. 
(3)  Bid opening procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk and shall be identified as to bidder, project, and "bid" on the envelope. Bids shall be opened by the city clerk's staff in public at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. A written record and tabulation shall be made at that time of all bids received, and shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of one year after the bid opening. The project manager shall make an analysis of the bids for compliance with bid specifications and, thereafter, make a recommendation for award or rejection. 
(4)  Award of contracts/minor irregularities. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid fulfills the purpose intended, according to criteria designated in the solicitation, and provided the award amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for that item. The city council may waive minor bid irregularities. 
(5)  Change orders. A "change order" shall be used to modify the contract documents regarding contract price, schedule of payments, completion date, plans and specifications, and for unit price overruns and under runs, as specified in the contract. Work description and justification must relate to the original project and must be work necessary to achieve original scope of project. After a determination that costs are merited by developments in a specific project, the city manager is authorized to issue contract amendments or change orders up to the contract contingency approved by the city council as awarded for the individual contract as follows: 
a.  City manager may approve accumulative project change orders up to the contingency established and approved by city council for each individual contract. 
b.  Any single change order exceeding $50,000.00 must be approved by city council prior to commencing with the work. In urgency situations where stopping the work will result in severe repair or replacement delays and subject the city to excessive additional costs due to the delay in the project, city manager may approve such change order and shall give notice to the city council at the next city council meeting. 
(6)  Tie bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay or re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept either bid. 
(7)  Performance/labor/materials bonds. A labor and materials bond, plus a performance bond shall be required, from an acceptable surety, in such amounts and in such a form as the city finds reasonably necessary to protect the public interest. 
(8)  No bids. If no bids are received, the project may be performed by city employees by force account, or by informal bidding procedures without further complying with this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-827. - Rejection of bids. 
(a)  In its discretion, the city council may reject any bids presented. If after the first invitation for bids all bids are rejected, the city shall state the reasons for the rejection, and after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city shall have the option of either of the following: 
(1)  Abandoning the project or re-advertising for bids in the manner described by this subdivision. 
(2)  By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the city council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by city employees, may have the project done by force account without further complying with this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-828. - Emergencies; procedure. 
In cases of great emergency as determined by the city council, including, but not limited to, states of emergency defined in Government Code Section 8558, when repair or replacements are necessary to permit the continued conduct of the operation of services of the city, or to avoid danger to life or property, the city council, by majority vote, may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specification, or working details, or give notice for bids to let a contracts. The work may be done by city forces, by contract, or by a combination of the two. The city council delegates to the city manager, the authority to declare a public emergency subject to confirmation by the city council by a four-fifths vote, at its next meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-829. - Staging of public works. 
Public works contracts shall not be knowingly staged or separated into smaller units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the competitive bidding requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-830. - Bid protests. 
Any interested party may file a protest regarding the procurement decisions authorized under this division. 
(a)  Notice of decision. After a decision regarding a procurement having a value over $30,000.00 has been made, the department head or designee shall notify all persons who submitted a response to a city solicitation of intended award. If a bidder is rejected because the bid is found non-responsive or because the bidder is deemed not-responsible, the city will give written notice to said bidder of evidence reflecting such decision. 
(b)  Time to file protest. All protests must be filed in writing and received by the department head within five business days of the date on the notice of intended award. 
(c)  Form of protest. All protests shall be in writing, state the grounds for the protest, state the facts relevant to the protest, and all evidentiary support to rebut adverse evidence that it or another bidder was either non-responsive or not responsible. All protests have to be filed in accordance with the instructions contained in the solicitation which is the subject of the protest. 
(d)  City manager review. The city manager or designee shall review the protest and issue a written decision on the protest. The city manager or designee may base the decision on the written protest alone or may informally gather evidence from the person(s) filing the protest or any other person having relevant information. For procurements having a value of $125,000.00 or less, the city manager's or designee's decision shall be final. 
(e)  Hearing on protest. If a bid was rejected on the grounds that the bidder was not a "responsible" bidder, the protesting party must submit materials set forth in subdivision (c) above for consideration. A hearing will be set within a reasonable time to provide a decision before final approval of the selected low bid. For procurements having a value of $125,000.00 or less, the city manager's or designee's decision shall be final. 
(f)  Appeal of city manager's decision to city council. For procurements having a value exceeding $125,000.00, an appeal of the city manager's decision may be filed with the city council. All such appeals must be in writing, and shall be filed with the city clerk within five business days from the date of the city manager's decision. 
(g)  Failure to timely appeal. An interested party who fails to file a protest within the times set forth in this section waives any right to protest the issue further. No appeal to either the city manager or city council of any decision to award a bid under this Division may occur once the contract has been awarded. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Secs. 2-831—2-839. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Professional, Management, General or Special Services 
 
Sec. 2-840. - Award of professional, management, general or special services contracts based upon competence. 
Factors to consider: In contracting for professional services listed in Government Code Section 4526, selection shall be based on demonstrated competence and on professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services and solicited through a request for qualification process. In contracting for professional services (other than those professions listed in Government Code Section 4526), management, general or special services contracts should only be awarded to firms or persons who have demonstrated "high competence" meaning: a level of experience, competence, training, credentials, character, integrity, reputation, financial responsibility, resources, equipment, staffing, and other professional qualifications necessary for more than a satisfactory performance of the services required in the time period needed and price. The cost of the service may be considered, however, the lowest cost may not be the sole factor in deciding which firm or who shall be awarded the contract. It may be in the city's best interest to award the contract to a higher priced contractor based on the scope of services, availability, unique skills, staffing levels, timing, prior experience, familiarity with the city and other factors required by the department. The information needed for determining that level of competence, other qualifications, and the procedure for selecting such services shall be determined by the city department responsible for recommending the service contract. 
(a)  Request for proposal/qualifications. The acquiring of services shall be procured through negotiated contract following a request for proposal/qualifications process. Contracting for services is decentralized and shall be the responsibility of the department head requesting the service. The purchasing agent may be contacted to assist in the formal request for proposal/qualification (RFP/Q) process. 
(b)  Contracts, not within (a) above, for an amount less than $2,500.00. A department head may award contracts up to $2,500.00 with qualified consultants/firms. 
(c)  Contracts for an amount exceeding $2,500.00 but not more than $25,000.00. The requesting department shall meet the following requirement unless an urgency exists pursuant to section 2-804 above: 
(1)  Selection process. Prepare an informal written document and contact as many companies as necessary to receive a minimum of three written responses from consultants/firms. This requirement may be waived for good cause in writing by the department head and purchasing agent in consultation with one another. 
(2)  Award. The department head shall prepare a written recommendation to the Purchasing Officer for the firm or person to be awarded the contract. The purchasing officer shalt award the contract. 
(3)  Contract document. A written contract must be established and the city manager or designee must sign/approve any service contract in an amount exceeding $2,500.00 but not more than $25,000.00. 
(d)  Contracts for an amount exceeding $25,000.00 and over. Departments shall utilize a sealed request for proposal process essentially meeting the following requirements unless an urgency exists pursuant in section 2-804 above: 
(1)  Request for proposal/qualification (RFP/Q) solicitation process. A formal sealed request for proposal/qualification (herein "RFP/Q") document shall be developed for solicitation of professional, management, or general and special services contracts for an amount exceeding $25,000.00. 
(2)  Advertisement. The department shall advertise in appropriate publications and/or use the professional services listings, as available, and post on the city's purchasing website, during the solicitation process. 
(3)  Ten-day notice. Notice inviting RFP/Q's shall be posted at City Hall at least ten calendar days before the due date of submission of the RFP/Q. 
(4)  Notice contents. The notice shall include a description of general type of service needed, how the RFP/Q minimum scope of work can be obtained, any pre-proposal conferences anticipated, the requirement of a written sealed proposal, state the closing date, and place and time for submission of the RFP/Q. 
(5)  Solicitation procedure. Sealed request for proposals/qualifications should be submitted to, the department. RFP/Q's need not be opened publicly. All proposals shall be analyzed by the department for compliance with RFP/Q requirements, value of the total scope of services. Follow-up interviews of the most qualified of those submitting a proposal should be held. 
(6)  Award. Professional, management, general, and special services contracts of an amount exceeding $25,000.00 shall be awarded by city council. 
(7)  Contract amendments. The city manager is authorized to issue contract amendments as set forth: 
a.  If the contract was originally executed for an amount of $25,000.00 or less, the city manager shall have the authority to issue contract amendments, provided that the sum of all amendments, plus original contract amount, shall not exceed $25,000.00. If the amended contract will exceed $25,000.00, the city council shall make a finding that it is in the best interest of the city to waive the normal selection process and approve the amendment to the contract. 
b.  For a contract originally executed for an amount of $25,000.00 and over and originally approved by city council, the city manager shall have authority to issue contract amendments, provided that the sum of all contract amendments for any single contract shall not exceed the amount approved by city council. If the amended contract will exceed the amount previously approved by city council, the contract amendment must be approved by city council. 
(8)  Master professional services contracts. For those professional services as defined in Government Code Section 4526, master single or multi-year contracts with several consultants with a general scope of work may be set up for a total not-to-exceed dollar amount as approved by city council. 
a.  A formal request for qualification process shall be used in accordance with municipal code section 2-840(d) and awarded based on qualifications plus reasonableness of cost. 
b.  Task orders shall be issued pursuant to the master contract with a specific scope of work and the city manager shall have authority to execute such task order for individual projects for $25,000.00 or less. 
c.  Any task orders in an amount exceeding $25,000.00 will require city council's approval pursuant to the terms of the master contract. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Secs. 2-841—2-849. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Miscellaneous 
 
Sec. 2-850. - Waiving of purchasing procedures. 
In its discretion, the city council may at any time, without amending this division, waive the purchasing procedures or alter these proceedings to fit a specific purchase or contract, when such waiver is not in violation of state or federal law. A request for waiver should occur only when unforeseen circumstances arise that justify an exception to following the provisions of this division and is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-851. - Ethics and accountability. 
(a)  The purchasing officer, the purchasing agent and all departments of the city shall adhere to the procedures and policies set forth under this division and any supplemental polices approved by resolution when procuring materials, supplies, equipment, vehicles and services. All purchases shall be limited to the approved budget or as otherwise authorized by city council. Purchasing dollar limits specified in this division are "per order" unless otherwise indicated. 
(b)  Applicable competitive bidding categories, authorization limits or contract award procedures will be based on unit cost, total purchase cost for consolidated bid items, or fiscal year aggregates in the case of standing purchase orders or similar ongoing purchasing arrangements. Staging of purchases to avoid competitive bidding procedures or authorization limits is prohibited. 
(c)  All personnel engaged in the purchasing function shall exercise good judgment in the use and stewardship of city resources, and all purchasing functions shall be conducted with absolute integrity and objectivity. Purchases are subject to public scrutiny; employees shall follow a strict rule of personal conduct that will not compromise the city in the conduct of its business. Any employee intentionally and/or repeatedly making purchases in a manner that circumvents, ignores or fails to comply with purchasing policies will be subject to disciplinary action, in accordance with city personnel procedures. 
(d)  No employee, elected or appointed official of the city shall be financially interested in any contract made by them in their official capacity, or by any body or board of which they are members (See: California Government Code Section 1090 et seq.) or violative of the conflict of interest provisions of the city and/or the Political Reform Act (See: California Government Code Section 87100 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-852. - Disposal of surplus property. 
(a)  The purchasing agent is authorized to exchange, trade-in, sell and dispose of surplus personal property of the city having salvage value in the open market, by public auction, by competitive sealed bids or by exchange or trade in for new goods. The sale or lease of surplus personal property to a governmental, public or quasi-public agency may be without advertisement for or receipt of bids. Employees are not eligible to receive or purchase surplus property, however, employees may receive personalized items, and receive or purchase at market value items considered to be memorial or commemorative in nature, subject to city manager approval. 
(1)  Personalized items means any item issued to an employee for business purposes that has a fair market value of less than $500.00 and for which the employee has sole possession and use of the item. In order to be eligible to be deemed as surplus property, the item must be past its useful life and impractical to re-assign to another employee. Some typical examples of personalized items include cell phones, tablets, laptops, city-issued uniforms/clothing and firearms (for police personnel). 
For purposes of this subsection, vehicles are not considered personalized items. 
(2)  Items considered to be memorial or commemorative in nature means items that have a value of less than $500.00 and have nostalgic value to the employee or commemorate, acknowledge, or memorialize an accomplishment to which the employee had an association or some level of involvement. Memorial or commemorative items include, but are not limited to, street signs, artwork, awards, coins, medallions, badges, clothing, jewelry and plaques. 
(b)  Surplus personal property with no salvage value, as determined by the purchasing agent, shall be disposed of in a manner that salvages recyclable components, if practical. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-853. - Unclaimed, seized or abandoned property. 
(a)  The purchasing agent authorized to sell or dispose of all goods in the possession or custody of the San Fernando Police Department which are unclaimed, seized and/or abandoned and may be legally disposed of by the city. 
(b)  With respect to unclaimed property referenced under section 50-1 (disposition of unclaimed property by police department) of article I (in general) of Chapter 50 (offense and miscellaneous provisions), the Purchasing Agent in coordination with the chief of police shall issue notice of any sale of such unclaimed property at least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the County of Los Angeles. The notice shall contain a general description of the items to be sold and the time and place of the auction. 
Any unclaimed property which has not been sold or which is in a dilapidated or deteriorated condition may be summarily destroyed by the police department after the public auction sale. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 2-854. - Reporting. 
The purchasing agent shall provide regular reports to the city council indicating surplus personal property disposed of, the method of disposal, and the amounts received from disposal, and shall maintain records for public inspection relative to the disposal of surplus personal property for a period of time in compliance with state law and the city's records retention schedule. Annual reports shall be provided to city council accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1653, § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
Secs. 2-855—2-865. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SURPLUS CITY-OWNED PERSONAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 2-866. - Sale authorized. 
Any city-owned personal property, including vehicles, which no longer can be used or which is inoperative or which is irreparable or not economically repairable shall be sold by the city administrative officer in the manner set forth in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 21A.19)  
Sec. 2-867. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not apply to any items of city-owned personal property used or to be used in trade or exchange for new replacement property of a similar nature pursuant to subdivision II of division 6 of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 21A.25)  
Sec. 2-868. - Council approval for disposal. 
Prior to disposing of any salvageable personal property or any nonsalvageable personal property that has been assigned an inventory number, the city administrative officer shall inform the council of the condition of the item proposed for disposition and obtain the determination of the council that such item is obsolete or surplus before proceeding with disposition. 
(Code 1957, § 21A.20)  
Sec. 2-869. - Bids; sales; exchanges. 
Under this division, requests for bids shall be issued, and sales shall be made to the highest bidder. However, if the city administrative officer deems it to be to the best interests of the city, he shall, subject to council approval for items over $500.00, make such sales by public auction or private sale or exchange. 
(Code 1957, § 21A.21)  
Sec. 2-870. - Cash transactions. 
All sales of salvageable city-owned items shall be paid for by cash, certified check or money order payable to the city. 
(Code 1957, § 21A.22)  
Sec. 2-871. - Documents. 
The city administrative officer shall be authorized to sign bills of sale and any other papers or documents evidencing such sales for and on behalf of the city of any such salvageable items. 
(Code 1957, § 21A.23)  
Sec. 2-872. - Disposition of nonsalvageable property. 
If the city administrative officer determines that any city-owned personal property items have no salvage value and the nonsalvageable personal property was not assigned an inventory number, the city administrative officer may dispose of them as deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1957, § 21A.24)  
Secs. 2-873—2-895. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - LIVING WAGE 
 
Sec. 2-896. - Purpose and short title. 
This article is enacted for the purpose of improving the quantity and quality of services received by the city from its service contractors. It is also the purpose of this article to promote an economic environment that protects public resources devoted to social support services. This article shall be known as the "Living Wage Ordinance of the City." 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-897. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this part, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions shall apply: 
Aid recipient. Any person that is awarded a grant by the city. 
Contractor. Any person that enters into a service contract with the city. 
Employee. Any person that both: (i) is employed by an employer or a temporary employment agency; and (ii) expends any of his or her time in the performance of work related to a service contract. "Employee" shall not include managerial, supervisory, and confidential personnel. "Employee" also shall not include persons required to possess an occupational license. 
Employer. Any contractor or subcontractor. "Employer" shall not include government entities, exempt non-profit organizations or temporary employment agencies. 
Exempt non-profit organization. A corporation that both: (i) is organized under 26 USCS 501(c)(3); and (ii) has a chief executive officer who earns a salary that, when calculated on an hourly basis, is less than eight times the lowest wage paid by the corporation. 
Grant. Any discrete financial assistance awarded by the city in connection with a program funded by the federal or state government. 
Service contract. A contract that: (i) is let to a contractor by the city primarily for the furnishing of services to, or for, the city; (ii) involves an expenditure in excess of $25,000.00 and (iii) has a term of at least six months. 
Subcontractor. Any person that enters into a contract with a contractor to assist the contractor in the performance of a service contract. "Subcontractor" shall not include any person that is an employee of a contractor. 
Temporary employment agency. A contractor that, on a temporary basis, provides the city with one or more employees that work under the city's direction. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-898. - Payment of living wage and benefits. 
(a)  Wages. Employers shall pay employees a wage of no less than the living wage set pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section. Temporary employment agencies shall pay employees a wage of no less than $7.25 per hour. 
(b)  Compensated days off. Employers shall provide at least six compensated days off per year for sick leave, vacation, or personal necessity at the employee's request. 
(c)  Uncompensated days off. Employers shall provide employees at least six uncompensated days off per year for sick leave for the illness of the employee or a member of his or her immediate family where the employee has exhausted his or her compensated days off for that year. 
(d)  Living wage rate. The initial rate of the living wage shall be: (i) $7.25 per hour with health benefits, as described in paragraph (e) of this section; or (ii) $8.50 per hour without health benefits, as described in paragraph (e) of this section. As necessary, the purchasing agent shall annually adjust the rate of the living wage to correspond with any adjustments to retirement benefits paid to members of the California Public Employment Retirement System. The adjustment of the living wage rate shall be effective upon publication by the purchasing agent of a bulletin announcing such adjustment and shall apply prospectively. 
(e)  Health benefits. Health benefits required by this article shall consist of the payment of at least $1.25 per hour towards the provision of health care benefits for employees and their dependents. Proof of the provision of such benefits must be submitted to the purchasing agent to qualify for the wage rate in paragraph (d) of this section for employees with health benefits. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-899. - Federal earned income credit notification. 
Employers shall inform employees making less than $12.00 per hour of their possible right to the federal Earned Income Credit ("EIC") provided for in 26 USCS 32. Employers shall make available to employees forms describing the EIC, as well as forms required to secure advance EIC payments from the employer. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-900. - Grounds for contract termination. 
All service contracts shall provide that violation of this article shall entitle the city to terminate the contract and otherwise pursue legal remedies that may be available. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-901. - Compliance by aid recipients. 
Aid recipients who are awarded a grant in excess of $25,000.00 shall comply with the requirements for employers that are set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-902. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Except as provided in this section, the provisions of this article shall apply to: (i) employers and temporary employment agencies with whom the city executes a service contract after the effective date of this article; (ii) employers and temporary employment agencies with whom the city executes an amendment to a service contract existing on the effective date of this article; and (iii) aid recipients to whom the city awards a grant after the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Inapplicable to employers when waiver issued. This article shall not apply to any person that has been issued a waiver pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section. 
(c)  Waiver authorization. The purchasing agent, with the consent of the city council, may issue a waiver of the requirements of this article to any person submitting a bid for a service contract upon making a finding that such waiver is necessary to allow the person to compete fairly in the bidding process. 
(d)  Inapplicable to recipients of restricted grants. This article shall not apply to aid recipients unless the city attorney either: (i) determines that application of this article is consonant with the laws governing the award of the particular grant; or (ii) receives a judgment from a court of law, or other tribunal, that indicates application of this article is consonant with the laws governing the award of the particular grant. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-903. - Administration. 
(a)  Implementation regulations. The purchasing agent shall promulgate implementing regulations consistent with this article. At a minimum, such regulations shall include the following: (i) a list of contracts that shall be regarded as service contracts for purposes of section 2-897; and (ii) requirements for employer reporting of employee compensation. 
(b)  Compliance monitoring. The purchasing agent shall monitor compliance with this article. Such monitoring shall include investigation of complaints of claimed violations by employees. The purchasing agent shall annually submit to the city council a written report on compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-904. - Notifying employees. 
Employers shall give written notification to each current and new employee of his or her rights to receive the benefits set forth in this article. The notification shall be provided in English, Spanish, and other languages spoken by a significant number of employees, and shall be posted prominently in communal areas at the work site. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-905. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any aggrieved person may enforce the provisions of this article by means of a civil action. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article or who aids in the violation of any provisions of this article shall be liable for, and the court shall award to the individual whose rights are violated, the following: actual damages; costs; attorney's fees; and not less than $250.00 but not more than $10,000.00 in addition thereto. In addition, the court may award punitive damages in a proper case. 
(c)  Actions to enforce the provisions of this article must be filed within one year of the alleged violation. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall preclude any aggrieved person from seeking any other remedy provided by law. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit any aggrieved person's right to bring legal action for violation of other minimum compensation laws. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
Sec. 2-906. - No criminal penalty. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code or any other ordinance to the contrary, no criminal penalties shall attach for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 4-3-2000)  
ARTICLE VII. - CAMPAIGN REFORM 
 
Sec. 2-907. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To eliminate the possibility of corruption or the appearance of corruption in local elections, arising as a result of disproportionately large political contributions, by adopting the least restrictive limits possible on the amounts of money any person may contribute or otherwise cause to be available to candidates for the city council and city treasurer and those who support or oppose such candidates; 
(2)  To eliminate the need for candidates and their supporters and opponents to seek large campaign contributions by establishing a realistic voluntary expenditure ceiling for campaigns; 
(3)  To promote informed actions by the electors of the city by requiring the full and truthful disclosure of contributions and expenditures in election campaigns; 
(4)  To inhibit improper or illegal campaign activity, and to ensure vigorous enforcement of this chapter; and 
(5)  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 81013 and Elections Code Section 10202, to impose contribution limitations and other regulations in addition to those imposed by state law, but that do not prevent any person from complying with state law. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 1, 1-3-2005)  
Sec. 2-908. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings set forth below. Except as otherwise provided here, the terms and provisions of this article shall have the meanings and shall be interpreted in accordance with the applicable definitions and provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended (Government Code § 81000, et seq.) and the regulations of the California Fair Political Practices Commission, as amended. 
(1)  Candidate means any person who is a candidate for member of the city council whether or not the person is seeking to become a member of the city council or is an incumbent member of the city council seeking reelection. 
(2)  Committee means any person or combination of persons who directly or indirectly do any of the following in connection with supporting or opposing a candidate or candidates for city council or city treasurer: 
a.  Receive contributions totaling $500.00 or more in a calendar year. 
b.  Make independent expenditures totaling $500.00 or more in a calendar year. 
c.  Make contributions totaling $5,000.00 or more in a calendar year. 
A person or combination of persons that becomes a committee shall retain its status as a committee until such time as that status is terminated pursuant to California Government Code § 84214. 
(3)  Election means any general election, special election or recall election. 
(4)  Person means an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, committee, company, corporation, limited liability corporation, association, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 1, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 1663, § 4, 4-3-2017)  
Sec. 2-909. - Contribution limitations. 
(a)  No person or committee shall make to any candidate, including the controlled committee of such candidate, a contribution in excess of $500.00 either cash or in-kind, for any single election at which the candidate is attempting to be, or is, on the ballot. Additionally, no candidate or candidate's controlled committee shall solicit or accept any contribution that will cause the amount contributed by the contributor to the candidate or the candidate's controlled committee to exceed $500.00 for any single election at which the candidate is attempting to be, or is, on the ballot. 
(b)  The city council may, by resolution, adjust the contribution limit established in subsection (a) in November of every even numbered year, to reflect any increase or decrease in the California consumer price index since the last such adjustment of the contribution limit. Such adjustments shall be rounded to the nearest $10.00 amount. 
(c)  The limitations of this section shall not apply to contributions of a candidate's personal funds to his or her controlled campaign committee on behalf of his or her own candidacy, and shall apply to contributions from the candidate's spouse. 
(d)  Candidates with election accounts must open a new account for the next city election in which they are a candidate, and may contribute up to $500.00 from the old account into the new account. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 1, 1-3-2005)  
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; distributors of advertising matter, § 22-129; posting of bills and advertisements in parks, § 54-3; advertising and signs for garage, patio and similar sales, § 66-67; poles, hydrants and signs as an obstruction on streets, § 74-193; vehicles used for advertising in central traffic district, § 90-9. 
State Law reference— Authorization for cities to regulate the exhibition, posting, carrying and suspension of banners, placards, posters, signs, etc., Government Code § 38774. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Posting in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person except a public officer or employee in the performance of a public duty to paint, post, paste, print, nail, stand, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, sticker, poster or advertisement, notice or advertisement device of any kind calculated to attract the attention of the public or cause the same to be done on any curbstone, curb, lamp-post, telephone booth or pole, hydrant, bridge, wall, tree or upon any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public place except as may be required by ordinance or law. 
The provisions of this section shall not impact the city's ability to display holiday messages or advertise civic events on or within city-owned rights-of-way, or to otherwise use said rights-of-way for other municipal purposes as it sees fit. This section shall also not impact the city's right to permit commercial sponsor signs to be posted on the city owned little league fields pursuant to regulations adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 3.1; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 1-18-2000) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1513, adopted Jan. 18, 2000, amends § 6-1 with the provision that pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, the amendment is categorically exempt under article 19, section 15311(a), accessory structures, on-premise signs.  
Secs. 6-2—6-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. U-1563, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2005, repealed §§ 6-2 and 6-3 in their entirety. Former §§ 6-2 and 6-3 pertained to posting and removal on private property, and penalty for violation, respectively. Former §§ 6-2 and 6-3 derived from Ord. No. 1561, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 3, 2005.  
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Handbill means and includes any printed or written advertising matter, any sample or any device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed matter or literature, but excludes any such matter which pertains exclusively to expressions of opinion on purely political matters. 
Newspaper means a newspaper published at stated intervals and devoted to both news and advertising. If any dodger, stuffer or any other material not printed on the same size paper as the newspaper and not bearing the name, dateline and page number of the newspaper is folded in a newspaper, such newspaper shall be deemed to be a handbill. 
(Code 1957, § 3.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-32. - Deposit on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or on any public thoroughfare, park, ground or other public place within the city. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to any person willing to accept such handbill. 
(Code 1957, § 3.3) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Sec. 6-33. - Deposit on private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private yard, grounds, walk, porch, steps, mailbox, vestibule, house, residence, building or any other private property unless such handbill is placed in such a manner as to prevent the handbill from being blown or carried about by the elements. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any private yard, grounds, walk, porch, steps, mailbox, vestibule, house, residence, building or other private property. 
(Code 1957, § 3.4)  
Sec. 6-34. - Placing in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle unless placed in a manner to prevent the handbill from being blown or carried about by the elements. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 3.5) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90.  
Sec. 6-35. - Distribution on posted premises. 
It shall be lawful for the owner or the occupant of any property to place a sign in a conspicuous place near the entrance thereof indicating that no handbills are desired, and it shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill upon any premises so posted. 
(Code 1957, § 3.6)  
Sec. 6-36. - Hours of distribution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any handbill between the hours of 9:00 p.m. of any day and 8:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1957, § 3.7)  
Sec. 6-37. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of the United States mail, to the delivery of any handbill to any person who has requested delivery of the handbill or to the delivery of any bona fide newspaper. 
(Code 1957, § 3.8)  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; schedule for amusement devices, § 22-102; schedule for amusement parks, § 22-103; schedule for amusement rides, § 22-104; amusement devices, § 106-1051 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BINGO FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bingo has the meaning assigned to such term by Penal Code § 326.5(o). 
(Code 1957, § 5A.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-27. - Maximum amount of prize. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games for charitable purposes shall not exceed $250.00 in cash or kind or both for each separate game which is held. The prizes to be awarded for each game shall be announced prior to the commencement of each game. All prizes shall be awarded immediately following the game. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.12)  
Sec. 10-28. - Proceeds to be kept in separate fund or account; record of income, expenses and disbursement. 
All monies derived from a bingo game for charitable purposes shall be kept in a special fund or account identified on the license application and shall not be commingled with any other funds or account. All such monies shall be used only for such purposes which are in compliance with Penal Code § 326.5, as amended. After each bingo session, all bingo proceeds shall be counted by two members of the licensee organization, and such proceeds shall be deposited in the special bingo fund or account on the next banking day. The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this article and shall account to the city finance director on or before the 15th of each month for all funds received or disbursed for the preceding calendar month. All disbursements shall be by consecutively numbered checks signed by two authorized officers of the licensee and payable to a specific individual or organization. No checks shall be made payable to cash or to a fictitious payee. There shall be a written notation on each check as to the purpose of each check. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time, and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such records available. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.13; Ord. No. 1545, § 13, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 10-29. - Financial interest in licensee only. 
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the licensee, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any bingo game for charitable purposes. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.14)  
Sec. 10-30. - Exclusive operation by licensee. 
(a)  A bingo game for charitable purposes shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Each such member shall display on his person an identification badge showing the name of the licensee organization and the title of the staff member. A member of the licensee organization shall be designated as the "bingo manager" and shall be responsible for the conduct of the games and compliance with all applicable rules and regulations. The bingo manager shall be present at all times during the playing of any bingo game. No member of the licensee organization shall receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee organization shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the licensee organization shall be entitled to employ security personnel who are not members of the licensee organization at such games, which security personnel may be paid from revenues of bingo games. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.15)  
Sec. 10-31. - Games open to public; posting of license, rules and regulations. 
All bingo games for charitable purposes shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensed organization. The licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. The license issued pursuant to division 2 of this article and the rules and regulations governing the playing of bingo shall be posted at the public entrance to the room in which bingo is to be played. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.16)  
Sec. 10-32. - Attendance limited to occupancy capacity. 
Notwithstanding that bingo games for charitable purposes shall be open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire chief in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.17)  
Sec. 10-33. - Conduct of games only on licensee's property. 
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game for charitable purposes only on property owned or leased by the licensee and which property is primarily used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under division 2 of this article shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application and is nontransferable. If the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee organization is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this article, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.18)  
Sec. 10-34. - Participation by minors. 
No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed to participate or be present where any bingo game for charitable purposes is played. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.19)  
Sec. 10-35. - Participation by intoxicated persons. 
No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game for charitable purposes, and the sale, dispensing or consumption of alcohol shall be prohibited in any room where a bingo game is conducted. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.20)  
Sec. 10-36. - Managers, operators and supervisors. 
No person who has been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall manage, operate or supervise any bingo game for charitable purposes in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.20.1)  
Sec. 10-37. - Hours of operation. 
No bingo games for charitable purposes shall be conducted between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 12:00 noon of any day. No bingo session shall exceed six hours in duration, and no more than one such session shall be permitted in any one day. No organization shall conduct bingo games more than one day per week. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.21)  
Sec. 10-38. - Presence of participants. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game for charitable purposes, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.22)  
Sec. 10-39. - Receipt of pay or profit by person. 
It is a misdemeanor under Penal Code § 326.5(b) for any person to receive pay or profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this article, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000.00, which fine shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.23)  
Sec. 10-40. - Use of proceeds. 
All proceeds received under this article shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
(1)  Such proceeds may be used for prizes. 
(2)  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed ten percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes or $500.00 per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead and administrative expenses. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.24)  
Sec. 10-41. - Enjoining violation by city. 
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Penal Code § 326.5 or of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.25)  
Sec. 10-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 10-42 which pertained to violations and derived from Code 1957, § 5A.26.  
Secs. 10-43—10-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-71. - Eligibility of certain organizations. 
Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d—23701g and 23701l; mobile home park associations; and senior citizens' organizations are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5, as amended, and this article. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.2)  
Sec. 10-72. - Application; term. 
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain a license to conduct bingo games for charitable purposes in the city shall file an application in writing in the office of the finance director on a form to be provided by the finance director. The issuing authority shall be the city council. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and annual fee. No organization shall conduct a bingo game unless licensed pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.3; Ord. No. 1545, § 14, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 10-73. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No license for bingo for charitable purposes shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under section 10-71 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.4)  
Sec. 10-74. - Contents of application. 
(a)  The application for a license for bingo for charitable purposes shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under section 10-71 of this division. 
(2)  The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the applicant organization. 
(3)  The particular property within the city, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant or property whose use is donated to the applicant, which property must be used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which proper bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place. 
(4)  The proposed day of the week and hours of the day for the conduct of bingo games. 
(5)  The name and account number of the special fund in which proceeds derived from bingo games will be kept. 
(6)  That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code § 326.5 and this article as they may be amended from time to time and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city council upon violation of any of such provisions. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by two duly authorized officers of the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
(c)  The annual license fee fixed by the city council shall accompany the application. 
(d)  The applicant shall also submit, if applicable, a certificate or determination of exemption under Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d or a letter of good standing from the exemption division of the franchise tax board in Sacramento, showing exemption under Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701a, 23701b, 23701d—23701g or 23701l. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.5)  
Sec. 10-75. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee for a license for bingo for charitable purposes, the finance director shall refer the application to interested city departments, including but not limited to the administrative services officer, city attorney and police department for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy and other applicable restrictions. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.6; Ord. No. 1545, § 15, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 10-76. - Issuance and contents. 
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified, under the law, to conduct bingo games for charitable purposes in the city, the city council shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and nature of the organization to which the license is issued. 
(2)  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted. 
(3)  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted. 
(4)  The date of the expiration of such license. 
(5)  The name of the member of the organization to be designated as "bingo manager." 
(6)  Such other information, including conditions, as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.7)  
Sec. 10-77. - Suspension. 
(a)  Whenever the chief of police, administrative officer, finance director or city council determines that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the sections of this article, the city official or body that made such determination shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. 
(b)  Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension of the license under subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(c)  The order issued under subsection (a) of this section shall also notify the licensee that it shall have five days from the date of such order to request a hearing before the city council to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the city council within the five-day period shall result in a revocation of the license. 
(d)  Upon such request by the licensee whose license has been suspended under subsection (a) of this section for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the city council shall provide such hearing within 15 days after receipt of such request, at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the city council for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation. 
(e)  The decision of the city council after such hearing shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.8; Ord. No. 1545, § 16, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 10-78. - Revocation. 
(a)  Whenever it appears to the chief of police, administrative officer, finance director or city council that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the sections of this article or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary suspension is ordered under section 10-77 or that the manner in which the bingo games are being operated interferes with the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby properties, the license may be revoked. However, the licensee may appear before the city council at the time fixed for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the revocation. The city council may attach conditions to the license to make the conduct of the bingo games compatible with the adjacent and nearby properties. 
(b)  The decision of the city council after such hearing shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.9; Ord. No. 1545, § 17, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 10-79. - Effect of revocation. 
Any organization whose license is finally revoked under this division may not apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. However, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of such exemption. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.10)  
Sec. 10-80. - Fee; renewal. 
(a)  Except as provided, a license fee of $50.00 is fixed and imposed upon each applicant for a license for bingo games for charitable purposes for each year or any portion thereof during which a license shall be in effect pursuant to this article. Such license fee shall not be apportioned or prorated for any period of less than a year. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this division shall be renewable, in the absence of revocation or grounds for revocation, during the 30-day period prior to its expiration. The licensee may apply for renewal on a form prescribed by the finance director accompanied by payment of the annual license fee. If it appears that there are grounds for revocation, the license renewal may be denied; provided, however, that the procedure specified in section 10-78 with respect to revocation shall be followed in connection with denial of renewal on such grounds. A license not so renewed shall expire automatically at the end of the license year. 
(c)  The amount of the license fee is found to be not more than the actual cost of issuing a license under this division. If any application is denied, one-half of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(Code 1957, § 5A.11; Ord. No. 1545, § 18, 11-3-2003)  
Secs. 10-81—10-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CARD ROOMS AND CARD GAMES 
 
Sec. 10-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Card games or playing cards mean and include all games played with cards where there is wagering or gambling on the outcome of the games. 
Card room means any place maintained, operated or conducted, in whole or in part, for the purpose of providing a place where card games are played and where compensation, donations or fees are received or charged, directly or indirectly, for the privilege of playing cards. 
Person means every individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture and corporation, whether acting as principal or agent, manager, clerk, employee or servant, either for or on behalf of himself or for any other person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or other entity owning, operating or proposing to operate a card room. 
(Code 1957, § 6A.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-107. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly engage in the playing of cards or card games for money in any card room or for any person to participate in any game of chance played for money with cards. However, it shall not be unlawful to participate in a tournament of duplicate bridge where there is no wagering or gambling on the outcome of the games. 
(Code 1957, § 6A.2)  
Secs. 10-108—10-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POOL ROOMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 148, which comprises this article, was an initiative ordinance, approved by vote of the citizens April 12, 1920. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-136. - Location. 
No license to conduct, carry on or maintain a pocket billiard or billiard room shall be granted for any other place or locality than a room or place situated on the ground floor of the building where the billiards are proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1957, § 20.1)  
Sec. 10-137. - Hours of operation. 
All conditional pocket or billiard rooms shall be closed to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1957, § 20.2)  
Sec. 10-138. - Minors prohibited. 
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play or to remain in any pocket billiard or billiard room, either as an employee, guest, visitor, spectator or otherwise. 
(Code 1957, § 20.3) 
Cross reference— Minors, § 50-191 et seq.  
Sec. 10-139. - Entrances. 
The street door or entrance front to any pocket billiard and billiard room shall be so constructed that the public walking along or being in the street in front thereof may at all times see the occupants of the billiard room and the contents thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 20.4)  
Sec. 10-140. - Connecting rooms. 
No other room shall be connected with any pocket billiard or billiard room, except such as are necessary for lavatory and storeroom purposes, provided that nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a bowling alley or box-ball alley being maintained in conjunction with any pocket billiard or billiard room. 
(Code 1957, § 20.5)  
Secs. 10-141—10-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-166. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal, officer, clerk, agent or employee, either for himself or for any other person, to engage in, conduct, manage, maintain or carry on the business of a pocket billiard or billiard room in the city without first having procured a license from the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 20.6)  
Sec. 10-167. - Application. 
Any person who shall desire to procure a license for conducting or maintaining a pocket billiard or billiard room shall make application in writing to the city council. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant and, if an association, the names of the members thereof and, if a corporation, the names of the officers thereof. Such application shall be considered by the city council as soon after the application has been received as is convenient, and the determination of the council thereon shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 20.7)  
Sec. 10-168. - Fee. 
The fee for a license required by this division shall be as established by section 22-153 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 20.8)  
Sec. 10-169. - Issuance. 
When the city council has approved an application for a license under this division, the city clerk shall issue the license upon the payment of the fee prescribed therefor. 
(Code 1957, § 20.9)  
Sec. 10-170. - Revocation. 
After a hearing held upon due notice given and at which all interested parties may be present, any license issued under this division may be revoked when due and sufficient proof has been made that the holder thereof has failed to comply with any section of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 20.10)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; riding or driving animals and vehicles in parks, § 54-6; hitching animals in parks, § 54-9; riding or driving animal not well broken or under control, § 54-11; persons riding or driving animals, § 90-6; animal-drawn vehicles in central traffic district, § 90-10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health officer means and includes the city health officer and his deputies and the county health officer and his deputies whenever the city has entered into a contract with the county for the performance by county health officers or other employees of public health services. 
Owner means and includes an owner, an agent, a manager, a proprietor, a lessee, a tenant, an occupant or a person in possession. 
Premises means and includes any building structure, place, lot or parcel of land or any number of contiguous lots or parcels of land in the possession or control of any person or in the joint or common possession or control of more than one person. 
(Code 1957, § 4.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-2. - Permit for animal to be at large; liability for damages. 
Any person obtaining a permit pursuant to title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code allowing an animal to be at large shall be liable for all damages that may be incurred because of the exercise of such permit. 
(Code 1957, §§ 4.2, 4.45, 4.50)  
Sec. 14-3. - Keeping near dwellings, schools, hospitals or similar institutions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall keep any animal, fowl or bird, wild or domestic, other than cats, dogs, canaries, racing or homing pigeons or birds of the Psittacidae family, within 50 feet of any residence or dwelling house or other building used for the habitation of human beings or within 100 feet of any school, hospital or similar institution. 
(Code 1957, § 4.3)  
Sec. 14-4. - Poultry and rabbits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than 50 chickens or poultry of any kind, except that poultry less than six months old shall not be included as coming under such limitation, or more than 20 rabbits or hares upon any lot, enclosure or premises having an area of 7,500 square feet or less without first obtaining a permit from the health officer. 
(Code 1957, § 4.4)  
Sec. 14-5. - Bees. 
(a)  No person shall establish or maintain any hive or box where bees are kept or keep any bees on any premises in the city within 300 feet of any dwelling other than that of the owner of such bees or within 100 feet of any exterior boundary of the property on which the hive or box is located, except that a hive or box for the keeping of bees may be located and kept: 
(1)  Within a schoolhouse for the purpose of study or observation. 
(2)  In a physician's office or laboratory for medical research or treatment or for scientific purposes. 
(b)  No bees permitted to be kept upon any premises under subsection (a) of this section shall be permitted to fly at large. 
(Code 1957, § 4.5)  
Sec. 14-6. - Keeping for educational projects or circuses, fairs or carnivals. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the keeping of any animals or fowl in connection with any educational project conducted by or through the cooperation of public or private schools or in connection with a circus, fair or carnival where a permit is first obtained from the health officer. 
(Code 1957, § 4.6)  
Sec. 14-7. - Permits generally. 
Whenever in this chapter the keeping of certain animals is made conditional upon the obtaining of a permit from the health officer, such permit shall be in writing, and the health officer shall state therein the conditions upon which it is granted. It shall be the duty of the permittee to comply with such conditions. Any such permit shall be revocable at any time by order of the city council on recommendation of the health officer. Any violation of the terms or conditions of any such permit shall be punishable in the same manner and to the same extent as violations of this chapter are punishable. Permits granted under this chapter are not transferable, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1957, § 4.7)  
Sec. 14-8. - Control of fly breeding and odor nuisance. 
Proper measures to control fly breeding and odor nuisances shall be taken by persons keeping animals and fowl in the city, and this shall include provision for a watertight covered container to hold all manure and straw bedding in the intervals between removal. 
(Code 1957, § 4.8)  
Sec. 14-9. - Removal of manure, soil droppings and bedding. 
(a)  All manure, soil droppings and urine-soaked straw and bedding shall be removed from the premises where animals and fowl are kept as often as determined necessary by the health officer to prevent fly breeding, nuisance and odor and not less than once every three days. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to manure which is spread as fertilizer over or around cultivated plants, vines, vegetables, lawns, bushes, shrubs or trees or to manure kept by any nursery for commercial fertilizer purposes. 
(Code 1957, § 4.9)  
Sec. 14-10. - Vehicles used for transportation of manure. 
No person shall park, store, repair or maintain any vehicle used for the purpose of hauling manure in any R-1, R-2, R-3, RPD, or C-1 zone or upon or in any public street or alley abutting any such zone unless the vehicle, prior thereto, has been thoroughly cleaned and is free of all manure and odor and has been sprayed with insecticide to prevent fly breeding. 
(Code 1957, § 4.10)  
Sec. 14-11. - Enclosure required for breeding. 
No person shall let to a mare any stallion or jack or let to a cow any bull or let to a sow any boar or to a bitch any dog or let to a nanny goat any goat, except within an enclosure so arranged as to obstruct such animals entirely from the view of all persons outside of such enclosure. 
(Code 1957, § 4.11)  
Sec. 14-12. - Variances; permit for keeping. 
(a)  Every person who, prior to June 6, 1951, was maintaining or keeping one or more animals in full compliance with all laws, ordinances and statutes then applicable thereto may continue to keep such animals in the same place and manner, if he obtained a permit to do so from the city clerk on or before July 6, 1951. 
(b)  Following the receipt of an application, the health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the premises. If such animals were lawfully maintained in the same place and manner immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives and do not constitute a nuisance or a menace to health and all the provisions of this chapter, state law or other ordinances have been complied with, he shall so certify that fact to the city clerk, who will issue the applicant a permit. Such permit shall be transferable. 
(c)  The applicant for such permit shall pay to the city clerk a fee of $2.00 for such permit to cover the expense of inspection and investigation of any matters referring to such application made by the health officer. The city council shall have power to revoke such permit at any time. 
(Code 1957, § 4.12)  
Secs. 14-13—14-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY CODE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14-41. - Title 10 adopted by reference. 
Except as hereinafter provided, Title 10, Animals, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended by Ordinance No. 2011-0038 (adopted July 26, 2011) and in effect on August 25, 2011, is hereby adopted by reference as the animal control ordinance of the City of San Fernando. 
(Code 1957, § 4.13; Ord. No. 1523, § 4, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1609, § 2, 12-5-2011)  
Sec. 14-42. - Copy on file. 
A copy of Title 10, Animals, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended by Ordinance No. 2011-0038 (adopted July 26, 2011) and in effect on August 25, 2011, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Code 1957, § 4.14; Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1609, § 3, 12-5-2011)  
Sec. 14-43. - Jurisdiction. 
Whenever in Title 10, Animals, of the Los Angeles County Code reference is made to the unincorporated area of the County of Los Angeles, such area shall be deemed to include in its true geographical location the entire area of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 4.15; Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 14-44. - Definitions. 
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in Title 10, Animals, of the Los Angeles County Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it as follows: 
County department of animal care and control means the city department responsible for enforcement of this chapter, except when the term "county department of animal care and control" is a correction notation due to circumstances and syntax. 
County of Los Angeles means the City of San Fernando, except where the County of Los Angeles is a correct notation due to circumstances and syntax. 
Regional planning commission means the city planning commission, except when the regional planning commission is a correct notation due to circumstances and syntax. 
Sheriff means the city chief of police, except when the term "sheriff" or "county sheriff" is a correct notation due to circumstances and syntax. 
(Code 1957, § 4.16; Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 8-6-2007) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-45. - Fee schedule. 
Section 10.90.010 of Title 10, Animals, of the Los Angeles County Code is adopted as a fee schedule for spaying, neutering, animal disposal, impounding, licensing and all other fees to be collected by the city or county. 
(Code 1957, § 4.17; Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 14-46. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Unless a different penalty is provided for in this article, any person violating any of the provisions of this article is guilty of an infraction that is punishable as provided in article II of chapter 1 of the San Fernando City Code. 
(b)  Violation of sections: 
10.12.190 
10.12.200 
10.12.220 
10.20.280 
10.20.310 
10.28.060 
10.28.280(C) 
10.32.020 
10.32.070 
10.32.080 
10.37.130 
10.37.140 
10.40.010 
10.40.040 
10.40.060 
10.40.065 
10.86.010 
of the animal control ordinance is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in article II of chapter 1 of the San Fernando City Code. 
(Code 1957, § 4.18; Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 1609, § 4, 12-5-2011)  
Secs. 14-47—14-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 14-76. - Keeping generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall keep or maintain any goat, cow, calf, bull, ox, pig or swine on any premises within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 4.44)  
Sec. 14-77. - Manner of tethering. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in possession or control of any horse, mule, cow or other livestock to tether the livestock upon any unenclosed lot or land within the city in such manner that the rope or other attachment by which the livestock is tethered will permit it to be or to go beyond the boundary of such lot or land. 
(Code 1957, § 4.46)  
Sec. 14-78. - Permit to keep in open corral. 
No person shall keep more than one cow or two horses, mules, goats, burros or jacks in an open corral within the city unless he first obtains a permit from the health officer. 
(Code 1957, § 4.47)  
Sec. 14-79. - Restrictions on location for keeping. 
No person shall keep any cow, goat, horse, mule, burro or jack within 100 feet of any structure on adjacent property used for dwelling purposes, food preparation, food service or a hospital, clinic, school, hotel or other public meeting place. 
(Code 1957, § 4.48)  
Secs. 14-80—14-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BIRDS 
 
Sec. 14-106. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall be applicable to any lot or separate parcel of land or upon any number of contiguous lots or separate parcels of land under the same owner or person or that is owned or in possession of any person upon land, the use of which is restricted or zoned for residential purposes by any city ordinance. 
(Code 1957, § 4.66)  
Sec. 14-107. - Maximum number permitted generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than 200 live birds or Psittacidae birds in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 4.67)  
Sec. 14-108. - Maximum number in open cages or aviaries. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store or maintain in the city more than 25 live birds or Psittacidae birds or more than 25 of any combination thereof upon any residential lot in an outside or open cage, flight cage, or open aviary. 
(Code 1957, § 4.68)  
Sec. 14-109. - Location of open cages or aviaries. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep or maintain any open cage, flight cage or open aviary for live birds or Psittacidae birds within 35 feet of any building used as a dwelling or residence or hospital by any adjoining landowner or person other than the owner of such birds. 
(Code 1957, § 4.69)  
Sec. 14-110. - Permanent enclosures. 
(a)  Any person may maintain not to exceed 200 live birds or Psittacidae birds, provided such birds are kept and housed in an enclosure covered with solid material on all four sides, with adequate flooring and roof and with windows in the structure, the area of which would represent a maximum of 25 percent of the floor area in conformity with requirements of the building department. Such structure, housing or aviary shall be maintained at a distance of not less than 35 feet from any building used as a dwelling, residence or hospital by any person other than the owner of such birds, and the wall of such structure, housing or aviary facing any building used as a dwelling, residence or hospital by any person other than the owner of such birds must be constructed of solid materials. The lower portion of the windows or openings referred to in this subsection must be not less than three feet above the floor area. 
(b)  Every person who, as of December 12, 1955, was maintaining a permanent structure or aviary as distinguished from an open cage, flight cage or open aviary, in full compliance with all laws and ordinances then applicable thereto, and in full compliance with the sections of this article except as to the distance such aviary is located from residences or structures used for dwelling purposes on adjoining property, may continue to keep and maintain such aviary or structure, provided it is at least 20 feet from any structure used for dwelling purposes by any person other than the owner of the birds, upon obtaining a permit from the city clerk within 30 days from December 12, 1955. 
(c)  Following receipt of an application, the city clerk may cause any city department to make an inspection of the premises and, if such aviary was lawfully maintained and complied with the sections of this article, except as to the distance, as of December 12, 1955, and such aviary does not constitute a nuisance or a menace to health, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a permit. Such permit shall be transferable. The city council shall have the power to revoke such permit at any time. 
(Code 1957, § 4.70)  
Sec. 14-111. - Fence required. 
The owner maintaining, keeping or housing birds as specified in this article shall maintain on his property line and opposite the openings of the structure, as described in section 14-110 of this article, a solid fence of a maximum height in conformity with this Code or city ordinances. 
(Code 1957, § 4.71)  
Sec. 14-112. - Cleanliness of cages and aviaries. 
Every person owning or occupying premises where birds are kept shall at all times keep the flight cage or aviary in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1957, § 4.72)  
Sec. 14-113. - Nuisances. 
It is declared a nuisance for any person to keep, maintain, store, house or have in his possession or control any birds in excess of the limits specified in this article. In addition to any other remedy, the city attorney may institute an action to summarily abate such nuisance. 
(Code 1957, § 4.73) 
State Law reference— State law authorizing cities to declare what constitutes a nuisance, Government Code § 38771.  
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 62; solid waste and recyclables collection services, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; numbering buildings, § 74-271 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform technical codes required, Health and Safety Code § 17958; authority to modify uniform codes, Health and Safety Code § 17958.7; authority for city to regulate the construction of and materials used in buildings and to prevent the erection and maintenance of unsafe buildings, Government Code § 38660. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1615, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 4, 2012, deleted the former Art. I, § 18-1, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to the adoption of the Uniform Administrative Code and derived from Ord. No. 1507, § 2(6.60), 6-7-1999; Ord. No. U-1540, § 1, adopted 10-21-2002. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Adoption of Administrative Code. 
(a)  Division II of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code, 2016 Edition (Part 2 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference, and may be referred to as the "administrative code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. The administrative code shall govern the administration and enforcement, including inspections and permits, of the codes adopted in this chapter. One copy of Division II of Chapter 1 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the administrative code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, move, enlarge, replace, repair, equip, use, occupy, locate, maintain, remove or demolish any building or structure in the city, or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the administrative code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 2, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-2. - Administrative Code amended. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-1, the exception to section 101.2 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code ("Scope") is amended to read: 
Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings ( townhouses ) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the residential code. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-1, the term "California Mechanical Code" used in section 101.4.2 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code ("Mechanical") is replaced with the term "mechanical code." 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-1, the term "California Plumbing Code" used in section 101.4.3 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code ("Plumbing") is replaced with the term "plumbing code." 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-1, section 103.1 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code ("Creation of Enforcement Agency") is amended to read: 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Division of Building and Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official . 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-1, Exemption No. 2 to section 105.2 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code ("Work exempt from permit") is deleted. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-1, Exemption No. 9 to section 105.2 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code ("Work exempt from permit") is amended to read: 
9. Prefabricated swimming pool accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches (457 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-1, Exemption No. 14 to section 105.2 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code ("Work exempt from permit") is added to read: 
14. Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m 2 ) in area that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by the 2016 edition of the California Residential Code Section R311.4. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-1, section 113.1 of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code ("General") is amended to read: 
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the building, residential building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and green building codes, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 2, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 3, 10-15-2018)  
Secs. 18-3—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1615, §§ 3—8, adopted June 4, 2012, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 18-31, 18-32, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to the building code and derived from Ord. No. 1507, § 2(6.1, 6.2), 6-7-1999; Ord. No. U-1540, § 2, adopted 10-21-2002. 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Adoption of the City of Los Angeles Building Code. 
(a)  The 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Building Code, excluding Sections 91.102—91.105, 91.106.2(13), 91.107-91.109 and 91.111, as amended, and in effect December 30, 2016, which code adopts and amends the 2015 International Building Code and the 2016 edition of the California Building Code, is adopted by reference, and shall be referred to as the "building code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of the 2016 edition of the California Building Code, the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Building Code, as amended, and in effect December 30, 2016, or any amendment to the building code contained in this Code, the provision contained in the later listed document shall control. 
(c)  One copy of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Building Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the building code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the building code adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 3, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 4, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-32. - References. 
(a)  All references to "board" contained in the building code shall mean and refer to the city council of the city. 
(b)  All references to "building official" contained in the building code shall mean and refer to the community development director, or his or her designee. 
(c)  All references to "California Building Code" (CBC) contained in the building code shall mean and refer to the 2016 edition of the California Building Code. 
(d)  All references to "chief of the fire department" contained in the building code shall mean and refer to the community development director, or his or her designee. 
(e)  All references to "city" contained in the building code shall mean and refer to the City of San Fernando. 
(f)  All references to "city council" contained in the building code shall mean and refer to the city council of the city. 
(g)  All references to "department" contained in the building code shall mean and refer to the community development department. 
(h)  All references to "superintendent of building" contained in the building code shall mean and refer to the community development director, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 4, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 5, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-33. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of any provision of this article or the code adopted herein shall be as set forth in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 5, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-34. - Building code fees. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Building Code, as amended, and in effect December 30, 2016, all fees required for permits issued pursuant to the building code shall be those fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 6, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 6, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-35. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Building Code, as amended, and in effect December 30, 2016, all appeals or requests for modifications in individual cases from the requirements of the building code shall be made in accordance with the procedure established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 7, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 7, 10-15-2018)  
Secs. 18-36—18-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1615, §§ 9—14, adopted June 4, 2012, deleted the former Art. III, §§ 18-61, 18-62, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to the electrical code and derived from the Code of 1957, §§ 8.1, 8.2; Ord. No. 1507, § 2(6.20, 6.21), 6-7-1999; Ord. No. U-1540, § 3, adopted 10-21-2002. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform codes required, Health and Safety Code § 17958; authority of city to amend and modify uniform codes, Health and Safety Code § 17958.7; authority for city to regulate the materials used in wiring structures for electricity, Government Code § 38660. 
 
Sec. 18-61. - Adoption of the City of Los Angeles Electrical Code. 
(a)  The 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Electrical Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, which code incorporates and amends the 2016 edition of the California Electrical Code, is adopted by reference, and may be referred to as the "electrical code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of the 2016 edition of the California Electrical Code, the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Electrical Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, or any amendment to the electrical code contained in this Code, the provision contained in the later listed document shall control. 
(c)  One copy of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Electrical Code, as amended, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the electrical code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the electrical code adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 9, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 8, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-62. - References. 
(a)  All references to "building official" contained in the electrical code shall mean and refer to the building official of the city. 
(b)  All references to "city council" contained in the electrical code shall mean and refer to the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 10, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 9, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-63. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of any provision of this article or the code adopted herein shall be as set forth in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 11, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-64. - Electrical code fees. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Electrical Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, all fees required for permits issued pursuant to the electrical code shall be those fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 12, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 10, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-65. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Electrical Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, all appeals or requests for modifications in individual cases from the requirements of the electrical code shall be made in accordance with the procedure established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 13, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 11, 10-15-2018)  
Secs. 18-66—18-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1615, §§ 15—20, adopted June 4, 2012, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 18-91, 18-92, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to the mechanical code and derived from (Ord. No. 1507, § 2(6.30, 6.31), 6-7-1999; Ord. No. U-1540, § 4, adopted 10-21-2002. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 18-91. - Adoption of the City of Los Angeles Mechanical Code. 
(a)  The 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Mechanical Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, which code incorporates and amends the 2016 edition of the California Mechanical Code, is adopted by reference, and may be referred to as the "mechanical code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of the 2016 edition of the California Mechanical Code, the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Mechanical Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, or any amendment to the mechanical code contained in this Code, the provision contained in the later listed document shall control. 
(c)  One copy of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Mechanical Code, as amended, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the mechanical code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the mechanical code adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 15, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 12, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-92. - References. 
(a)  All references to "building official" contained in the mechanical code shall mean and refer to the building official of the city. 
(b)  All references to "city council" contained in the mechanical code shall mean and refer to the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 16, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 13, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-93. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of any provision of this article or the code adopted herein shall be as set forth in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 17, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-94. - Mechanical code fees. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Mechanical Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, all fees required for permits issued pursuant to the mechanical code shall be those fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 18, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 15, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-95. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Mechanical Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, all appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretations of the mechanical code shall be made in accordance with the procedure established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 19, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 16, 10-15-2018)  
Secs. 18-96—18-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1615, §§ 21—26, adopted June 4, 2012, deleted the former Art. V, §§ 18-121, 18-122, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to the plumbing code and derived from the Code of 1957, §§ 19.1, 19.2; Ord. No. 1507, § 2(6.40, 6.41), 6-7-1999; Ord. No. U-1540, § 5, adopted 10-21-2002. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform codes by cities, Health and Safety Code § 17958; authority of city to make modifications in uniform codes, Health and Safety Code § 17958.7. 
 
Sec. 18-121. - Adoption of the City of Los Angeles Plumbing Code. 
(a)  The 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Plumbing Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, which code incorporates and amends the 2016 edition of the California Plumbing Code, is adopted by reference and may be referred to as the "plumbing code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of the 2016 edition of the California Plumbing Code, the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Plumbing Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, or any amendment to the plumbing code contained in this Code, the provision contained in the later listed document shall control. 
(c)  One copy of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Plumbing Code, as amended, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the plumbing code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the plumbing code adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 21, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 16, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-122. - References. 
(a)  All references to "building official" contained in the plumbing code shall mean and refer to the building official of the city. 
(b)  All references to "city council" contained in the plumbing code shall mean and refer to the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 22, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 17, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-123. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of any provision of this article or the code adopted herein shall be as set forth in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 23, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-124. - Plumbing code fees. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Plumbing Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, all fees required for permits issued pursuant to the plumbing code shall be those fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 24, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 19, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-125. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Plumbing Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, all appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretations of the plumbing code shall be made in accordance with the procedure established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 25, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 20, 10-15-2018)  
Secs. 18-126—18-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING CODE 
 
Sec. 18-151. - Adopted. 
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being the Uniform Housing Code, 1973 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted as amended in this article as the housing code of the city, establishing minimum requirements for the protection of life, limb, health, property, safety and welfare of the general public and owners and occupants of residential buildings or structures in the city; establishing and prescribing enforcement proceedings; providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor; and prescribing penalties for violation thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 6.25)  
Sec. 18-152. - Short title. 
Whenever the term "Uniform Housing Code" or "housing code" appears in this Code or any city ordinance, such phrases shall be deemed and construed to refer and apply to the Uniform Housing Code adopted and amended by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 6.26)  
Sec. 18-153. - Amendments. 
The Uniform Housing Code adopted in section 18-151 shall be amended as follows: 
Section 103 is amended by adding to subsection (a) a new and additional paragraph to read as follows: 
The requirements of this housing code are applicable to any new or proposed residential building construction or alteration and to any existing substandard buildings as defined herein. 
Section 103 is further amended by adding a new and additional subsection (d) to read as follows: 
(d) Conflict with zoning. The provisions of this code shall be subject to all of the provisions of the Code of the City of San Fernando, California, as amended, and all ordinances of the city and resolutions adopted pursuant thereto relative to zoning. In case of any conflict between this Uniform Housing Code and the provisions of the Code of the City of San Fernando, California, and the ordinances and resolutions of the city relative to zoning, then the zoning provisions, laws, ordinances and resolutions shall govern. 
Section 201(b) is amended to read as follows: 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Emergency. The building official or his duly authorized representative shall have the authority to enter any building or premises for the purpose of investigating the existence of suspected or reported damages or defects which constitute an immediate hazard to public safety or health. 
(2)  No emergency. Except in emergency situations as defined in paragraph (1) of this subsection above, the building official or his duly authorized representative shall not enter any building or premises without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof, unless he possesses a search warrant authorizing entry and search of premises. 
Section 203 concerning the housing and advisory appeals board is deleted and specifically not adopted. 
Section 204 concerning penalties is deleted and specifically not adopted. 
Section 401 is amended by adding the definition of the term building official to read as follows: 
Building official. Building official means the director of building and planning of the City of San Fernando and is the officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or his regularly authorized deputy. 
(Code 1957, § 6.27)  
Secs. 18-154—18-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 18-181. - Code adopted. 
(a)  That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, as amended, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted by reference and may be referred to as the "uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings" of the city to provide a just, equitable and practical method cumulative with and in addition to other remedies provided in the most current versions of the building code and the housing code, or any successor codes thereto, as adopted by the city, whereby buildings or structures, which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1957, § 6.40; Ord. No. U-1540, § 6, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 1615, § 27, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-182. - Short title. 
Whenever the term "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings" or "dangerous buildings code" appears in this Code or in this chapter or any city ordinance, such phrases shall be deemed and construed to refer and apply to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted and amended by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 6.41)  
Sec. 18-182.1. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of any provision of this article or the code adopted herein shall be as set forth in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 28, 6-4-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1615, § 28, adopted June 4, 2012, enacted provisions intended for codification as § 18-183. To avoid duplicative sections and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 18-182.1.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY PRE-SALE INSPECTION AND REPORT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 18-183. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article: 
(a)  To protect purchasers of residential real property located within the city against the purchase of such property without prior knowledge of unpermitted construction or other unlawful conditions at the property by assuring that potential purchasers are furnished with a report of matters of city record pertaining to the structure at the property, and of code violations as determined by an inspection of the property prior to the sale or exchange of a residential real property; and 
(b)  To protect and promote the existence of sound and wholesome residential buildings, dwelling units, and neighborhoods by the enforcement of standards, regulations, and procedures designed to remedy the existence or prevent the development or transfer or creation of dangerous, substandard or unsanitary and deficient residential buildings and dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-184. - Scope. 
The residential property pre-sale inspection and report program shall apply to all residential properties within the city with one or more dwelling units, with the exception of: 
(a)  Hotels and motels 
(b)  Mobile homes and mobile home parks. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-185. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement of sale or exchange means any agreement or written instrument effecting transfer of title to any residential property in the city from one owner to another owner. 
Bedroom means a room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
Building code means the building code as adopted, amended and/or incorporated by reference in chapter 18 of this Code. 
Building official means the community development director, or designee thereof, who shall possess all statutorily mandated certifications to enforce state building and construction codes. 
Dwelling means a residential building containing one or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms constituting a self-contained independent living area used, or intended to be used, for residential occupancy by one or more persons, and providing permanent facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Guesthouse means detached living quarters on the same premises as a single-family dwelling for the use of family members, guests or employees of the occupants of such dwelling, containing no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Housing and property maintenance standards means the health, safety, and technical construction codes as adopted, amended and/or incorporated by reference in chapters 18 and 42 of this Code, the property maintenance standards set forth in chapter 106 of this Code, and the provisions of the State Housing Law (Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq.). 
Multiple-family dwelling means a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in residential property. 
Permitted bedroom means a room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes that has been constructed, altered, repaired, renovated, converted or improved with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals. 
Permitted dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that has been constructed, altered, repaired, removed, converted or improved with all local requisite permits, inspections and approvals. 
Residential property means any real property, whether occupied or vacant, improved with one or more buildings or structures that in whole or in part are legally permitted for use as a dwelling or a guesthouse. 
Single-family dwelling means a dwelling containing one dwelling unit. 
Unpermitted construction means any structure or portion thereof, including but not limited to a dwelling unit or bedroom, that has been constructed, altered, repaired, renovated, converted or improved without all requisite local permits, inspections and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-186. - Pre-sale report required. 
Prior to entering into an agreement of sale or exchange of any residential property, the owner, or his or her real estate agent or other authorized agent, shall obtain a pre-sale report on the residential property from the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-187. - Application for pre-sale report and inspection. 
The owner of a residential property, or his or her real estate agent or other authorized agent, shall file an application for a pre-sale report with the building official, accompanied by a fee, as provided in section 18-192 of this article. The building official shall review pertinent city records concerning the residential property and conduct an inspection of the exterior and interior of the residential property for compliance with housing and property maintenance standards. The owner, or his or her real estate agent or other authorized agent, shall provide access for inspection within ten working days of the building official's written request, and shall provide notice of the inspection to all tenants in accordance with state law. The building official may require additional inspections by other city departments and/or other agencies exercising jurisdiction in the city for compliance with housing and property maintenance standards. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-188. - Preparation of pre-sale report. 
The building official shall, within 20 business days from the date of his or her inspection of the residential property, issue a written pre-sale report to the owner or the owner's authorized agent. The report shall contain the following information, and shall be valid for six months from the date of issuance: 
(a)  The property address and legal description of the property; 
(b)  The zone classification of the property; 
(c)  The number of permitted dwelling units on the property; 
(d)  The number of permitted bedrooms in each dwelling unit or guesthouse on the property; 
(e)  A summary of all building and technical permits issued, the date of issuance, and the date of final approval for each permit; 
(f)  A summary of variances, use permits, or other pertinent legislative acts of record concerning the property; 
(g)  Identification of any unpermitted construction; 
(h)  A list of violations of the housing and property maintenance standards observed at the residential property during the inspection; and 
(i)  Identification of any equipment, materials, devices, safety measures and/or maintenance, as set forth in section 18-190(a)(3) that are not installed or provided for at the time of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-189. - Delivery of pre-sale report. 
Upon receipt of the pre-sale report from the building official and prior to the consummation of the sale or exchange of the residential property, the owner, or his or her authorized agent, shall deliver the pre-sale report to the buyer or transferee, or his or her real estate agent, escrow company, or other authorized agent. The buyer, or his or her authorized agent, shall execute a "receipt of pre-sale report" on a form approved by the city, and said receipt shall be delivered to the building official within ten business days from the date of execution of the receipt. The city will not accept a signed waiver or other such document in lieu of an executed "receipt of pre-sale report". 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-190. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  A certificate of compliance shall be issued with the pre-sale report if the building official has made the following determinations based upon his or her review of the city records for the residential property and the findings of the inspection of the residential property: 
(1)  No unpermitted construction is present on the property; 
(2)  No violations of the housing and property maintenance standards were observed at the property; and 
(3)  The following equipment, materials, devices, safety measures and/or maintenance are installed or provided for at the residential property subject to approval by the building official: 
a.  Smoke and carbon monoxide alarms. Smoke alarms are mounted on the ceiling or wall of each existing room used for sleeping purposes and at a point centrally located on the wall or ceiling of the existing corridor or area giving access to such room. Where a dwelling unit has more than one story or where a dwelling unit has a basement, a smoke alarm is installed on each story or basement, all in a manner consistent with the building code. Carbon monoxide alarms are installed in a manner consistent with the California Health and Safety Code and the building code. 
b.  Earthquake safety. Earthquake-actuated gas shut-off valves are installed in dwellings containing fuel gas piping and water heater tanks are secured with seismic safety restraints, all in a manner consistent with the plumbing code. 
c.  Ground-fault circuit-interrupter (G.F.C.I.). All ground fault circuit receptacles have been inspected, repaired as needed, and/or installed in place of non-G.F.C.I. receptacles located in rooms with sinks or tubs or showers, all in a manner consistent with the electrical code. 
d.  Pool safety. Swimming pools and spas are fully enclosed by a fence of at least five feet in height with self-closing and self-latching gates, and every pool and spa drain inlet is equipped with a drain inlet safety cover, all in a manner consistent with the building code. 
e.  Impact safety glazing. Panes of glazing are resistant to breaking or shattering upon impact where installed in hazardous locations as specified in the building code, including but not limited to glass in swinging doors and in sliding-door assemblies and glass enclosures of tubs and showers, all in a manner consistent with the building code. 
(b)  If a certificate of compliance is not issued with the pre-sale report, the owner or his authorized agent, after abating any unpermitted construction or other code violations and installing or providing the equipment, materials, devices, safety measures and/or maintenance set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, and upon payment of a re-inspection fee, may request a re-inspection of the property. The building official shall, following re-inspection, issue a certificate of compliance upon making the determinations set forth in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-191. - Certificate of compliance required. 
A certificate of compliance shall be obtained by an owner of a residential property for sale no sooner than six months prior to sale of the residential property, or no later than six months after the sale of the residential property, unless the period to obtain such certificate is extended for good cause by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-192. - Fee schedule. 
The council shall establish residential property pre-sale inspection and report program fees by resolution, which fees shall be set forth in the regular fee schedule of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-193. - Nonliability of the city. 
Neither the provisions of this article nor the preparation and delivery of a pre-sale report or certificate of compliance shall impose any liability upon the city for any errors or omissions contained in the pre-sale report or certificate of compliance, nor shall the city bear any liability not otherwise imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
Sec. 18-194. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in section 1-30 of this Code. 
(b)  The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section are not intended to, and shall not be construed to limit in any way, all other remedies available to the city to prosecute or abate public nuisances or violations of the housing and property maintenance standards. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2011)  
ARTICLE IX. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 18-195. - Adoption of the City of Los Angeles Residential Code. 
(a)  The 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Residential Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, which code incorporates and amends the 2015 International Residential Code and the 2016 edition of the California Residential Code, is adopted by reference, and may be referred to as the "residential code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of the 2016 edition of the California Residential Code, the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Residential Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, or any amendment to the residential code contained in this Code, the provision contained in the later listed document shall control. 
(c)  One copy of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Residential Code, as amended, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the residential code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the residential code adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 29, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 21, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-196. - References. 
(a)  All references to "building official" contained in the residential code shall mean and refer to the building official of the city. 
(b)  All references to "city council" contained in the residential code shall mean and refer to the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 29, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 22, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-197. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of any provision of this article or the code adopted herein shall be as set forth in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 29, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-198. - Residential code fees. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Residential Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, all fees required for permits issued pursuant to the residential code shall be those fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 29, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 23, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-199. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Residential Code, as amended and in effect December 30, 2016, all appeals or requests for modifications in individual cases from the requirements of the residential code shall be made in accordance with the procedure established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 29, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 24, 10-15-2018)  
Secs. 18-200—18-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - GREEN BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 18-226. - Adoption of the City of Los Angeles Green Building Code. 
(a)  The 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Green Building Code, as amended, and in effect December 30, 2016, which code incorporates and amends the 2016 edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, is adopted by reference, and may be referred to as the "green building code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of the 2016 edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Green Building Code, as amended, and in effect December 30, 2016, or any amendment to the green building code contained in this Code, the provision contained in the later listed document shall control. 
(c)  One copy of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Green Building Code, as amended, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the green building code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the green building code adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 30, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 25, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-227. - References. 
(a)  All references to "building official" contained in the green building code shall mean and refer to the building official of the city. 
(b)  All references to "city council" contained in the green building code shall mean and refer to the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 30, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 26, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-228. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of any provision of this article or the code adopted herein shall be as set forth in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 30, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-229. - Green building code fees. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Green Building Code, as amended, and in effect December 30, 2016, all fees required for permits issued pursuant to the green building code shall be those fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 30, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 27, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 18-230. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Green Building Code, as amended, and in effect December 30, 2016, all appeals or requests for modifications in individual cases from the requirements of the green building code shall be made in accordance with the procedure established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 30, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1682, § 28, 10-15-2018)  
Secs. 18-231—18-256. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ELEVATOR CODE 
 
Sec. 18-257. - Adoption of the City of Los Angeles Elevator Code. 
(a)  The 2008 edition of the City of Los Angeles Elevator Code, excluding Sections 92.0126(c)-(d) and 92.0127-92.0132.1, as amended, and in effect December 10, 2007, which code incorporates and amends the Elevator Safety Orders of Title 8 and the 2007 edition of Part 7 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference, and may be referred to as the "elevator code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of the 2008 edition of the City of Los Angeles Elevator Code, as amended, and in effect December 10, 2007, or any amendment to the elevator code contained in this Code, the provision contained in the later listed document shall control. 
(c)  One copy of the 2008 edition of the City of Los Angeles Elevator Code, as amended, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the elevator code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the elevator code adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 31, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-258. - References. 
(a)  All references to "board" contained in the elevator code shall mean and refer to the city council. 
(b)  All references to "department" contained in the elevator code shall mean and refer to community development department. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 31, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-259. - Penalties. 
Penalties for violation of any provision of this article or the code adopted herein shall be as set forth in chapter 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 31, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-260. - Elevator code fees. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2008 edition of the City of Los Angeles Elevator Code, as amended, and in effect December 10, 2007, all fees required for permits issued pursuant to the elevator code shall be those fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 31, 6-4-2012)  
Sec. 18-261. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2008 edition of the City of Los Angeles Elevator Code, as amended, and in effect December 10, 2007, all appeals or requests for modifications in individual cases from the requirements of the elevator code shall be made in accordance with the procedure established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 31, 6-4-2012)  
Secs. 18-262—18-287. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - EXPEDITED PERMITTING PROCEDURES FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 18-288. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Article XII, the following definitions shall apply: 
Association means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
Building department means the San Fernando Community Development Department. 
Building official means the San Fernando Community Development Director or designee. 
Chief of the fire department means and refers to the San Fernando Fire Department Chief or designee. 
City means the City of San Fernando. 
Common interest development means any of the following: 
(1)  A community apartment project; 
(2)  A condominium project; 
(3)  A planned development; or 
(4)  A stock cooperative. 
Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
(1)  E-mail; 
(2)  The internet; and/or 
(3)  Facsimile. 
Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall utilize its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A)-(B). 
Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal; 
(2)  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City, county, or City and county and paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code; 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling; or 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
Solar energy system means either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating; or 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 18-289. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article XII is to establish an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act, as amended by AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014), to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This Article XII encourages the use of small residential rooftop solar energy systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding property owners' ability to install small rooftop solar energy systems. This Article XII allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting the community's health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 18-290. - Applicability. 
(a)  This Article XII applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
(b)  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this Article XII are not subject to the requirements of this Article XII unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 18-291. - Solar energy system requirements. 
(a)  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the city, State of California, and local fire department. 
(b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
(c)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards published by the California Electrical Code, the institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 18-292. - Electronic processing. 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the city's website. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by electronic means shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. Website applications may be allowed at such time in the future that the technology is made available to the city. The city's website shall specify the permitted method of electronic document submission. 
(c)  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents, in lieu of a wet signature. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 18-293. - Duties of applicant. 
Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
(a)  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
(b)  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 18-294. - Duties of building department and building official. 
(a)  The building department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
(b)  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting guidebook adopted by the State Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(c)  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 18-295. - Expedited permit review and inspection requirements. 
(a)  An application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system permit that building department determines to satisfy the informational requirements contained in the city's checklist as prepared by the building department pursuant to section 18-294(a) shall be deemed complete. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building department shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited issuance of a small residential rooftop solar energy system permit. 
(c)  Upon the building department's determination that the application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system permit is complete, the building department shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within three (3) business days. 
(d)  The building department's review of such applications for small residential rooftop solar energy system permits shall be limited to whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
(e)  The building official shall require an applicant to apply for a use permit, if he or she finds, based on substantial evidence, that that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(f)  If a use permit or other discretionary city approval is required, the building official may not deny the application for the use permit unless he or she makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid such adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decision by the building official may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(g)  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. The city shall ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A)-(B). 
(h)  The city shall not condition approval of an application for the approval of an association, as defined in Civil Code Section 4080. 
(i)  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. Such an inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request for such an inspection. 
(j)  If a small residential rooftop energy system fails the building department's inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized by need not conform to the requirements of this section 18-295. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Secs. 18-296—18-313. - Reserved.  
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; emergency services, ch. 30; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 58; parking and business improvement areas, § 62-61 et seq.; secondhand goods, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 82; telecommunications, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 102; C-1 limited commercial zone, § 106-486 et seq.; C-2 commercial zone, § 106-516 et seq.; SC service commercial zone, § 106-546 et seq.; M-1 limited industrial zone, § 106-581 et seq.; M-2 light industrial zone, § 106-611 et seq.; adult businesses, § 106-1021 et seq.; home occupations, § 106-1241 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to license for revenue and regulation purposes, Government Code § 37101; authority of city to license in the exercise of police power and for purposes of regulation, Business and Professions Code § 16000. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  This article is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. 
(b)  Any person required to pay a license fee for transacting and carrying on any business under this article shall be relieved from payment of any license fee for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any other sections of this Code or city ordinance, but shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such other sections of this Code or the ordinance. This section shall not apply to inspection fees. 
(Code 1957, § 12.1)  
Sec. 22-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Circus means an exhibition or entertainment at which feats of horsemanship, acrobatic feats and trained or wild animals are exhibited or displayed in the city, to which exhibition or entertainment and admission fee is charged, and which exhibition or entertainment is conducted by a person having no regular, established place of business in the city for the exhibition thereof. 
Civil Code provisions. The provisions of Civil Code §§ 13 and 1645 are adopted in the interpretation of words and phrases, unless otherwise provided. 
Collection agency means and includes any person engaging, directly or indirectly and as a primary or secondary object, business or pursuit, in soliciting claims for collection or in the collection of claims owed or due or asserted to be owed or due to another. Any person, when engaged in collecting accounts for another, where the employment is for one or more persons, shall be deemed to be engaged in the collection business within the meaning of this article. Any person using a fictitious name in collecting his own accounts receivable with the intention of conveying to the debtor that a third party has been employed is engaging in the collection business as contemplated by this article and shall be subject to this article. The term "collection agency" does not include attorneys at law, individuals regularly employed on a regular wage or salary in the capacity of credit men or in another similar capacity upon the staff of employees of any one person not engaged in the business of a collection agency, banks, abstract companies doing an escrow business, duly licensed real estate brokers or agents doing a real estate business, or a merchant-owned nonprofit credit association unless they are conducting a collection agency. 
Dancehall means any place where the business of holding or conducting public dances is regularly carried on, provided that nothing in this definition shall be deemed or construed to require the holder of a license to conduct the business of a public dancehall to procure any additional license to conduct a dancing academy, if such dancing academy is conducted at the same location and under the same management as the public dancehall. 
Dancing club means any club or association of persons which conducts dances other than public dances for its members or bona fide guests more often than once per month at which a fee is charged, either for admission to such dance or for dancing therein, or at which any collection or donation of money is made or received or in which the amount of dues to be paid by each member is dependent upon attendance at such dances by such member. 
Employment agency, employment bureau or booking agency means the business of securing employment for any person for any fee or compensation of any kind or furnishing information regarding or leading to any employment of any kind for which any fee or compensation is received or charged. 
Engaged in business means the conducting, managing or carrying on of any profession, trade, calling, occupation or commercial enterprise in the city licensed under this article as owner, officer, agent, manager, employee, servant or lessee of any of them. 
Freight forwarding means the business of collecting or consolidating for shipment in carload lots or less or truckload lots or less any goods, wares or merchandise as agent or bailee for any person where a fee is charged for such service. 
Gross receipts means the gross receipts of the calendar year and is defined as follows: the total amount of the sale price of all sales, the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether such service, act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, including all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, the cost of labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, cash discounts allowed or taken on sales shall not be included, and this article shall not be construed to impose any fee upon any business or transaction which the city is not authorized to license or to charge a fee under any law of the state or of the United States. The amount of any federal tax imposed on or with respect to retail sales, whether imposed upon the retailer or upon the consumer, and regardless of whether or not the amount of federal tax is stated to customers as a separate charge, and any state, city or city and county sales or use tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser and such part of the sales price of any property previously sold and returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property so accepted for resale shall be deducted for the purpose of determining gross receipts under this article. But no deduction shall be made of the amount of any federal manufacturers' or importers' excise tax included in the price of the property sold, even though the manufacturer or importer is also the retailer thereof and whether or not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge. Sales of goods, wares or merchandise by persons engaged in selling such articles shall not be considered as producing gross receipts to the extent that such sales are for convenience. 
Itinerant vendor means any person who engages in a temporary business for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise and who, for such purpose, hires or occupies any building or structure or portion thereof within the city. 
Peddler means any person, other than a bona fide salesman or solicitor for any person engaged in business and licensed under other sections of this article, who sells or offers for sale goods, wares or merchandise, either by going from place to place for the purpose of selling, offering for sale or delivering such goods or for the purpose of taking or soliciting orders for the future delivery of such goods; or by selling or offering for sale such goods from a stand, park or vehicle in any street or upon or along any sidewalk or parkway or in any doorway or entranceway of any building or upon any unenclosed lot or parcel of land. 
Person means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock companies, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies and individuals engaged in any business, as defined in this section, in the city. 
Sale or sell includes and refers to the making of any transfer of title, in any manner or by any means whatsoever; to tangible personal property for a price; and to the serving, supplying or furnishing, for a price, of any tangible personal property fabricated or made at the special order of consumers who do or who do not furnish, directly or indirectly, the specifications therefor. A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a "sale." This definition shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
Sale for convenience means a sale of new goods, wares or merchandise by a person engaged in selling such articles to another person engaged in selling like or similar kinds of articles: (i) where the primary purpose of the particular transaction or sale is to accommodate the purchaser rather than to make a sale in the ordinary course of business; (ii) where, in the particular kind of business involved, a similar manner of dealing is frequent or customary in the circumstances under which the particular sale is made; and (iii) where goods, wares or merchandise of like or similar kind and of substantially equivalent value to that which was sold is received in consideration. The following types of transactions are sales for convenience when the circumstances stated in (i), (ii) and (iii) are present: 
(1)  Transactions in which the seller conveys an article which is in short supply or which, under the circumstances, cannot be obtained by the purchaser through normal sources of supply in sufficient time to permit the purchaser to furnish an equivalent article to a prospective customer. 
(2)  Transactions in which, because of the seller's more convenient location relative to a designated point of delivery, the purchaser agrees to reimburse the seller for delivering goods, wares or merchandise at that point to the purchaser's customer in accordance with a contract of sale between the purchaser and his customer. 
(3)  Transactions in which, as a matter of business practice, the form of a sale is arranged and entered into by the seller and the purchaser as a substitute for or the equivalent of the transportation of the article or the payment of transportation charges on the article from the point of the delivery to some other point. 
(4)  Transactions different in detail from those described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition but which the clerk has found and by rule determined to be of a kind whose primary purpose is to accommodate the purchaser rather than to make a sale in the ordinary course of business of a kind which, in the particular kind of business involved, is frequent or customary in the circumstances under which a particular sale is made and of a kind where goods, wares or merchandise of like or similar kind and of substantially equivalent value to that which was sold is received as consideration. 
No sale shall be considered a sale for convenience unless it is of a kind described in subsection (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this definition. 
Selling goods, wares or merchandise, unless otherwise specifically provided, in addition to any other meaning established at law, is deemed to extend to and include in its application the serving or supplying of meals for a fee or charge. 
Street includes all streets, avenues, highways, alleys, courts, lanes, places, squares, curbing, sidewalks or other public ways in this city which have been or may be dedicated as such and open to public use. 
(Code 1957, § 12.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-28. - License fee imposed; license required. 
There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this article license fees in the amounts prescribed, and it shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so or without complying with any and all applicable sections of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.3)  
Sec. 22-29. - Separate license for each establishment. 
(a)  Separate licenses must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license. However, warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under this article shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(b)  Whenever any person is engaged in two or more wholesale or retail businesses at the same location licensed under section 22-159 of this article, such person shall not be required to obtain separate licenses for each of such businesses, but shall be issued a joint license, and the sum of the gross receipts of all of such businesses so conducted shall be used as the basis for computing the amount of license fee to be paid for the conduct of all such businesses so affected. 
(Code 1957, § 12.4)  
Sec. 22-30. - Permit as prerequisite to issuance. 
No license, other than a renewal license, shall be issued under this article when the provisions of this Code or other city ordinance require a permit to be obtained or to be applied for as a prerequisite to entering into or performing any such business, profession, trade, occupation or act until such permit is first so applied for or obtained, as the case may be. Any license issued in violation of this section shall be void. 
(Code 1957, § 12.5)  
Sec. 22-31. - Affidavit required when fee based on weight of vehicle. 
Where any license fee prescribed by this article is based upon the unladen weight of any vehicle, an affidavit certifying to the make, type and unladen weight of such vehicle must be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 12.6)  
Sec. 22-32. - Statement required of certain applicants. 
(a)  When the license fee required by this article is based upon the amount of gross receipts or is graduated according to some other sliding scale, the applicant must file with the city clerk a written statement, made by the applicant or someone authorized to make the statement and having knowledge of the facts stated therein, showing whichever of the following is applicable to the particular business: 
(1)  The gross receipts of the business during the preceding calendar year; 
(2)  The gross production cost during the preceding calendar year; 
(3)  The average number of persons employed or vehicles used during the preceding calendar year; 
(4)  The amount of admission fees or other charges collected; 
(5)  The square-foot area used; 
(6)  The seating capacity of the place of business; 
(7)  The number of barrels of oil pumped or produced during the period on which the license is based; 
(8)  The number of tables, machines or other articles of equipment used; or 
(9)  Such factor other than of size, quantity or volume as the particular license fee may be based upon. 
Such written statement shall be made upon forms furnished by the city clerk and shall include a certificate in substance as follows: 
"I declare, under penalty of making a false certificate, that this return is made by me, that I am authorized to make such return, and that to the best of my knowledge and belief it is a true, correct and complete return made in good faith for the year stated, pursuant to the provisions of article II of chapter 22 of the Code of the City of San Fernando." 
(b)  Where the quarterly or yearly license fee to be paid under any section of this article is based upon the gross quarterly or annual receipts of business transacted or the gross quarterly or annual commissions or fees received or collected, only one such statement need be filed during any calendar year, which statement shall be filed at the time the first license is procured, and the fee to be paid shall be determined by and based upon the statement filed at the time the first license is procured. 
(c)  The written statement required in subsection (a) of this section shall be filed at the time the license is applied for, and the city clerk may withhold the issuance of any license until the required statement is furnished. 
(Code 1957, § 12.7)  
Sec. 22-33. - Conclusiveness of statement; audit. 
No statement filed under section 22-32 shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the statement preclude the city from collecting, by appropriate action, such sum as is actually due and payable under this article. The statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the city clerk or by his deputies. 
(Code 1957, § 12.8)  
Sec. 22-34. - Failure to file statement. 
If any person fails to file any statement required by section 22-32 of this division within the time prescribed or if, after demand therefor made by the city clerk, any person fails to file a corrected statement, the city clerk may determine the amount of license fee due from such person from such information as he may be able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the fee required to be paid upon the basis of external indices, such as stock on hand, capital invested, dividends paid, sales or other taxes paid, number of people employed, or by considering other facts. If such a determination is made, the city clerk shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving the notice personally or by depositing the notice in the United States Post Office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within ten days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount of the fee. If such application is not so made within the time prescribed, the assessment shall become final. If such an application is filed, the city clerk must cause the matter to be set for hearing within 15 days before a board consisting of the city treasurer, the city clerk and the city attorney or the duly appointed deputy of each. Such board shall consider all evidence produced and shall make written findings thereon, a copy of such findings to be served upon the applicant, in the manner prescribed in this section for the service of the notice of assessment. Such findings shall become final at the expiration of five days from the date of service, within which time exceptions may be filed by the applicant. If filed, the board so appointed shall consider the exceptions and make such modification as may be deemed necessary, and thereupon the final assessment shall be made. 
(Code 1957, § 12.9)  
Sec. 22-35. - Extension of time to file statement. 
The city clerk shall have, in addition to all other powers conferred upon him, for good cause shown, the power to extend the time for filing any statement required by section 22-32 of this division for a period of not to exceed 30 days before the statement becomes delinquent, when requested to do so in writing by the person concerned. In such case the city clerk is authorized to waive any penalty that would have otherwise accrued. 
(Code 1957, § 12.10)  
Sec. 22-36. - False statement, certificate or return. 
Any person making or filing a false statement, certificate or return under this article, knowing the statement, certificate or return to be false, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1957, § 12.11)  
Sec. 22-37. - Preparation and issuance of licenses. 
All licenses required under this article shall be prepared and issued by the city clerk upon the payment of the sum required to be paid by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.12)  
Sec. 22-38. - Contents of licenses. 
(a)  Each license issued under this article shall state upon the face thereof the following: 
(1)  The person to whom the license is issued. 
(2)  The kind of business licensed. 
(3)  The amount paid therefor. 
(4)  The location of such business. 
(5)  The date of expiration of such license. 
(b)  Each license shall state upon the back thereof the following: 
This license constitutes a receipt for the payment of a license fee imposed by the provisions of article II of chapter 22 of the Code of the City of San Fernando and shall have no other legal effect. Said receipt does not authorize the licensee, or any agent or employee thereof to conduct the business or occupation, or to perform any act specified on the reverse side hereof, or to conduct or perform any other business, occupation or act in the City of San Fernando without strictly complying with all the provisions of the ordinances of said city, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or officer of the city. THIS RECEIPT DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A PERMIT. 
Any receipt issued upon the payment by check of any license fee shall be void unless the amount due is actually received by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 12.13)  
Sec. 22-39. - Issuance of license to debtor licensees. 
No license for any ensuing, current or unexpired license period shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making application for any license, is indebted to the city for any unpaid license fee required to be paid under this article, provided that the city clerk or his duly authorized deputy may enter into an agreement with any person indebted to the city for nonpayment of license fees for any past license period, agreeing with such person that such person may pay delinquent license fees for any past license period in equal installments extending over a period of not to exceed one year. In such agreement, such debtor shall acknowledge his debt to the city and agree, if default is made in the payment of any installment agreed to be paid thereunder, that the whole amount agreed to be paid shall become immediately due and payable and that, if suit is brought to enforce the collection of the amount agreed to be paid under such agreement, the debtor will pay all costs of the suit incurred by the city. If such agreement is executed, licenses for any current or ensuing license period may be issued to any such person upon such person paying the fee prescribed for the current or ensuing license period, together with penalties, if any. 
(Code 1957, § 12.14)  
Sec. 22-40. - Determination of license fee. 
(a)  When the amount of the license fee required by this article is based upon gross receipts, such fee shall be ascertained by and computed upon the gross receipts of the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  When such fee is based upon the number of barrels of oil pumped or produced, such fee shall be ascertained by and computed upon the number of barrels of oil pumped or produced during the next preceding license period. 
(c)  In all other cases such fee shall be ascertained by a strict construction of the sections of this article applicable to the particular business. 
(Code 1957, § 12.15)  
Sec. 22-41. - Due date of fees. 
License fees required under this article shall be due and payable at the following times: 
(1)  Annual licenses on January 1 of each year. 
(2)  Semiannual licenses on January 1 and July 1 of each year. 
(3)  Quarterly licenses on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year. 
(4)  Monthly licenses on the first day of each and every month. 
(5)  Daily licenses in advance on each day. 
(Code 1957, § 12.16)  
Sec. 22-42. - Payment of license fee in advance in lawful money. 
All license fees required by this article shall be paid in advance to the city clerk in lawful money of the United States. 
(Code 1957, § 12.17)  
Sec. 22-43. - Amount of license fee for newly established businesses. 
The first license fee for any newly established business shall be ascertained and paid in the following manner: 
(1)  Except when the license required is for the whole or any fractional part of any license period or the fee is based upon gross receipts, gross production costs, gross costs of work done, or a number of barrels of oil pumped or produced, any applicant for a license for a proposed new business shall, at the time of obtaining the first license, pay the minimum fee required. 
(2)  In the cases expressly mentioned in subsection (1) of this section, the first license for newly established businesses shall be ascertained and paid in the following manner: The applicant shall at the time of making application pay the minimum amount required to be paid, the amount not to be prorated, and, at the expiration of the license period and before obtaining a license for any subsequent license period, such person shall file a written statement in the form of and setting forth the particulars required by the statement referred to in section 22-32 of this division and shall pay at such time such additional sums as may be found to be due based on the gross receipts, gross production costs, gross cost of work done, or oil produced or pumped during the license period then expiring. The license fees for the license period subsequent to the first license period shall be ascertained and paid in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.18)  
Sec. 22-44. - Acceptance of fee different from that due. 
No person charged with the enforcement of this article shall knowingly accept or receive any sum in payment of any fee due under any section of this article which is less than or greater than the amount actually required to be paid under this article. However, if a discrepancy exists between the amount of the fee paid and the amount of the fee due under this article resulting in an underpayment or overpayment of the fee in an amount of $1.00 or less, the city clerk may accept and record such underpayment or overpayment without other notification to the payor. 
(Code 1957, § 12.19)  
Sec. 22-45. - Deficiency determination of fee; notice. 
(a)  If the city clerk is not satisfied with any statement or return of the license fee or the amount of the fee made under this article, he may compute and determine the amount to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or return or upon the basis of any information in his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount of the fee due for a period. When a business is discontinued, a determination may be made at any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising out of such business, whether or not the determination is issued prior to a date the fee would otherwise be due. 
(b)  Notice shall be given in writing, either by personal service or by deposit of such writing in the United States mail, with postage prepaid, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business appearing on the face of the license issued to him or to such other address as he shall register with the city clerk for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.20)  
Sec. 22-46. - Delinquent fees. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided for in other sections of this article, all license fees required to be paid by this article shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on, before or within the following prescribed time: 
(1)  Annual licenses: On or before the close of business on the last day of the month following the month in which the fee became due. 
(2)  Semiannual licenses: On or before the last day of the month following the month in which the fee became due in each semiannual period. 
(3)  Quarterly licenses: On or before the close of business on the last day of the month in which the fee became due. 
(4)  Monthly licenses: On or before the close of business on the last day of the month in which the fee became due. 
(5)  Daily licenses: On or before the close of business of each day for which the fee is due. 
(6)  Fees arising when a business has been discontinued, dissolved or otherwise terminated: Within 45 days of the date of the termination of the business. 
(7)  Deficiency determinations: Within 30 days of the date of notification. 
(Code 1957, § 12.21)  
Sec. 22-47. - Penalty for failure to pay fee generally. 
Any person who fails to pay any fee required to be paid by this article, excepting deficiency determinations made by the city clerk under section 22-45 of this division, within the time required, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the fee in addition to the amount of the fee. 
(Code 1957, § 12.22)  
Sec. 22-48. - Penalty for continued delinquencies. 
Any person who fails to pay any delinquent license fee, excepting deficiency determinations made by the city clerk under section 22-45 of this division, on or before the last day of the fourth month following the date on which the fee first became delinquent shall pay a second penalty of ten percent of the amount of the fee in addition to the amount of the fee and the ten-percent penalty imposed by section 22-47. Additional penalties at a rate of ten percent per month will be imposed thereafter until such time as payment has been received. Penalties shall not exceed the amount of the original fee imposed. 
(Code 1957, § 12.23; Ord. No. 1574, § 2, 8-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-49. - Penalty for deficiency determination. 
Any person who fails to pay a deficiency determination within 30 days after the city clerk has notified him of the amount thereof in accordance with section 22-45 of this division shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such determination in addition to such amount. 
(Code 1957, § 12.24)  
Sec. 22-50. - Penalty for negligence. 
If the city clerk determines that the nonpayment of any license fee is due to negligence or willful disregard of this article, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the fee shall be added thereto, in addition to the penalties stated in sections 22-47 and 22-48 of this division. If the city clerk determines that any part of the deficiency of a deficiency determination is due to negligence or willful disregard of this article, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the deficiency determination shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in section 22-49. 
(Code 1957, § 12.25)  
Sec. 22-51. - Penalty for fraud. 
If the city clerk determines that the nonpayment of any license fee is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the fee shall be added thereto, in addition to the penalties stated in sections 22-47 and 22-48 of this division. If the city clerk determines that any part of the deficiency of a deficiency determination is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the deficiency determination shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in section 22-49. 
(Code 1957, § 12.26)  
Sec. 22-52. - Penalty for delinquency for newly established business. 
A newly established business for which a quarterly or monthly license is required, no penalty shall be imposed if the fee is paid within 30 days after commencement of operations; otherwise, penalties shall be imposed as for any other business. 
(Code 1957, § 12.27)  
Sec. 22-53. - Penalty becomes part of fee. 
Every penalty imposed under this article shall become a part of the fee required to be paid. 
(Code 1957, § 12.28)  
Sec. 22-54. - Interest on unpaid fees. 
(a)  In addition to any penalties imposed by this article, any person who fails to pay any fee required to be paid by this article shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the fee, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the fee first became delinquent until paid. Any person who is required to pay any deficiency determination shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the deficiency of the fee, exclusive of any penalty imposed, from the first day of delinquency following the period for which the fee or any portion thereof should have been paid until the date of payment. Interest shall run during any period of time for which an extension of time has been granted by the city clerk. Interest required by this section shall not be subject to waiver or compromise other than in accordance with section 22-44 of this division. 
(b)  For a newly established business for which a quarterly or monthly license is required, no interest shall accrue if the fee is paid within 30 days after the commencement of operation; otherwise, interest shall accrue as for any other business. 
(c)  All interest that accrues under this section shall become a part of the fee required to be paid under this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.29)  
Sec. 22-55. - Overpayment of fees. 
No refund or allowance for credit for the overpayment of a license, occupation or other revenue license fee imposed by this article shall be made except under the following procedure: 
(1)  No claim shall be allowed in whole or in part unless filed with the city clerk within a period of three years from the date of the overpayment for which a refund is claimed, and all such claims for refund of the amount of the overpayment of any of such fees must be filed with the city clerk on forms and in the manner prescribed by him. 
(2)  For the purpose of allowing overpayments as credit against underpayments of such fees, where such overpayment has been received by the city within the three years next preceding, the city clerk, when making determinations of the amount of fees due the city, shall make an allowance of credit for any such overpayment, and, where an overpayment has been made prior to an underpayment, no penalty shall apply upon the amount of the underpayment satisfied by the prior overpayment. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to bring into being or validate any claim for refund arising from a cause existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives if such claim, whether filed or not, was or would have been invalid because of the then-existing statutory term, and nothing in this section shall be deemed to validate, revive, restore or continue any such claim for refund filed and denied. 
(Code 1957, § 12.30)  
Sec. 22-56. - Compromise of claims for fees. 
The city clerk, with the written approval of the city attorney, is authorized to compromise any claim for a license fee imposed by this article amounting to less than $100.00. With the approval of the city attorney and the city council, the clerk may compromise any claim for such a fee amounting to $100.00 or more. 
(Code 1957, § 12.31)  
Sec. 22-57. - Suit to recover fee. 
Any sum required to be paid under this article shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person who engages in any business required to be licensed without first obtaining a license to do so shall be liable to an action by and in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of any such amount. 
(Code 1957, § 12.32)  
Sec. 22-58. - Period of validity. 
All licenses provided for by this article shall be valid only for the period for which issued. 
(Code 1957, § 12.33)  
Sec. 22-59. - Duplicates. 
Duplicate licenses may be issued by the city clerk to replace any license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon the applicant's filing an affidavit thereof attesting to such fact. 
(Code 1957, § 12.34)  
Sec. 22-60. - Transfer. 
No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable except as follows: 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application for transfer of a license within the current license period or on or before the last day of the second month of the license period next following the license period in which the successors of a business assume control or ownership, accompanied by such evidence of transfer of ownership or control as may be required by the city clerk, the city clerk shall transfer the license in the name of the transferee. Only the following shall be entitled to such transfer of license: 
a.  Duly qualified representatives of licensees regularly appointed by courts of competent jurisdiction, assignees for the benefit of creditors, spouses and the child or children of deceased licensees. 
b.  A new corporation organized and controlled by an individual or unincorporated licensee and which corporation has acquired the assets of and is continuing the established business previously owned and operated by such individual or unincorporated licensee. 
c.  An individual or a partnership where the individual or the members of the partnership were the stockholders of a corporation that owned and operated a business and which corporation has been dissolved and the individual or the partnership has acquired the assets of the corporation for the purpose of continuing the established business previously owned and operated by the incorporated licensee. 
d.  For a successor to a business holding a license under section 22-121 of this article covering premises where the use of a coin-operated phonograph or similar device is permitted, such license may be transferred to such successor notwithstanding other subsections of this section. 
(2)  Notwithstanding other sections of this article, where a new partnership consisting of the surviving members of a dissolved partnership or consisting of the surviving member of a dissolved partnership plus a new member or a new partnership consisting of the previous owner plus a partner is formed for the purpose of continuing an established business or where the surviving member of a dissolved partnership continues an established business, it may be deemed not to be a change of ownership, and the business may be continued under the license originally issued without transfer other than correction as to name, for which correction no fee shall be charged. 
(3)  When the amount of the license fee is based upon or measured by gross receipts or any other measure of quantity of business done during the preceding calendar license period, the fee due for the license period following the one during which the business was transferred pursuant to this section shall be computed upon the total gross receipts or other measure of business done during the entire preceding license period by both the transferor and the transferee of the license or when a license was continued due to the organization, reorganization or dissolution of a partnership, the fee due for the license period following the one in which the license was continued pursuant to this section shall be computed upon the total gross receipts or other measure of business done during the entire preceding license period by all the participants in ownership. 
(4)  A licensee may, upon application therefor, have his existing license amended by the city clerk so as to authorize the conduct of his business at a new location. 
(Code 1957, § 12.35)  
Sec. 22-61. - Cessation of business operation. 
Any person ceasing to operate a business in the city between license renewal periods shall file an affidavit of business gross receipts or other taxable measurement since the last renewal date, if the person has a valid license, and remit the required fees to cover the gross receipts or measurement. If the person does not have a valid license, that person shall be required to bring the license current prior to settling for the current period. 
(Code 1957, § 12.35.1)  
Sec. 22-62. - Display or possession of license; vehicle stickers; labels for coin-operated machines. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided by this article, all licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: 
(1)  Subject to other sections of this article, any licensee engaged in business at a fixed place of business shall keep the license issued posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is conducted. 
(2)  Any person engaged in business in the city, but not operating from a fixed place of business, shall keep the license issued to him upon his person at all times while engaging in such business. 
(3)  Any person operating or conducting any business, fees of which are computed upon the basis of the number of vehicles or pushcarts used in such business or the equipment necessary or convenient to the conduct of such business, shall keep the license issued for the equipment, apparatus, device or vehicle firmly affixed to such equipment, apparatus, device or vehicle in a license holder furnished by the city clerk. 
(4)  When the license fee is based upon the number of trucks, trailers, tractors or horse-drawn vehicles, the city clerk shall issue a separate license and license sticker for each such vehicle. The license shall be kept in a license holder as prescribed in subsection (3) of this section. The sticker issued by the city clerk shall be firmly affixed and kept upon the vehicle for which the license is issued and shall not be transferable. 
(5)  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to whom a vehicle sticker has been issued pursuant to this section to give away, sell or transfer any such vehicle sticker or permit its use by another. 
(6)  Each coin-operated machine, instrument or device, the operation of which is licensed under this article, shall have stamped upon it or affixed thereon the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner or operator thereof. 
(7)  The city clerk shall issue one stamp or label for each coin-operated machine, instrument or device, which shall be affixed thereto to indicate that the required fee has been paid for each current year. Whenever any machine is found available to the public for operation and the required license label or seal is not affixed thereon, the city clerk shall seal the coin opening or slot in a manner such as will render the coin device inoperative. It shall be unlawful for any person to break or permit to be broken any such seal without written authorization from the city clerk to do so. A service charge of $10.00 shall be paid to the city clerk by the owner or operator of any such machine so sealed for the removal of such seal. 
(Code 1957, § 12.36)  
Sec. 22-63. - Exhibition of license upon demand. 
The city clerk and all of his deputies shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge and at any time, any place of business required to be licensed by this article and to demand an exhibition of such license. Any person having any such license theretofore issued in his possession or under his control who fails to exhibit the license on demand shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1957, § 12.37)  
Sec. 22-64. - Unlawful business not authorized. 
(a)  No license issued under this article shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business or the provision or sale of any service or product that is illegal under the laws of the United States or the State of California, or any ordinance of the city. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, no business license shall be issued for any use of land, operation, or business in all planning areas, districts, or zones within the city that is in violation of local, state and/or federal law. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this article relating to the establishment and/or operation of any business or the provision or sale of any service or product relating to adult-use or medicinal "commercial cannabis activities," as such term is defined in subdivision (k) of California Business and Professions Code section 26001 and as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1957, § 12.38; Ord. No. U-1603, § 3, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 1604, § 1, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. U-1669, § 3, 9-18-2017)  
Sec. 22-65. - Exemption of charitable and religious activities; independent contractors. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to require the payment of a license fee to operate or carry on the functions of any charitable or religious institution, organization or association organized for charitable or religious purposes and conducted solely for such purposes nor the payment of any license fee to engage in teaching, preaching or otherwise disseminating any religious tenets or beliefs of any religion, nor shall a license fee be required for the conducting or staging of any concert, exhibition, lecture or entertainment where the net receipts, if any, derived therefrom are to be used solely for charitable or benevolent purposes within the city, and not for the purpose of private gain. No license fee shall be required to be paid by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association for the conducting or staging of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture when the net receipts derived from any of such are to be used wholly for the benefit of such organization and not for the purpose of the private gain of any individual. 
(b)  An independent contractor who, for profit or gain, undertakes to carry on any business or activity for the conduct or operation of which a license is required by any section of this article shall not be exempted from the payment of the fee established therefor because of the fact that he has paid or agreed to pay or turn over to any charitable institution or organization a portion of the receipts or profits of the business or activity, as a reward or recompense for the sponsorship of the business or activity, or for any other reason, and such a contractor shall not be deemed to be acting for charitable purposes only. 
(Code 1957, § 12.39)  
Sec. 22-66. - Application for exemption, investigation. 
Any applicant for a license who claims exemption from the payment of the license fee, pursuant to section 22-65, shall make an application for such exemption upon a form furnished by the city clerk. The application shall be forwarded to the city council who shall make or cause to be made such investigation of the applicant and the business or activity carried on or proposed to be carried on as may be necessary to determine whether or not such business or activity is in fact conducted for charitable purposes only and whether the proceeds thereof are to be used for the purposes mentioned in section 22-65. The council shall endorse its finding upon the application and return the application to the clerk. If the finding is to the effect that the business or activity is in fact carried on or proposed to be carried on for charitable purposes only, and that the proceeds thereof are to be used for the purposes mentioned in section 22-65, the clerk shall issue the license to the applicant without the payment of the license fee, provided the applicant has complied with all other applicable sections of this article. The license so issued shall show on its face that it was issued without fee and the reason therefor. If the finding is otherwise, the clerk shall not issue the license unless the regular fee therefor is first paid, as in any other case. 
(Code 1957, § 12.40)  
Sec. 22-67. - Burden on interstate commerce. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring a license or paying of a license fee for the doing of any act which would constitute an unlawful burden upon or an unlawful interference with interstate or foreign commerce or which would be in violation of the Constitution or the laws of the United States or of the state. 
(Code 1957, § 12.41)  
Sec. 22-68. - Enforcement generally. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk and he is directed to enforce each and all of the sections of this article, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this article as may, from time to time, be required by the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 12.42)  
Sec. 22-69. - Examination of licensees' and applicants' books and records. 
The city clerk and any of his deputies are authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for a license as may be necessary, in the judgment of the city clerk, to ascertain the correct amount of the license fee due under this article. All licensees, applicants for licenses and persons engaged in business are required to permit an examination of such books and records for such purpose. 
(Code 1957, § 12.43)  
Sec. 22-70. - Use and disclosure of information obtained from examination or audit. 
(a)  Any information or data obtained from any examination or audit authorized by this article or from any statement required by this article shall be used for the purpose of enforcing this article and no other purpose. It shall be unlawful for any city officer or employee to make known in any manner whatever any of the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records or equipment of any person from whom such information has been obtained for the purpose of administering and enforcing this article or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. However, any such information may be given and any such return or books may be shown to another city official or employee for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any section of this article. 
(b)  The city clerk may, in writing, authorize the examination of the returns by federal or state officers or employees or by the tax officers of any other city, if a reciprocal arrangement exists. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors of taxpayers, if directly interested, may, at the option of the city clerk and with the approval of the city attorney, be given information concerning the particular taxpayers they respectively represent as to the items included in the measure and amounts of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected with interest and penalties. 
(Code 1957, § 12.44)  
Sec. 22-71. - Inspection of places of business. 
The city clerk, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him by this article and acting through his deputies, shall examine all places of business in the city to ascertain whether or not there is compliance with this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.45)  
Sec. 22-72. - Complaint against violators. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk and each of his deputies to cause a complaint to be filed against any person found to be a violator of any of the sections of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.46)  
Sec. 22-73. - Remedies cumulative. 
The conviction and punishment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license fee due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the sections of this article. All remedies prescribed shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.47)  
Sec. 22-74. - Rules and regulations of city clerk. 
The city clerk is authorized to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to aid or assist in the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.48)  
Sec. 22-75. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue any license under this article may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. 
(Code 1957, § 12.49)  
Secs. 22-76—22-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Scope. 
Subject to all of the sections of division 1 of this article, a license is required to be obtained by every person engaged in any of the businesses, trades, callings or professions specified in this division, and for such license a fee is imposed in the amount prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 12.50)  
Sec. 22-102. - Amusement devices or machines. 
(a)  For every person who lets or permits, upon premises over which he has control, the use or operation of any amusement device, machine, video game, pinball machine or apparatus, except such machines, devices, games or apparatus as are described and referred to in section 22-110, 22-121 or 22-149 of this division, and the operation or use of which results from or is permitted or allowed by the insertion of any coin, slug or token of value into the machine, device, game or apparatus or any device attached thereto or by the payment of any fee, the fee shall be $150.00 per machine per year or fractional part thereof for each such premises or location where the use of any such machine, device, game or apparatus is let or permitted, whether or not such person is the owner of such machine, device, game or apparatus. 
(b)  The term "person" as used in this section shall include the following: 
(1)  Any owner of any such machine, device, apparatus, game, table or board. 
(2)  The person in whose place of business any such machine, device, apparatus, game, table or board is placed for use by the public. 
(3)  Any person having control over such machine, equipment or device, game, table or board. 
However, the payment of any such fee or other license fee therefor under any other section of this article by any person enumerated in subsection (b)(1), (2) or (3) of this section shall be deemed compliance with this section. 
(c)  Each such apparatus, machine, device, pin marble game, table or board of the kind or character referred to in this section shall have stamped upon the apparatus, machine, device, pin marble game, table or board a serial number to identify such machine, and any license issued pursuant to this section shall be issued for a particular machine, apparatus, device or any pin marble game, table or board. Such license shall be affixed upon the machine for which it was issued in a conspicuous place and shall remain upon such machine, device, apparatus, pin marble game, table or board until a new and different license is issued for such machine, device, apparatus, pin marble game, table or board. No license shall be transferable to any person or from one machine, apparatus or device to another. 
(Code 1957, § 12.51) 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10.  
Sec. 22-103. - Amusement parks. 
Every person operating an amusement park within any grounds, garden or enclosure wherein shows, exhibitions or amusements of any character are presented, shown or staged shall pay a license fee of $775.00 per quarter. 
(Code 1957, § 12.52) 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10.  
Sec. 22-104. - Amusement rides. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of conducting or operating a Ferris wheel, scenic railway, or any ride by boat or car for the amusement of the public, any merry-go-round, swing, or similar device shall pay a license fee of $120.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the holder of a license authorizing the conduct of an amusement park licensed under other sections of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.53) 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10.  
Sec. 22-105. - Arcades. 
Every person who lets or permits, upon premises over which he has control, an arcade wherein five or more coin-operated or slug-operated amusement machines are maintained or one or more coin-operated or slug-operated still or motion picture machines, projectors or similar contrivances are maintained and which are not otherwise specifically licensed or specifically exempted from a license by any other section of this article shall pay a license fee of $300.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.53.1)  
Sec. 22-106. - Auctioneers and auction houses. 
Every individual person who, as an employee or as an independent contractor, engages in the business of auctioneer shall pay a license fee of $240.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.54)  
Sec. 22-107. - Automobile parking lot or storage place. 
The license fee for an open air automobile parking place, storage lot or storage place where motor vehicles are parked or stored and when a charge is made directly or indirectly for such parking or storage shall be $30.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.55) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90.  
Sec. 22-108. - Automobile rentals. 
Any person engaged in the business of letting the use of any passenger automobile or motor-propelled vehicle for the carriage of persons, to be driven by and to be routed under the direction of the person hiring the automobile or vehicle, shall pay a license fee of $30.00 per year per vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 12.56)  
Sec. 22-109. - Automobile wrecking. 
Every person engaged in the business of automobile wrecking shall pay a license fee of $150.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.57)  
Sec. 22-110. - Bowling alleys; pingpong courts; skeeball machines, alleys or courts; shuffleboard tables or courts; pool or billiard tables. 
(a)  Every person operating any bowling alley; pingpong court; skeeball machine, alley or court; or any shuffleboard table or court or pool or billiard table having less than 24½ square feet of playing surface or who, in the conduct of any business, uses, operates or maintains any such alley, court, table or machine or rents or lets the use of any such alley, court, table or machine for the purpose of being used in playing any of such games and which is not otherwise licensed or specifically exempted from license by any other section of this article shall pay a fee of $25.00 per year or fractional part thereof for each such alley, court, table or machine. However, the provisions of this section as to pool or billiard tables shall apply only where there is only one such table in any premises and where the operation and maintenance thereof is not the principal activity of the premises where such a table is located. 
(b)  Nothing in this section or this article shall require the payment of a fee for engaging in the activities licensed in this section when engaged in by a bona fide nonprofit social club which is organized for social purposes and not for profit and which maintains or operates the facilities required for the members of the club as incidental to the purpose of the club and not as a primary purpose thereof 
(Code 1957, § 12.58)  
Sec. 22-111. - Boxing (amateur) or wrestling. 
Any person promoting or staging any boxing (amateur) or wrestling event or exhibition in any structure or arena shall pay a license fee of $25.00 for each such exhibition or contest. 
(Code 1957, § 12.59)  
Sec. 22-112. - Buses. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base weeks means the third week in January, the third week in April, the second week in July, and the first week in October; provided, however, that the city clerk may, from time to time, order that there be substituted in lieu of any of the four weeks designated in this definition the week next preceding or next succeeding such designated week. If any such order by the clerk occurs, the operator shall be notified thereof at least ten days prior to the first day of the substituted week. 
Bus means and includes any motorbus, motorcoach, trolley bus, omnibus, passenger stage, or similar vehicle using either a self-contained source of power or power obtained from another source such as an overhead trolley system, not operated upon fixed tracks or rails, and primarily designed for the transportation of more than seven passengers, excluding the driver. 
Bus revenue mile means the operation, for one mile, of a bus then and there made available for use as a common carrier in the transportation of persons or property for hire. 
Gross receipts means the same as that set forth in section 22-27 of this article and includes the total gross receipts of the operator, together with the full cash value of any consideration received in a form other than cash, from the following: 
(1)  The transportation of persons and property by bus, as a common carrier, and from advertising and all other privileges or services in, on or by buses while being so operated, including receipts from the sale of tokens, tickets and passes, and from all contracts, by the terms of which the operator agrees to furnish transportation by bus, as a common carrier, whether or not such transportation is actually furnished; and 
(2)  The rental, of any bus operated in this city as a common carrier, or of property operated, installed or maintained in any street in the city for use in connection with the operation of any bus as a common carrier, or from permitting others to use or occupy any part thereof, and from allowing others any privilege whatsoever with respect thereto; provided, however, that for any operator transporting passengers in areas outside this city, only that proportion of subsection (1) of this definition shall be included, which number of bus revenue miles operated in this city in the last four consecutive base weeks, the latest of which terminates within the next preceding license period bears to the total number of bus revenue miles operated in such base weeks. 
Operator means any person engaging in business, either directly or indirectly, as a common carrier in the transportation of persons by bus upon any street in this city. 
Week means a Sunday and the next six succeeding days. 
(b)  Transporting. Every person engaged in the business of transporting persons as a common carrier for hire, by bus, upon or over any street in this city, which business includes the loading or discharging of passengers on the city streets, shall pay for each calendar year or portion thereof or, if required by the city clerk, for each calendar quarter or portion thereof, a sum equal to 2½ percent of the gross receipts of the next preceding license period, but not less than $25.00 per year or $6.25 per quarter, as the case may be. 
(c)  Exemption. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any municipal corporation or other political entity. 
(2)  The gross receipts derived from or the bus revenue miles traveled by any bus which is being operated solely pursuant to any license issued under any other section of this article. 
(3)  The business of operating buses in this city pursuant to a franchise granted by city ordinance, which franchise provides for payment to the city of not less than 2½ percent of the gross receipts. The exemption extended by this subsection shall not apply to all such franchise operations commencing January 1, 1955. 
(Code 1957, § 12.60)  
Sec. 22-113. - Buying and selling junk, rubbish and waste materials from vehicles. 
Any person collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in scrap metal, rags, papers, junk, rubbish, waste material or refuse matter of any kind, who does not have a fixed place of business in the city, shall pay a license fee of $200.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.61)  
Sec. 22-114. - Buying and selling rags, paper or junk at fixed place of business; salvage and conversion plant operation. 
(a)  Any person buying, selling, collecting or otherwise dealing in used or secondhand rags or paper, at a fixed place of business in the city, shall pay a license fee of $200.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(b)  The fee for persons buying, selling, collecting or otherwise dealing in articles commonly known or referred to as junk, excepting only rags or paper, and including, but not limited to, old or secondhand sacks, cans, bottles or metals, at a fixed place of business in the city, shall be $240.00 per year or fractional part thereof. However, a person licensed under this subsection may deal in the commodities or materials mentioned in subsection (a) of this section without obtaining an additional license under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any person carrying on a salvage and conversion plant operation, including the manufacture and sale of byproducts, shall pay a license fee of $1,000.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.62)  
Sec. 22-115. - Card rooms or social card clubs. 
Every person engaged in the operation, maintenance or conducting of a card room or social card club, as defined by section 10-106, shall pay a license fee of $500.00 per quarter or any portion thereof, plus an additional $150.00 per quarter or any portion thereof for each playing table or unit used in the licensed premises, payable quarterly in advance. 
(Code 1957, § 12.125)  
Sec. 22-116. - Carnivals. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means any fair, festival, bazaar, entertainment, exhibition, amusement, or like activity, whether having concessions or not or whether or not at which, in conjunction with which, or adjacent to which a ride, such as a merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, swing, miniature train, or any other similar device, is operated. 
Concession means any booth, stand or space at which any game of skill or amusement is offered and in which the public is permitted or invited to participate for a charge. 
Person operating and conducting the ride device means the person operating and conducting the carnival. However, if the ride device operated at the carnival or such ride device together with equipment for operating a concession has been leased, furnished or otherwise supplied to any person or organization for operation by such person or organization in connection with or adjacent to the carnival, the lessor or supplier of such device or of such device and such equipment is defined to be the person operating or conducting the carnival, and he shall pay the license fee provided in this section. If there is no ride device operated at, adjacent to, or in conjunction with the carnival, the person operating or conducting the games of skill and chance is defined to be the person operating and conducting the carnival. If the games operated at the carnival or such games together with the equipment for operating a concession have been leased, furnished or otherwise supplied to any person or organization for operation by such person or organization in connection with or adjacent to the carnival, the lessor or supplier of such games or such games and such equipment is defined to be the person operating or conducting the carnival, and he shall pay the license fee provided in this section. If there is more than one such operator or conductor, each shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the license fee. 
(b)  License fee. Any person conducting or operating any carnival shall pay a license fee of $150.00 for the first day and $100.00 for each additional day. 
(c)  Exemption. If any person otherwise exempt from license fees under this section by virtue of section 22-65 of this article uses in connection with any such carnival any ride such as a merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, swing, miniature train, or any other similar device for which any consideration of any kind, in any form, is paid, whether by rental, percentage of the gross receipts, any share of the profit, or otherwise, the license fees provided in this section shall be paid, notwithstanding section 22-65 of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12.63) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Sec. 22-117. - Cesspool cleaners or drainers. 
Every person engaged in the business of pumping, cleaning or draining of cesspools shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per year for each vehicle used in such business. 
(Code 1957, § 12.64)  
Sec. 22-118. - Check cashers. 
Every person cashing payroll checks for a fee or charge and every person whose business consists, in whole or in part, of cashing checks for others for a fee or charge shall pay a license fee of $120.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.65)  
Sec. 22-119. - Christmas tree dealers. 
Any person selling or offering for sale Christmas trees at retail and not from a fixed place of business dealing in other commodities and previously licensed under subsection 22-142(2) of this division shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per quarter or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.66)  
Sec. 22-120. - Circuses and similar exhibitions. 
The license fee for conducting a circus or similar exhibition shall be $250.00 per day. 
(Code 1957, § 12.67)  
Sec. 22-121. - Coin-operated phonographs and music machines. 
(a)  Every person who lets or permits, upon premises over which he has control, the use of any coin-operated phonograph, television instrument, radio or other device for the playing or furnishing of music or other programs, the operation of which results from the insertion of a coin, slug or token of value, whether placed or inserted directly into such machine or into a device causing its operation, and which is not otherwise licensed or specifically exempted from a license by any other section of this article, the license fee shall be $25.00 per year or fraction thereof for each such premises or location where the use of any such machine or device is permitted, whether or not such person is the owner of such machine or device. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the installation of any such device in any room used solely for dwelling purposes and installed for the use of the occupants thereof. However, the maintenance or operation of any such coin-operated machine installed for use by occupants of dwelling quarters, when maintained or operated for profit or gain, shall be subject to a license under section 22-122 of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 12.68)  
Sec. 22-122. - Coin-operated scales and service machines. 
(a)  Every person maintaining or operating any coin-operated scales, weighing device, baggage-checking device, radio or any other coin-operated machine or device, whether or not of the same general character as those specifically enumerated in this subsection, which renders any service or furnishes any program or information in return for a coin or token of value, installed or maintained for profit or gain, the operation of which machine or device is not otherwise specifically licensed or specifically exempted from a license under any other section of this article, shall pay a license fee in the sum of $6.00 per machine per year or fractional part thereof for machines requiring $0.05 or more for the operation thereof, and $3.00 per machine per year or fractional part thereof for machines requiring less than $0.05 to operate. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the payment of any license fee under this section for the operation of any automatic telephone or any coin box for the receipt of fares on any carrier or any other coin-receiving device, the use of which is merely incidental to the conduct of another business operating under any franchise or under any occupational license expressly granted or issued therefor under any other section of this Code or city ordinances or under any other section of this article. 
(c)  Every person who has a business interest in the maintenance of any machine, the operation of which is subject to license under this section, and who receives the profit of any share thereof from its operation or who, for profit or gain, permits its maintenance in his place of business or who maintains the machine or lets its use in another's place of business for either a fixed or variable charge or recompense shall be deemed to be in the business of operating the machine and shall be liable for the payment of the license fee established in this section. Where two or more persons are interested financially in the maintenance or operation of any such machine, the payment of the license fee imposed by any one of them shall constitute full compliance with this section. 
(d)  The city clerk shall issue one stamp or label for each machine operated by any licensee, which shall be affixed thereto to indicate that the required fee has been paid for each current year. The clerk shall seal the coin opening or slot on each machine not bearing such a label after the penalty for nonpayment of the fee has accrued under this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to break any seal affixed pursuant to this subsection without written authorization to do so issued by the clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 12.69)  
Sec. 22-123. - Cold storage plants. 
The license fee for conducting a cold storage warehouse or refrigerating plant for the purpose of storing fruits, vegetables, meat, fish, eggs or dairy products, shall be $72.00 per year, plus $6.00 per year for each 1,000 square feet or fractional part thereof of floor area of such warehouse or plant in excess of 2,500 square feet. 
(Code 1957, § 12.70)  
Sec. 22-124. - Collection agencies. 
(a)  The license fee for conducting a collection agency shall be $75.00 per year for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $3.00 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part of such gross receipts. 
(b)  In computing the license fee imposed by this section, there shall be deducted from gross receipts the amount received as the result of collections made outside the state. 
(Code 1957, § 12.71)  
Sec. 22-125. - Commission merchants or brokers. 
Every commission merchant or broker shall pay a license fee of $15.00 per year for the first $5,000.00 or less of gross receipts of such business, plus $3.00 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.72)  
Sec. 22-126. - Contractors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractor means any person, except an owner, who contracts for a project with another person who is licensed by the state as a contractor or architect or registered civil engineer acting solely in his professional capacity, who, in any capacity other than as an employee of another with wages as the sole compensation, undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to or does himself or by or through others construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding, other structures or works in connection therewith. 
Gross receipts has the meaning as that set forth in section 22-27 of this article and also includes the total cost of the job or project covered by the contract to which the contractor is a party, without deduction for subcontracts, and irrespective of whether the contract is one on a fixed price or on a cost-plus basis or one under the terms of which the contractor acts as agent for the owner. The term "gross receipts," however, includes only receipts from jobs or projects located within the city limits. 
(b)  Fee. Every person engaged in business as a contractor shall pay a license fee in the sum of $50.00 per year for the first $12,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $0.96 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.73)  
Sec. 22-127. - Dancehalls. 
The license fee required to be paid under this article for conducting any public dancehall, shall be based upon the square-foot area of the dance floor as follows: 
(1)  For 1,000 square feet or less of dance floor area in such dancehall, $125.00 per year. 
(2)  Over 1,000 square feet of dance floor area in such dancehall, $250.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.74)  
Sec. 22-128. - Dancing clubs. 
Any person conducting a dancing club shall pay $187.50 per year as a license fee. 
(Code 1957, § 12.75)  
Sec. 22-129. - Distributors of advertising matter. 
Every person engaged in the business of distributing advertising samples, handbills, dodgers or advertising matter of any kind and employing five persons or less shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per year or, at his option, $2.50 per day per person employed. If such person employs more than five persons, the fee shall be $100.00 per year or, at his option, $2.50 per day per person employed. 
(Code 1957, § 12.76) 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6.  
Sec. 22-130. - Drilling, cleaning or pulling pipe from wells. 
Any person drilling water wells, oil wells or test wells by the use of any portable drilling rig; engaging in the business of cleaning out oil wells or water wells; or in the business of pulling casing, tubing, oil string drill pipes or sucker rods therefrom shall pay a license fee of $37.50 per quarter for each portable rig used in such business. 
(Code 1957, § 12.77)  
Sec. 22-131. - Exhibitions, lectures, shows and entertainments. 
Every person conducting, operating or presenting any lecture, entertainment, show or exhibition not otherwise required to pay a license fee therefor under other sections of this division, where an admission fee is charged, received or collected or where no admission fee is charged, received or collected but donations of any kind or character are solicited or accepted, the fee shall be $150.00 per year or fractional part thereof or, at his option, which may not be revoked as to any period for which a fee has been paid, $15.00 per day. However, if no admission fee is charged, received or collected and no donations of any kind or character are solicited or accepted or if the person conducting, operating or presenting the lecture, entertainment, show or exhibition charged a fee under this section is a person mentioned in subsection 22-142(8) of this division, no fee shall be required to be paid by such person. 
(Code 1957, § 12.78)  
Sec. 22-132. - Fire, closing-out and wrecking sales. 
Every person conducting a fire sale, closing-out sale or wrecking sale shall pay a license fee of $200.00 per quarter. However, the license fee specified in this section shall not be applicable to a bona fide merchant licensed as such who is closing his business and selling out merchandise then on hand or who has had a fire and is selling only the merchandise damaged in such fire. 
(Code 1957, § 12.79)  
Sec. 22-133. - Fortunetellers. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "fortunetelling" shall mean and include astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life-reading, fortunetelling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, mediumship, spirit photography, spirit writing, spirit voices, spirit materialization, etherealization, prophecy, augury, divination, magic, necromancy, fortunetelling by handwriting analysis, or other similar business or act. 
(b)  Fee. Every person engaged in the business of fortunetelling shall pay a license fee of $300.00 per year or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.130)  
Sec. 22-134. - Golf courses, miniature golf courses and driving or archery ranges. 
The license fee for a golf course, miniature golf course, golf practice driving range or archery range shall be $150.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.80)  
Sec. 22-135. - Hotels, roominghouses or residential rentals. 
Every person engaged in the business of conducting or operating a hotel, roominghouse, boardinghouse, apartment house, lodginghouse, duplex, triplex, house court or bungalow court and every person engaged in the business of renting or letting rooms, apartments or other accommodations for dwelling, sleeping or lodging in any such place or engaged in the business of renting or letting rooms, apartments or other accommodations for dwelling, sleeping or lodging in a single-family dwelling shall pay for each rental unit a license fee of $25.00 per year or fractional part thereof for the first $15,000.00 or less derived from such rental unit, plus $3.00 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof in excess of $15,000.00. However, one such rental unit may be exempt from the fee if the owner resides in the exempted rental unit. 
(Code 1957, § 12.81)  
Sec. 22-136. - Ice dealers. 
Every person selling ice at retail, the delivery of which is made by the use of any motor vehicle or other transportation device, shall pay a license fee of $40.00 per year or fractional part thereof for each such motor vehicle or other transportation device. 
(Code 1957, § 12.82)  
Sec. 22-137. - Landscape gardeners. 
Every person engaged in the business of landscape gardening shall pay a license fee of $25.00 per year for the first $10,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $1.00 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.128)  
Sec. 22-138. - Laundries, cleaning and dyeing; linen supply; agent or collector. 
Every person engaged in the business of washing, ironing, drying, cleaning, dyeing, sizing, blocking or pressing any clothing, wearing apparel, garment, linen, fabric, or similar materials or similar article of personal property, whether accomplished by hand, machine or any coin-operated machine operated by such person, his employee or any customer, or furnishing or letting the use of any towels, linens, aprons, bedding, napkins, table covers, or any other article of personal property of a similar nature or collecting or delivering any such article as an agency or otherwise, for a fee or charge, the license fee shall be $30.00 per year or fractional part thereof for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $1.20 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof in excess of $25,000.00. A person engaged in a business subject to a fee under this section who, at the same location, is also engaged in any business subject to a fee under subsection 22-142(2) of this division or, at the same location, makes minor alterations or repairs to the clothing, wearing apparel, garments, linens, fabrics, or similar material being washed, ironed, dried, cleaned, dyed, sized, blocked or pressed, in lieu of paying a separate business fee and obtaining separate registration certificates under this Code for the conduct of each such business may combine the gross receipts of all such businesses at that location and, upon the basis of that computation, pay a combined business fee and obtain a single registration certificate under this section for all businesses at that location. 
(Code 1957, § 12.83)  
Sec. 22-139. - Leasing or renting tangible personal property. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "tangible personal property" shall mean personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched, or which is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
(b)  Fees. Any person leasing or renting any tangible personal property not specifically licensed by other sections of this article shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per year or fractional part thereof for the first $12,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $2.50 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof, provided that gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $1.25 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts. 
(c)  Exemption. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the inclusion of the amount received for the leasing or renting of tangible personal property, the entire use of which is made wholly outside the state. 
(Code 1957, § 12.84)  
Sec. 22-140. - Lunch or refreshment wagons. 
Any person operating any lunch or refreshment wagon in or upon any public street or upon any unenclosed area, vacant lot or parcel of land shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.85)  
Sec. 22-141. - Massage parlors. 
Every person engaged in the business of or holding himself out to the public as engaged in the business of conducting a massage parlor, where facial massage, fomentations, massage, electric or magnetic treatment, or alcohol rubs are administered or given shall pay a license fee of $200.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.86)  
Sec. 22-142. - Miscellaneous businesses. 
Every person transacting, engaging in, conducting, operating and carrying on the business, trade, calling or professions enumerated in this section shall pay a license fee as follows: 
(1)  Wholesalers; exemption of blind persons. Every person manufacturing and selling any goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale or selling any goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale and not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this article shall pay, for each calendar year or portion thereof, a license fee of $100.00 for the first $50,000.00 or less of gross receipts and, in addition thereto, $0.96 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof in excess of $50,000.00. Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $0.48 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts, and blind persons need not include the first $20,000.00 of gross receipts in the computation of the amount of the fee due under this subsection, nor shall they be required to pay the minimum fee of $100.00. This exemption shall not subject blind persons to subsection (5) of this section. 
The term "blind person," within the meaning of this subsection, shall mean a person having not more than ten percent visual acuity in the better eye, with correction. Such blindness shall be certified by a duly licensed and practicing physician, skilled in the diseases of the eye, or by a duly licensed and practicing optometrist or by the bureau of vocational rehabilitation of the department of education of the state, and the exemption provided by this subsection shall not apply until a certificate as to such blindness shall be furnished the city clerk. 
For the purpose of this subsection, the term "wholesale sale" or "sale at wholesale" means a sale of goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of resale in the regular course of business. 
(2)  Retailers; exemption of blind persons. Every person manufacturing and selling any goods, wares or merchandise at retail or selling any goods, wares or merchandise at retail and not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this article shall pay, for each calendar year or portion thereof, a license fee of $50.00 for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts and, in addition thereto, $1.20 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof in excess of $25,000.00. Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $0.60 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts, provided that blind persons need not include the first $20,000.00 of gross receipts in the computation of the amount of the fee due nor shall they be required to pay the minimum fee of $50.00. This exemption shall not subject blind persons to subsections (5) and (6) of this section. 
The term "blind person," within the meaning of this subsection, shall mean a person having not more than ten percent visual acuity in the better eye, with correction. Such blindness shall be certified by a duly licensed and practicing physician, skilled in the diseases of the eye, or by a duly licensed and practicing optometrist, or by the bureau of vocational rehabilitation of the department of education of the state, and the exemption provided by this subsection shall not apply until a certificate as to such blindness shall be furnished to the city clerk. 
For the purpose of this subsection, the term "retail sale" or "sale at retail" means a sale of goods, wares or merchandise for any purpose other than resale in the regular course of business. 
(3)  Wholesalers and retailers. When a person is engaged in the business of manufacturing and selling at wholesale and also at retail or is selling at wholesale and also at retail but not manufacturing, and not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this article, separate statements showing the amount of the wholesale and retail business, respectively, of any such business shall be fixed, and separate licenses based upon the wholesale portion of such business and retail portion of such business must be obtained. The fees fixed for such license for the wholesale part of such business are such as are prescribed for wholesale businesses referred to in subsection (1) of this section, and the fees prescribed for the retail part of any such businesses are such as are prescribed for the retail businesses mentioned in subsection (2) of this section. If such separate statements are not filed or if sufficient records have not been kept which will enable the wholesale part and the retail part of such business to be ascertained, the retail rates prescribed by subsection (2) of this section shall be paid, and all business done by any such person, whether wholesale or retail, shall, for the purpose of this article, be considered as retail business. 
(4)  Sales outside state. Nothing in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this section shall be construed to require the inclusion in the computation of the amount of the fee due thereunder of the gross receipts of the sales of goods which are shipped to the purchasers of such goods by the seller to points outside of the state. 
(5)  Professions. Every person engaged in any profession as an independent contractor and not as an employee of another, and not specifically licensed by other sections of this article, shall pay a license fee of $100.00 per calendar year or fractional part thereof for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts and, in addition thereto, $2.40 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof of gross receipts in excess of $25,000.00. Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $1.20 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts. 
(6)  Occupations. Every person engaged in any trade, calling, occupation, vocation or other means of livelihood as an independent contractor and not as an employee of another, and not specifically licensed by other sections of this article, shall pay a license fee of $75.00 per calendar year or fractional part thereof for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts and, in addition thereto, $2.40 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof of gross receipts in excess of $25,000.00. Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $1.20 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts. 
(7)  Persons engaged in more than one business. A person engaged in more than one trade, calling, occupation, vocation, profession, or other means of livelihood embraced within this section shall consolidate all gross receipts and shall be issued one license covering all such activities. Any person engaged in any activities embraced within this section, in addition to activities covered by any other section of this article, shall obtain separate licenses for the activities covered by such other sections. 
(8)  Receipts excluded from gross receipts. As used in this section, the term "gross receipts" does not include the following: 
a.  Receipts from a trade, calling, occupation, vocation, profession, or other means of livelihood which this city is prohibited from receiving a fee for under the Constitution or laws of the United States or under the constitution or laws of the state. 
b.  Receipts of community chests, funds, foundations or corporations organized and operated for religious, hospital or charitable purposes, not conducted for profit and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
c.  Receipts of nonprofit educational institutions of collegiate grade, defined to mean institutions incorporated as colleges or seminaries under state laws, which require for regular admission the completion of a four-year high school course or its equivalent and which confer upon their graduates at least one academic or professional degree, based on a course of at least four years in liberal arts and sciences or on a course of at least three years in professional studies such as law, theology, education, medicine, pharmacy, architecture, fine arts, commerce or journalism; receipts of nonprofit secondary schools which are duly accredited by the University of California; and receipts of nonprofit elementary full-time day schools in which instruction is given in the first to the eighth grades, inclusive, in the several branches of studies required to be taught in the public schools of the state. 
d.  Receipts of Rotary, Kiwanis and Lions Clubs; nonprofit automobile clubs; chambers of commerce and other community service organizations; also receipts of trade associations such as Merchants and Plumbers Association, Merchants and Manufacturers Association, and labor organizations. 
e.  Receipts of: 
1.  Railroad companies, including street railways, defined to include interurban electric railways; 
2.  Sleeping car, dining car, drawing-room car and palace car companies; refrigerator, oil, stock, fruit and other car companies operating upon the railroads in this city; 
3.  Companies doing express business on any railroad, steamboat, vessel or stage in this city; 
4.  Telegraph companies; and 
5.  Companies engaged in the transmission or sale of gas or electricity. 
f.  Receipts of persons acting as agents or brokers whose compensation is fixed on a commission or fee basis, other than such commission or fee. 
g.  Receipts from the publication and sale of newspapers, magazines and other periodicals regularly issued at average intervals not exceeding three months. 
(9)  Allocation of receipts. When the gross receipts are derived from or attributable to sources both within and without the city, the license fee imposed by this section shall be measured by the gross receipts derived from or attributable to sources within the city. Such gross receipts shall be determined by an allocation upon the basis of payroll, value and situs of tangible property; general expenses; or by reference to any of these or other factors or by such other method of allocation as is fairly calculated to determine the gross receipts derived from or attributable to sources within this city. Gross receipts attributable to isolated or occasional transactions at places outside the city but within the state, where the licensee is not engaged in business, shall be considered as gross receipts derived from or attributable to sources within this city. Gross receipts derived from or attributable to sources within this city include: (i) gross receipts from tangible or intangible property located or having situs in this city and (ii) when not contrary to law, gross receipts from any activities carried on in this city regardless of whether carried on in interstate, intrastate or foreign commerce. 
Allocation formulas designed to carry into effect the purpose of this subsection shall be adopted by the city clerk by rules and regulations. The city clerk is authorized, in the application to individual cases of such rules and regulations and the formulas therein contained, to make such modifications in formulas as may be necessary to carry out the intent of this subsection. 
If the city clerk reallocates gross receipts upon his examination of any return, he shall, upon the written request of the licensee, disclose to him the basis upon which the reallocation has been made. 
(Code 1957, § 12.87)  
Sec. 22-143. - Moneylenders. 
(a)  Fees. Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the license fee for every person engaged in the business of loaning money, advancing credit, or loaning credit or arranging for the loan of money or the advancing of credit or loaning of credit for and on his own behalf or on behalf of any other person as principal, agent or broker, whether security of any kind is taken for such loan or advance or not, or purchasing or discounting or arranging for the purchase or discounting of any obligation of money due or to become due or any evidence of any obligation of money due or to become due, whether or not such obligation or evidence is secured or guaranteed and whether the person so purchasing or arranging for the purchase of such items acts as principal, agent or broker, shall be $1,000.00 per year for each person. Where any such loan is secured by jewelry only, the license fee shall be $150.00 per year. 
(b)  Exemptions. Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the business of loaning money, advancing credit, or arranging for the loan of money or the advancing of credit as principal or agent, where the obligation to repay the money loaned or debt incurred or to compensate for the advancement of credit is secured by a lien on real property or some interest in real property, nor shall this section apply to the business of purchasing, either as principal or agent, any debt or evidence of debts secured by any lien upon real property, nor shall this section apply to any transaction involving the purchase or sale of real property. 
(Code 1957, § 12.88)  
Sec. 22-144. - Movie takers and producers generally. 
(a)  Every person taking or producing one or more moving or motion pictures or photoplays and having no fixed place of business in the city shall pay a daily fee as follows: 
(1)  For the first day, $300.00. 
(2)  For every additional day of the same shoot, $100.00. 
(3)  Still photography, $100.00 per day. 
(b)  Additional fees may be charged for rental of city property and/or use of city personnel. 
(c)  As defined in section 22-451 of chapter 22 of the San Fernando Municipal Code, charitable films, city produced public access films, family videos, news reporters, student films, and studios are exempt from the fee required by this section. 
(Code 1957, § 12.89; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 1579, § 1, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-145. - Museums. 
(a)  The license fee for a person conducting a museum where curiosities or objects of interest connected with science, art or literature are exhibited or displayed and a fee is charged for admission thereto or any donation or anything of value is solicited or accepted or a person conducting any museum of anatomy, whether or not a fee is charged for admission, shall be $100.00 per year or fractional part thereof. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to apply to arcades, circuses, exhibitions or amusement parks licensed under other sections of this article. 
(c)  If any goods, wares or merchandise are sold or offered for sale or if any article or commodity is sold or offered for sale in any such museum to which no admission fee is charged or if such museum is maintained for the purpose of attracting purchasers for any goods, wares or merchandise, article or commodity sold or offered for sale in any such museum, the license fee provided for in this section shall be paid. 
(Code 1957, § 12.90)  
Sec. 22-146. - Music teachers. 
Every person engaged in the calling of teaching music shall pay a license fee of $15.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.91)  
Sec. 22-147. - Newsstands. 
The license fee for operating or maintaining a newsstand in or upon any public street or in, upon or at any other public place in the city shall be $3.00 per quarter. 
(Code 1957, § 12.92)  
Sec. 22-148. - Oil production. 
(a)  Every person producing oil from any well located in the city shall pay a license fee of $5.00 per quarter for each such well producing 400 barrels or less of oil per quarter, plus $0.025 per barrel of oil produced by each such well in excess of 400 barrels per quarter. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, a well shall be deemed to be located in the city if the surface location of the well or the surface of the well itself is located in the city, regardless of where the hole of the well may be bottomed. 
(Code 1957, § 12.93)  
Sec. 22-149. - Operators of microscopes, lung testers, muscle testers or similar machines or instruments. 
Any person exhibiting, showing or letting the use of any microscope, lung tester, muscle tester, galvanic battery, automatic photograph machine, or any machine or instrument of like character which is not otherwise specifically licensed or specifically exempted from license by any other section of this article shall pay a license fee of $18.00 per year or fractional part thereof for each such machine or instrument. 
(Code 1957, § 12.94)  
Sec. 22-150. - Peddlers. 
(a)  Fees. For every person engaged in the business of peddling, the following license fee shall be paid: 
(1)  For each person proposing to peddle on foot, $15.00 per quarter or $50.00 per year. 
(2)  For each person proposing to peddle from a wagon, motor vehicle, or other vehicular conveyance, $15.00 per quarter or $50.00 per year. 
(3)  For each helper or assistant to a licensed peddler using a vehicle, $10.00 per quarter. The helper must procure a permit as required by this Code or city ordinances regulating peddlers and shall pay the license fee provided in this subsection. 
(4)  Blanket license fee. Whenever any person employs or wholesales goods to peddlers, as defined in this article, in the conduct of his business, he may, in lieu of the license fee required to be paid by such peddlers, pay a blanket license fee of $100.00 per year, plus $10.00 per year per peddler so employed or engaged, which peddler must obtain a permit as required by this Code or city ordinances regulating peddlers, provided he: 
a.  Makes application for such blanket license in his own name. 
b.  Keeps and maintains a current list of the peddlers employed or associated with him as retailers, which list shall be furnished to the city clerk or the chief of police on request. 
(b)  Exemption of blind persons. Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to blind persons. This exemption shall not subject such blind persons to subsections 22-142(5) and (6) of this division. The term "blind person," within the meaning of this subsection, means a person having not more than ten percent visual acuity in the better eye, with correction. Such blindness shall be certified by a licensed physician and surgeon who specializes in diseases of the eye or by the state bureau of vocational rehabilitation of the department of education, and the exemption provided by this subsection shall not apply until a certificate as to such blindness shall be furnished to the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 12.95) 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Sec. 22-151. - Rental of office, commercial buildings, etc. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Casual tenant or casual tenancy means any tenant or tenancy where the consideration paid or agreed to be paid consists exclusively of services; or where, after examining all the facts, the city clerk determines that the only tenancy is that of one or more tenants paying to a sublessor primarily on a cost-sharing basis for the space used involving less than 25 percent of the space under the control of the sublessor, and is terminable at will. 
Gross receipts has the same meaning as in section 22-27 and specifically includes all amounts paid by a tenant to a lessor for services performed or materials used or utilities or facilities furnished by the lessor on the premises or in connection with the tenant's use, possession, or the right to possess the premises. Gross receipts also includes any receipts paid by a tenant to a lessor for the use or possession of land or the right to use or possess land other than that upon which the building or structure is located but which is used or possessed or is available for use or possession by a tenant for purposes related to his tenancy. Gross receipts also includes all amounts paid as prepaid rent. 
Lessor includes a licensor and a person granting a concession. 
Tenant or tenancy includes tenants and tenancies of all types, and persons occupying and the occupation of a building or structure or space in a building or structure under any license or any concession agreement with a lessor. The right to use or possess such space shall be deemed to be the same as actual occupation. 
(b)  License fee. For every lessor engaged in the business of renting or letting a building or structure of any kind on land located in the city to a tenant for purposes other than dwelling, sleeping or lodging or renting or letting space or the use or possession of space or the right to use or possess space in such a building or structure to a tenant for such purposes, the license fee shall be $25.00 per year or fractional part thereof for the first $15,000.00 or less of gross receipts derived from such business, plus $1.25 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof in excess of $15,000.00. 
(c)  Applicability. For the purposes of this section, the business described in subsection (b) of this section shall, unless an exemption or partial exemption is provided in this section, include renting and letting of every kind and character, whether by an owner, lessee or sublessee, and licensing and the granting of a concession by any of them, without regard to the length of the term of the tenancy, the date of its commencement, expiration or renewal, without regard to the number of tenants a lessor may have or the number of buildings or structures or the quantity of space in the buildings or structures a lessor may have available for renting or letting to a tenant. A lessor otherwise subject to the fee described in subsection (b) of this section shall not be exempt therefrom because of the fact that one or more persons may reside within the building or structure where either the primary purpose of the particular tenancy or the primary use or right of use by the particular tenant is for some purpose other than dwelling, sleeping or lodging. No lessor otherwise subject to the tax described in subsection (b) of this section shall be exempt therefrom because of the fact that his tenant proposes to operate or does in fact operate the building or structure as a premises for a business subject to tax under another section. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following persons, when engaged in the described activity, shall not be deemed to be engaged in the business described in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the business of maintaining a storage or warehouse and required to pay a fee for that business under this division. 
(2)  Persons engaged in the business of providing space in a building or structure for the parking or storage of automobiles and required to pay a fee for that business under other sections of this division. 
(3)  Persons engaged in the business of operating a theater, exhibition hall or any similar place of public assemblage or entertainment, to the extent that his receipts are charges collected by him from patrons for admission to the premises. 
(4)  To the extent that his business activity includes renting to casual tenants, a person otherwise subject to tax under subsection (b) of this section. 
(5)  To the extent that his gross receipts are received as compensation for permitting coin-operated machines and devices to be placed or to remain on or within the premises under the control of the lessor. 
(6)  Persons conducting, operating, promoting or sponsoring a bona fide trade show, where the bona fide trade show does not exceed 14 days; neither shall such persons be subject to fees under any other section of this division by virtue of engaging in any activity for which an exemption is granted in this subsection. 
(e)  Registration certificate. A lessor required by this section to pay a fee need obtain only one registration certificate, but he shall include in the measure of the fee the gross receipts derived from all businesses taxed by this section engaged in by him within the city, whether at one or more than one location. At the time the fee provided in this section is remitted, the city clerk may require the registrant to furnish a statement of the number of such businesses conducted by him, giving the street address of each location, the amount of gross receipts attributable to each location, and designating a location at which the registration certificate issued shall be posted. 
(Code 1957, § 12.129)  
Sec. 22-152. - Physical culture institutions. 
(a)  Fees. The license fee for a physical culture institution, where instruction in physical culture or beauty culture, calisthenics or exercises are given to subscribers, students or pupils, shall be $150.00 per year. 
(b)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any gymnasium maintained in connection with any private club or to any private school where instruction other than physical culture is also given, nor shall this section require the operator of any such business to obtain an additional license for the giving or administering of massages or furnishing baths, bath supplies or bath equipment to bona fide subscribers, students or members of such institutions. 
(Code 1957, § 12.98)  
Sec. 22-153. - Pool and billiard rooms. 
Every person who conducts or operates any pool or billiard room or who, for a fee or charge of any kind, lets to players the use of any pool table, billiard table, or similar device with a playing surface of 24½ square feet or larger or who keeps any such table or device available for such use, the license fee shall be $30.00 per year for each table or device, whether used or not, which is kept upon the premises. This section shall apply regardless of whether the table is maintained as an incident to the conduct or operation of a social or athletic club or as an adjunct of any other private institution or activity, if a charge is imposed for the use thereof. However, this section shall not apply to only a single pool or billiard table having a playing surface of less than 24½ square feet where the operation and maintenance thereof is not the principal business activity of the premises where such a table is located, and the premises in which the table is located shall not be considered a pool or billiard room because of the presence of such single table. 
(Code 1957, § 12.99)  
Sec. 22-154. - Private patrols or night watch service. 
Any person conducting a night watch service or private patrol or engaged in the business of acting as a private police officer shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per year or fraction thereof for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $2.00 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof. Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $1.00 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts. 
(Code 1957, § 12.100)  
Sec. 22-155. - Promoters of baseball, football and other games or exhibitions. 
Every person promoting or staging any baseball, football, soccer, tennis, polo, swimming or similar exhibition, event or contest shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per month or, at his option, $10.00 per day. However, when the game promoted or played or the exhibition given is softball and no participant therein receives any compensation for participation therein and the admission charge or entrance fee for spectators is $0.15 or less, the license fee required to be paid shall be $2.50 per day or, at the option of the applicant for the license, $10.00 per month. 
(Code 1957, § 12.101)  
Sec. 22-156. - Public camps or trailer camps, parks or lots. 
Every person engaged in the business of operating any public camp or trailer camp, park or lot where the public may rent camping, trailer or tent space or services provided or available in connection with such space, the license fee shall be $60.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.102)  
Sec. 22-157. - Public dances. 
The license fee for conducting or staging any public dance, whether for profit or not, to which the public at large is admitted or in which the public at large is allowed to participate, shall be $25.00 per day. 
(Code 1957, § 12.103)  
Sec. 22-158. - Riding academies. 
Any person conducting the business of a riding academy where instruction in horseback riding is given shall pay a license fee of $50.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.104)  
Sec. 22-159. - Sales and deliveries to fixed places of business. 
Every person engaged in the business of soliciting orders and making sales and deliveries of goods, wares, merchandise, meats, produce, or other food products or other articles to fixed places of business in the city, the license fee shall be $100.00 for the first $50,000.00 or less of gross receipts and, in addition thereto, $0.96 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof in excess of $50,000.00, provided that: 
(1)  Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $0.48 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts. 
(2)  Blind persons, as defined in section 22-142, need not include the first $20,000.00 of gross receipts in the computation of the amount of the fee due thereunder nor shall they be required to pay the minimum fee of $100.00. This exemption shall not subject such blind person to subsection 22-142(5). 
(3)  Persons doing business of the type described in this section and in an amount less than $25,000.00 per year shall pay a license fee of $50.00. 
(Code 1957, § 12.96)  
Sec. 22-160. - Sales and deliveries of food products on established routes. 
Every person engaged in the business of selling and distributing food products from house to house on an established route in the city and where such person is not licensed under some other section of this Code, the license fee shall be $15.00 per quarter or $40.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.97)  
Sec. 22-161. - Secondhand dealers. 
(a)  Fees. The license fee for buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares or merchandise shall be $30.00 per year for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $1.20 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof. However, notwithstanding any other section of this article, persons engaged in such business only as a temporary trade show, exhibition, exposition or the like may pay such fee prorated for the calendar quarter during which such show, exhibition, exposition or the like is conducted. 
(b)  Exemption of dealers accepting secondhand goods as partial payment. Whenever any person engaged in any business licensed under this article and, as an incident to such business, accepts secondhand goods, wares and merchandise as part payment on new merchandise, such person shall not be required to obtain a license under this section and, for the doing of such acts, shall not be considered as dealing in secondhand merchandise within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  Exemption of dealers in secondhand machinery. Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed as applying to dealers in used or secondhand machinery, wherein the volume of such secondhand business is less than 12½ percent of the entire gross business of such dealer in any one calendar year, provided such dealer files an affidavit together with a filing fee in the amount of $5.00 with the city clerk prior to February 1 of each year, setting forth a statement of the previous year's business and giving the amount of total sales in dollars and the amount of secondhand sales in dollars, by months, and stating that the secondhand portion of the business during the preceding calendar year has not exceeded 12½ percent of such machinery sold. 
Upon the filing of such affidavit, the applicant shall be exempt from the license payment provided for in this section; provided, however, that any person selling any secondhand articles of machinery in any one calendar year and who fails to file the affidavit provided for in this subsection within the time specified shall be barred from such license exemption for the ensuing year. 
The affidavit of each machinery dealer shall include a true and correct report of business done and a statement that such dealer will, at all times, render himself available for inspection by a representative of the city clerk's office and that he will keep a continuous register of all sales of new and secondhand articles of machinery by dates and consecutive numbers. 
For the purpose of this subsection, the term "machinery dealer" is defined to be a person carrying on the business of selling or dealing in articles of machinery used for construction purposes. 
(d)  Exemption of dealers in secondhand automobiles, motor vehicles, books and magazines. Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed as applying to dealers in used or secondhand automobiles or motor vehicles or to the business of dealing in secondhand books or magazines. 
(Code 1957, § 12.105) 
Cross reference— Secondhand goods, ch. 66.  
Sec. 22-162. - Sharpening tools and cutlery. 
Any person sharpening or grinding any tools or cutlery and traveling from place to place or house to house for such purpose and using any wagon or vehicle in connection therewith shall pay a license fee of $40.00 per year for each such vehicle. If such person travels from place to place or house to house on foot, using no wagon or vehicle, $20.00 per year shall be paid as a license fee. 
(Code 1957, § 12.106)  
Sec. 22-163. - Shoe repairers. 
Any person repairing or rebuilding shoes shall pay for each calendar year or portion thereof a license fee of $30.00. 
(Code 1957, § 12.107)  
Sec. 22-164. - Shoeshine stands or parlors. 
The license fee for a shoeshine stand or parlor shall be $15.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.108)  
Sec. 22-165. - Shooting galleries or ranges. 
(a)  Fees. Any person conducting or operating a shooting gallery or shooting range shall pay a license fee of $125.00 per year for each such range or gallery. 
(b)  Exemption. This section shall not apply to the holder of an amusement park license. 
(Code 1957, § 12.109)  
Sec. 22-166. - Sideshows or aftershows. 
Any person conducting a sideshow or aftershow to a circus, where a separate fee is charged, received or collected, shall pay a license fee of $25.00 per day. 
(Code 1957, § 12.110)  
Sec. 22-167. - Skating rinks. 
The license fee for an ice or roller skating rink shall be $100.00 per quarter. 
(Code 1957, § 12.111)  
Sec. 22-168. - Slaughterhouses, meat packers, etc. 
Any person slaughtering cattle, calves, sheep, hogs, rabbits, or any other animals fit for human consumption or fowl of any kind or character or engaged in the business of curing, processing, packing or manufacturing any part of any animal into any food product for human consumption or engaged in the business of selling fish, meat or meat products of any kind at wholesale or reducing any part of any animal into any product fit for human consumption or any person who, in connection with or as part of any business referred to in this section sells or offers for sale any other goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale shall pay a license fee of $60.00 per year or fraction thereof for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $2.40 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof. Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $1.20 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts. 
(Code 1957, § 12.112)  
Sec. 22-169. - Steam, mineral, etc., baths. 
(a)  Every person giving steam baths; electric light baths; electric tub baths; shower baths; sponge baths; sun baths; mineral baths; Russian, Swedish or Turkish baths; or any other bath or similar treatment wherein the patient is treated or assisted by an attendant or any public bath place which maintains in connection therewith a steam room, dry heat room, plunge, shower bath, or sleeping accommodations shall pay a license fee of $150.00 per year. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to physical culture institutions or public swimming pools licensed under other sections of this article. 
(c)  Any person who, incidental to the actual or purported conduct of a profession or healing art, makes a charge for the giving of baths or treatments mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to be engaged in the business made subject to license by this section and shall pay the required fee therefor if the giving of any such bath or treatment is advertised or publicly announced in any manner or if such baths or treatments are furnished for hire or reward to persons who have not otherwise retained, hired or engaged the professional services of the person furnishing the bath or treatment. 
(Code 1957, § 12.113)  
Sec. 22-170. - Swap meet exhibitors. 
Every swap meet exhibitor, as defined in section 66-136 of this Code, shall pay the license fee prescribed in subsection 22-142(2). However, any such swap meet exhibitor, in lieu of the license fee prescribed therein, may pay a license fee of $0.65 per day per space or stall used in exhibiting or offering for sale or selling merchandise at any swap meet, not to exceed 20 such daily licenses in any one calendar year. Such in-lieu daily license fees shall be collected by the swap meet operator and remitted to the city on or before the 15th day of the next succeeding month during which the daily license fees were paid, along with a statement under oath or penalty of perjury signed by the swap meet operator on a form prescribed by the city showing the total number of exhibitors holding daily licenses, their respective names, spaces or stalls rented by each, and the total daily license fees collected for the preceding month. 
(Code 1957, § 12.113.1)  
Sec. 22-171. - Swap meet operators. 
Any person conducting or operating a swap meet shall pay the license fee imposed by subsection 22-142(6) of this division, provided that there shall be excluded from the gross receipts the amounts of any admission fees charged. 
(Code 1957, § 12.113.2)  
Sec. 22-172. - Swimming pools. 
The license fee for operating a public swimming pool shall be $25.00 for each calendar quarter or fraction thereof during which the pool is kept open for use. 
(Code 1957, § 12.114)  
Sec. 22-173. - Takers and producers of advertising film. 
Every person taking or producing advertising films by means of a motion picture camera and using no actors or portable properties, such films to be sold or used for advertising purposes, shall pay a license fee of $400.00 per year or $50.00 per day, at the option of the licensee. 
(Code 1957, § 12.115)  
Sec. 22-174. - Taxicab businesses. 
Any person conducting a taxicab business for which a permit is required under article II of chapter 102 of this Code shall pay a license fee of $500.00 per year or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12.126) 
Cross reference— Taxicabs, § 102-26 et seq.  
Sec. 22-175. - Telephone service businesses. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, a person engaged in the business of providing telephone services shall mean a telephone company as that term is used in article XIII, section 14, of the state constitution. 
(b)  Every person engaged in the business of providing telephone services, the license fee shall be $20.00 per year or fractional part thereof for the first $20,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $1.00 per year for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts or fractional part thereof in excess of $20,000.00. Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged a fee at the rate of $0.50 per each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 gross receipts. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "gross receipts" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the definition thereof contained in section 22-27, except that only those receipts derived from providing telephone services within the city shall be included, and further excepting that only receipts resulting from intrastate telephone services shall be included. 
(Code 1957, § 12.127)  
Sec. 22-176. - Theaters. 
The license fee for conducting a theater containing a permanent stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical appliances are used, where regular theatrical or vaudeville performances are given and for which privilege of viewing a fee is charged, collected or received, or for conducting, managing or carrying on a moving picture theater or airdrome, where moving or motion pictures are exhibited and a fee is charged, collected or received, shall be $200.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 12.116)  
Sec. 22-177. - Theatrical performances. 
(a)  Fees. Any person staging or conducting any theatrical or vaudeville performance in any public dancehall, clubroom or other place of assemblage, where movable scenery or theatrical appliances are used, whether an admission fee is charged or not, shall pay a license fee of $12.50 per day. 
(b)  Exception. This section shall not apply to the holder of a theater license as required under section 22-176 of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 12.117)  
Sec. 22-178. - Trade and business schools. 
(a)  Fees. The license fee for conducting a trade school, trade college, business school, business college, beauty school or beauty college, where instruction is given in any trade or occupation and a fee is charged for such instruction or compensation is received by such school or college by the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services, shall be $60.00 per calendar year or fraction thereof for the first $25,000.00 or less of gross receipts, plus $2.40 per year for each additional $1,000.00 or fractional part thereof of gross receipts in excess of $25,000.00. Gross receipts of $1,000,000.00 or more shall be charged at the rate of $1.20 for each $1,000.00 in excess of $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts. 
(b)  Exception. This section shall not apply to a drama school. 
(Code 1957, § 12.118)  
Sec. 22-179. - Transportation of passengers generally. 
(a)  Any person running, driving or operating any automobile or motor-propelled vehicle for the transportation of passengers for hire, when driven by the owner or a representative of the owner at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week or per month, and such vehicle is routed under the direction of such passengers or such persons hiring the vehicle, shall pay for each vehicle having a seating capacity of five to ten persons, inclusive, $100.00 per year, and for each such vehicle having a seating capacity of 11 or more persons, $200.00 per year. 
(b)  In determining the seating capacity of any such vehicle, the driver and conductor shall be included. 
(Code 1957, § 12.119)  
Sec. 22-180. - Transportation of schoolchildren. 
(a)  Any person running, driving or operating any vehicle for the transportation for hire of schoolchildren to and from school, school events or activities shall pay for each such vehicle having a seating capacity of five to ten persons a license fee of $16.00 per year, and for each vehicle having a seating capacity of 11 persons and over, $32.00 per year. 
(b)  In determining the seating capacity of any such vehicle, the driver and conductor shall be included. 
(Code 1957, § 12.120)  
Sec. 22-181. - Traveling theatrical performances. 
Any person conducting any traveling theatrical performance under or surrounded or partially enclosed by canvas, such as comedy, spoken drama, opera or concert, shall pay a license fee of $100.00 for the first day and $70.00 for each additional day. 
(Code 1957, § 12.121)  
Sec. 22-182. - Trucking. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle means the same as defined in the Motor Vehicle Transportation License Tax Act. 
Operator means the same as defined in the state Motor Vehicle Transportation License Tax Act with reference only, however, to persons engaging in the transportation of property for hire or compensation. 
Tractor means a truck tractor as defined in Vehicle Code § 655. 
Trailer and semitrailer mean as defined in Vehicle Code § 630. 
(b)  Every person whose business, in whole or in part, is that of operator of any motor vehicle for the transportation of property for hire or reward and who, in the course of that business, uses the public streets and highways of this city for the purpose of such operation shall pay a license fee for each year or fractional part thereof of such operation, the amount of which shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  For each vehicle, other than a tractor, trailer or semitrailer, used to receive or discharge, pick up or deliver property within this city, the annual fee shall be as follows, where the unladen weight thereof is: 
a.  Four thousand pounds or less, $6.00. 
b.  Over 4,000 pounds and not more than 8,000 pounds, $12.00. 
c.  Over 8,000 pounds, $15.00. 
(2)  For each trailer or semitrailer so used, where the unladen weight thereof is: 
a.  One thousand pounds or less, $4.00. 
b.  Over 1,000 pounds and not more than 3,000 pounds, $8.00. 
c.  Over 3,000 pounds, $12.00. 
(3)  For each tractor which is used to haul one or more trailers or semitrailers not permanently affixed thereto, $15.00. 
(c)  Every person engaged in any business not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this article who uses any motor vehicle, tractor, trailer or semitrailer for hauling or carrying his tools, equipment or supplies or for delivering or carrying goods, wares or merchandise sold, let or handled by him in the course of his business shall pay a license fee in the amount prescribed in subsection (b) of this section, and it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to drive or operate, within this city, any vehicle, the operation of which is subject to license under this section, unless such vehicle has prominently displayed thereon the sticker or identifying symbol indicating that the proper license fee based upon the operation thereof has been paid. For any vehicle operated exclusively for trips between points within this city and points without this state, the fee shall be one-half of the standard fee per vehicle set forth in subsection (b) of this section. No fee under this section shall be required for the operation of any motor vehicle or equipment along the city streets if such operation is merely occasional and incidental to a business conducted elsewhere; provided, however, that no operation shall be deemed merely occasional if trips or hauls are made beginning or ending at points within this city upon an average of more than once a week in any quarter, and a business shall be deemed to be conducted within this city if an office or agency is maintained here or if transportation business is solicited here. 
(Code 1957, § 12.122)  
Sec. 22-183. - Truck rentals. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of renting or letting the use of any motor vehicle, tractor, trailer or semitrailer to another to be used for hauling, carrying or delivering property shall pay a license fee for such business, for each year or fractional part thereof of such operation, based upon the unladen weight of each vehicle and piece of hauling equipment so let or rented, according to the rate schedule set forth in section 22-182 of this division. 
(b)  When the business use of any particular vehicle or piece of hauling equipment has been licensed under this section, no further license or fee, for the same license period, shall be required of any lessee or operator thereof under section 22-182 of this division for the use of the particular equipment. 
(Code 1957, § 12.123)  
Sec. 22-184. - Vending machine businesses. 
(a)  Every person engaged exclusively in the business of renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines shall pay an annual license fee of 1½ percent of the gross receipts of such machines attributed to the business activities conducted within the city; provided, however, that the minimum fee shall be $5.00 for each of such machines. 
(b)  Every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or operating coin-operated vending machines not covered by subsection (a) of this section shall pay such license fee as may be prescribed in other sections of this article. 
(c)  No license under this section shall be required for the maintenance or operation of the following: 
(1)  Postage stamp machines; or 
(2)  Machines dispensing sanitary or hygienic articles or drinking cups, towels or medicines, which machines are entirely owned and supplied by the owner or operator of the premises where installed and maintained solely for the convenience of employees, visitors or customers and not for profit to him or to any other person. 
(d)  The city clerk shall issue one stamp or label for each machine operated by any licensee. This shall be affixed thereto to indicate that the required fee has been paid for each current year. The clerk shall seal the coin opening or slot on each vending machine not bearing such label after the penalty for nonpayment of the fee has accrued under this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to break any seal affixed without written authorization to do so issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1957, § 12.124)  
Sec. 22-185. - Warehouse operations. 
Persons engaged in the business of maintaining a warehouse, storage and/or centralized record storage in the city which is not subject to the business license fee imposed on the business of manufacturing and selling goods pursuant to section 22-142 of this division shall pay the following license fees: 
(1)  For up to 1,500 square feet of building area, $75.00. 
(2)  For building area in excess of 1,500 square feet and less than 100,000 square feet, $0.05 per square foot. 
(3)  For building area in excess of 100,000 square feet, $0.10 per square foot. 
(Code 1957, § 12.131)  
Secs. 22-186—22-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 22-211. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or deal in any business mentioned in section 22-215 of this article without first obtaining a permit. 
(Code 1957, § 18.1)  
Sec. 22-212. - Application generally. 
A person desiring to obtain a permit to conduct, manage or deal in any business mentioned in section 22-215 of this article shall file an application in writing with the city council specifying by street and number the place where such business is proposed to be conducted or carried on. A junk collector having no fixed place of business shall specify in such application his residence by street number. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain the address of his residence. 
(Code 1957, § 18.2)  
Sec. 22-213. - Investigation of applicant's business. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required under this article, the city council shall cause to be investigated the business of the applicant and the location at which the applicant proposes to engage in business as specified in the application. 
(Code 1957, § 18.3)  
Sec. 22-214. - False, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
No person shall make any false, misleading or fraudulent statement or misrepresent any fact in any application for a permit required under this article or in any notice or record required to be filed with the city council or other authorized person of this city. 
(Code 1957, § 18.4)  
Sec. 22-215. - Fees. 
(a)  Schedule. The city council shall not accept any application for any permit required to be obtained by this article or by any other ordinance or law or for the renewal of such permit, unless the application is accompanied by the fee prescribed in the following schedule: 
Business or Activity for Which Permit is Required 	Original 
Fee 	Renewal 
Fee 
Antique shop 	$ 50.00 	$ 10.00 
Arcade 	50.00 	25.00 
Auction (jewelry) 	100.00 	
Auctioneer 	100.00 	15.00 
Auto rental 	25.00 	15.00 
Auto repossessor: 		
	Owner 	50.00 	25.00 
	Employee 	10.00 	10.00 
Auto wrecking 	300.00 	25.00 
Bath 	10.00 	10.00 
Bowling alley 	25.00 	10.00 
Boxing (amateur) contest 	25.00 	25.00 
Carnival 	25.00 	25.00 
Closing-out sale 	100.00 	25.00 
Dance, public (only one) 	None 	
Dancehall: 		
	Cafe, bar where liquor is sold 	100.00 	10.00 
	Public 	50.00 	10.00 
Dancing academy 	10.00 	10.00 
Dancing club 	25.00 	10.00 
Escort bureau 	100.00 	50.00 
Fire sale 	100.00 	25.00 
Fireworks sale 	25.00 	25.00 
Game, skill and chance 	25.00 	10.00 
Handbill (as defined in section 6-31) distribution business 	25.00 	10.00 
Junk and/or refuse collector 	25.00 	10.00 
Junk dealer 	50.00 	10.00 
Massage parlor 	25.00 	10.00 
Merry-go-round 	10.00 	10.00 
Pawnbroker 	200.00 	25.00 
Pool room 	25.00 	10.00 
Pool tables (two only), incidental to main business activity, per table 	25.00 	10.00 
Private patrol 	25.00 	10.00 
Secondhand dealer: 		
	Auto parts 	50.00 	10.00 
	Books 	50.00 	10.00 
	General 	50.00 	10.00 
	Jewelry 	50.00 	25.00 
	Used automobile vehicles 	300.00 	25.00 
Shooting gallery 	25.00 	10.00 
Show (in liquor establishment) 	25.00 	10.00 
Skating rink 	50.00 	25.00 
Street speaking 	10.00 	10.00 
Swap meet operator 	100.00 	25.00 
Tattooing and/or body piercing 	50.00 	25.00 
Trailer camps 	25.00 	10.00 
Applications for changing location of a business for which a permit has been granted 	10.00 	
Change of ownership to be applicable only when the new owner is already operating under a permit issued pursuant to this article 	10.00 	
 
(b)  Closeout sales, fire sales. The permit fee requirements and the submission requirements for the inventory of merchandise for closeout sales and fire sales shall be as follows: 
(1)  The permit fee requirements specified for closeout sales and fire sales are not applicable to bona fide merchants licensed as such who are closing their business and selling out merchandise then on hand or who have had fires and are selling only the merchandise damaged in such fire. 
(2)  Any person, before conducting any close-out or fire sale, shall file with the police department and the city a complete inventory of merchandise on hand to be sold at any such sale and such supplementary inventories as may be required and shall comply with such other rules and regulations governing such sales as may be prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall not be deemed to modify the requirements of any other section of this article and any other ordinance prescribing any change of location fees, any change of ownership fees, any special fee for additional places of business operated by one permittee, or any special fee for the posting of notices or the like, nor shall the schedule of fees appearing in this section be deemed exclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 18.5)  
Sec. 22-216. - Issuance generally; term. 
After the investigation provided for in section 22-213 of this article or any other section of this Code where specific provision is made for investigation, the city council may issue a permit to the applicant upon such conditions as the council may determine and impose in the permit. The permit shall be for the remaining portion of the then-current year or such shorter period of time as may be prescribed by any resolution of the council or in the permit. 
(Code 1957, § 18.6)  
Sec. 22-217. - Compliance required. 
The city council shall not grant any permit provided for in this article to any person who fails, refuses or neglects to comply with the laws, ordinances and sections of this Code relating to and regulating the business for which such permit is sought. 
(Code 1957, § 18.7)  
Sec. 22-218. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Whenever a permit is required to be obtained from the city council under any section of this article or of any other section of this Code, any ordinance or any law, it shall be deemed an annual permit, except when it is expressly provided in the particular section, ordinance or law by which such permit is required that the life or term of the permit shall be one day, one week, one month or some other period less than one year in duration, and the following rules shall govern the expiration and renewal thereof: 
(1)  Each annual permit shall automatically expire on December 31 following the date of issuance. 
(2)  Subject to any other section of this article expressly dealing with the renewal of any particular kind of permit, each annual permit may be renewed in the manner prescribed in this section, subject to the power of the city council to deny any application for renewal, upon notice and hearing as required by section 22-221 of this article, for any ground which would have justified a denial of the original application for a permit. 
(3)  The renewal of any such annual permit may be granted upon written application therefor accompanied by the renewal fee prescribed in section 22-215 of this article, provided such application is filed not later than January 15 next following the expiration date. 
(4)  If the application for renewal is not filed within the time allowed in subsection (a)(3) of this section but the application is thereafter filed between January 16 and May 15 next following the expiration date, a penalty of 25 percent of the fee for each month or portion of a month elapsing between the expiration date and the date of filing shall be added to the fee prescribed. 
(b)  The city council may grant any such renewal application after January 15 and not later than May 15 following the expiration date, only where such application is accompanied by the fees prescribed and the penalties provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If the application for renewal is not filed on or before May 15 following the expiration date, it shall be treated as an original application for a new permit, and the fee shall be that prescribed for the issuance of an original permit. 
(d)  A person operating under this article shall be required to secure, within the time limits specified in this section, an annual renewal of the permit issued commencing January 1 of the succeeding year in which such permit was granted. 
(Code 1957, § 18.8)  
Sec. 22-219. - Applicability to disabled veterans. 
(a)  Every honorably discharged or honorably released member of the military, naval or air service of the United States who is unable to obtain his livelihood by manual labor shall have the right to hawk, peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise, except spirituous, malt, vinous, mixed or other intoxicating liquors, without payment of any fee required by this article. A certificate of disability by a surgeon of the United States military, naval or air service or any physician regularly employed in the city health department shall be sufficient proof of such disability. A certificate of honorable discharge from the United States military, naval or air service or an exemplified copy thereof shall be sufficient proof of such service and honorable discharge, and, upon presentation of the certificate, it shall be the duty of the clerk to issue a permit without cost to such member of the military, naval or air service. 
(b)  Each and every permit issued under this section shall not be transferable and shall be for the exclusive use of the person whose name is inserted therein. Such person shall be required to write his name on the margin of such permit and on the stub retained by the clerk at the time such permit is issued. Such person shall be required to furnish to the clerk, at the time of application for such permit, two copies of a photograph of himself. It shall be the duty of the clerk to satisfy himself by proper examination and investigation that the same photograph is a true likeness of the person who makes the application and whose name appears in the discharge and in the physician's certificate. One copy of such photograph shall be attached to the permit, and the other shall be attached to the stub written by the clerk. The photograph shall at all times be kept attached to the permit, and any permit found without such photograph attached thereto shall be taken up and forfeited, and the person to whom it is issued and the holder thereof shall forthwith surrender all rights under the permit and shall not again be entitled to any permit. 
Such person shall identify himself by his signature whenever required to do so by any police officer, license inspector, license collector or other city officer. If any such permit is found in the possession of any person other than the person named therein, it shall be taken up, surrendered to the clerk and cancelled, and the holder thereof shall not again be entitled to a permit under this section. 
Whenever the holder of any permit issued under this section uses any wagon, cart, tray, basket or other vehicle or receptacle in vending any goods, wares or merchandise, such permit shall be inserted, held and carried in a permit holder and in the manner prescribed by law. 
Every permit issued under this section shall be issued for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Upon the expiration of any permit, as provided in this article, a new permit shall be issued under this section. Not more than one permit shall be issued to any discharged member of the military, naval or air service during any one calendar year from the date of the original permit. 
(c)  No person, except the person named in such permit, shall use or have in his possession any permit issued under this section. 
(d)  No person shall sell, purchase or transfer any permit issued under this section or transfer or convey the discharge or certificate mentioned in this section to any other person for the purpose of securing the permit. 
(Code 1957, § 18.9)  
Sec. 22-220. - Revocation or suspension generally. 
Except where more specific provisions are made for revocation or suspension of any permit by any other ordinance or section of this Code, which shall govern, any permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended if the holder thereof violates any of the sections of this article or any provision of any other section of this Code or any ordinance or any law relating to or regulating the business covered by the permit or if he conducts or carries on such business in an unlawful manner. Also, the failure to pay any license fee imposed on a permittee by article II of this chapter or by any other section of this Code or city ordinance shall be a ground for the suspension of the permit. 
(Code 1957, § 18.10)  
Sec. 22-221. - Procedure for revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Any permit granted pursuant this article to any person to conduct, carry on or engage in any business, profession, trade or occupation, unless provision is otherwise specifically made, shall not be revoked or suspended except as provided in this section. 
(b)  No such permit or certificate shall be revoked or suspended until a hearing upon written notice to the permittee shall have been had by the city council or other person having authority to do so. Such notice shall state the following: 
(1)  The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or suspension in clear and concise language. 
(2)  The time when and the place where such hearing is to be held. 
(c)  If a verified complaint is required to be filed with the city council or other person having authority to revoke or suspend such permit, a true and correct copy of such complaint shall be served on the permittee in lieu of stating the grounds of complaint. However, notice of the time when and the place where such hearing is to be held shall be served with such complaint. 
(d)  Such notice or copy of the complaint shall be served or given to the permittee at least five and not more than ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(e)  At any such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and defend himself, and he may call witnesses in his behalf. 
(f)  The city council or other person conducting such hearing may continue such hearing from time to time upon good cause being shown therefor. 
(g)  After conducting such hearing, the city council or other person having authority may suspend or revoke any such permit upon such terms and conditions as, in the exercise of a reasonable and sound discretion, shall be determined. 
(Code 1957, § 18.11)  
Sec. 22-222. - Notice to permittee of finding on revocation or suspension. 
The city council or any other person having authority to revoke or suspend any permit issued under this article or under any other ordinance or section of this Code shall, orally or in writing, notify the permittee of any finding, suspension, or revocation made by the council or other person or any conditions attached thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 18.12)  
Sec. 22-223. - Notice to clerk of revocation or suspension; license not to issue. 
The city council or other person having authority to do so, after revoking or suspending any permit as provided in this article or any other ordinance or section of this Code, shall notify the city clerk of such fact, and thereafter no license shall be issued by the clerk to any permittee to conduct, carry on, or engage in any business or do any act for which such permit was granted until a new permit shall have been granted. 
(Code 1957, § 18.13)  
Sec. 22-224. - Carrying on business after revocation or suspension. 
No person whose permit has been revoked or suspended pursuant to this article or pursuant to any other section of this Code or city ordinance shall engage in or carry on any business or do any act permitted to be done pursuant to such permit during the period of suspension or after revocation thereof, until a new permit shall have been granted. 
(Code 1957, § 18.14)  
Sec. 22-225. - Issuance after revocation. 
Where a person's permit has been revoked by the city council as provided in this article, no permit shall be granted to such person to conduct, manage, carry on or deal in any business mentioned in section 22-215 of this article until six months have elapsed after such revocation. 
(Code 1957, § 18.15)  
Sec. 22-226. - Rummage sales. 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "rummage sale" is defined as a sale of new or secondhand articles for charitable purposes with a duration of not more than 14 days. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall operate or maintain a rummage sale in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city. Such permits shall be issued by the city administrative officer or his authorized representative and shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section. 
(c)  Application for permit. An application for a rummage sale permit shall be submitted to the city administrative officer, on a form supplied by the city, not less than seven days prior to the first date of sales. 
(d)  Permit fee. A fee in the amount of $10.00 is fixed and established as the sum to be paid for filing an application for a rummage sale permit. 
(e)  Limitations on permit. A rummage sale permit shall be valid only for the specific days listed upon such permit and shall be subject to any limitations imposed by such permit. 
(f)  Grounds for revocation or suspension of permit. No person shall make any false, misleading or fraudulent statement or represent any fact in the application for such permit, and the permit may be revoked or suspended by the city administrative officer, upon notice and hearing as required by section 22-221 of this article, for any ground which would have justified a denial of the original application for a permit. 
(Code 1957, § 18.16)  
Secs. 22-227—22-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-256. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Massage means a method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping with the hand or any instrument. 
Massage parlor or massage establishment means an establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on any business of giving Turkish, Russian, Swedish, vapor, sweat, electric, salt, magnetic or any other kind or character of massage, baths, alcohol rub, manipulation of the body or similar procedures. 
Massage technician means any person who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-257. - Employees. 
It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the permit for the massage establishment or the employer of any person purporting to act as a massage technician to ensure that each person employed as a massage technician shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.14)  
Sec. 22-258. - Records of treatment. 
Every person operating a massage establishment under a permit as provided in this article shall keep a record of the date and hour of such treatment, the name and address of the patron and the name of the technician administering such treatment. Such record shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of this article for the purposes of law enforcement and for no other purposes. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any city officer or employee shall constitute a misdemeanor. Identical records shall be kept of treatments rendered off the business site and, in addition, shall describe the address where the treatment was rendered. Such records shall be maintained for a period of two years. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.15)  
Sec. 22-259. - Violations. 
(a)  Every person, except those persons specifically exempted by this article, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee or operator or whether acting as a participant or worker in any way, who does or practices any acts mentioned in this article for which a permit is required, without first obtaining a valid permit from the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge or in control of a massage establishment who knowingly employs a person performing as a massage technician, as defined in this article, who is not in possession of a valid permit or who allows such employee to perform, operate or practice within such a place of business is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to this article shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this article, commence an action or a proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to this article. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.16)  
Secs. 22-260—22-285. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 22-286. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city, the business of a massage establishment or to render or permit to be rendered, within the city, the business of massage at a location removed from a massage establishment in the absence of a permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.2)  
Sec. 22-287. - Exceptions. 
The requirements of this article shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to any person designated as follows: physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or any registered or licensed vocational nurse working under the supervision of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. The permit requirement shall not apply to any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person licensed to practice any such art or profession under the Business and Professions Code or under any other law of this state. Practical nurses or other persons without qualifications as massage technicians or other persons not otherwise licensed by the state to practice pursuant to the medical practice art, whether employed by physicians, surgeons, chiropractors or osteopaths or not, may not give massages or massage procedures. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.3)  
Sec. 22-288. - Application generally. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment or to perform massage services shall make application to the chief of police upon a form provided by him. Such application shall be accepted only after the city clerk has received a fee, in an amount established by resolution of the city council, to investigate such applicant. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.4)  
Sec. 22-289. - Application contents. 
(a)  Any application for a permit required under this article shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. 
(3)  Written statements signed under declaration of perjury by at least five bona fide state residents that the applicant is of good moral character. 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
(6)  Two portrait photographs, at least two inches by two inches. 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(8)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime and if so the circumstances thereof and the sentence therefor. 
(10)  A certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease. 
(11)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(b)  In addition to the information required in subsection (a) of this section, the applicant must furnish a diploma or a certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage technicians is taught. The city may confirm the fact that the applicant has actually attended classes in a recognized school by requiring the applicant to submit to a written examination in the field of massage techniques. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to deny to the police department the right to take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, nor shall anything contained in this section be construed to deny the right of the police department to confirm the height and weight of the applicant. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.5)  
Sec. 22-290. - Prerequisites to issuance. 
No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the chief of police or an employee authorized by him to do so reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, that all such signs shall comply with the city's sign ordinance. 
(2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided and illuminated in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron. 
(3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code. 
(4)  Equipment capable of disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(6)  Closed cabinets shall be provided, which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
(7)  In any establishment in which massage services are rendered only to members of the same sex at any one time, such persons of the same sex may be placed in the same room, or the operators of the massage establishment may elect to place such persons of the same sex in separate enclosed rooms or booths. Adequate outside ventilation shall be provided to all rooms and booths while massage services are being performed therein. 
(8)  Adequate baths or showers and dressing room, locker, and toilet facilities shall be provided for the use of all patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower and one dressing room containing for each patron a separate locker capable of being locked shall be provided. There shall also be provided by every massage establishment a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin; provided, however, if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at such establishment, a separate massage and dressing room and separate bathing or showering and toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
(9)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all physical facilities for the establishment must be kept in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(10)  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(11)  A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of the employees of such establishment, which basin shall be provided with soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within, or as close as practicable to, the area devoted to the performing of the massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin unused, clean, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(12)  Proof of compliance with all applicable sections of this Code shall be provided upon the request of any police officer at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.6)  
Sec. 22-291. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any applicant for a permit required under this article shall personally appear at the police department and produce proof to the police department that the application fee has been paid to the city clerk, and thereupon the applicant shall complete an application containing the information required in this division. The chief of police shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant for the protection of the public interest and, upon the completion thereof, shall notify the applicant by registered or certified mail at the address shown on the application whether or not such permit may be issued. The chief of police shall send the notification to the applicant by registered or certified mail at the applicant's address shown on the application within a reasonable time after the chief of police receives the completed application. 
(b)  The director of building and safety, the fire department and the county health department may inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the massage establishment and may make separate recommendations to the chief of police concerning compliance with this division. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.7)  
Sec. 22-292. - Issuance or denial; expiration; transferability. 
(a)  The chief of police shall grant a permit to the massage establishment if all requirements for a massage establishment described in this division are met and shall issue a permit to all persons who have applied to perform massage services and have complied with this article, unless it appears that any such person is not of good moral character or has deliberately falsified the application or unless it appears that the record of any such person reveals a conviction of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, those offenses detailed in Government Code § 51032(a) and (b). 
(b)  Any permit issued pursuant to this division shall expire one year from the date of issuance. Any permit issued shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.8)  
Sec. 22-293. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
The chief of police may revoke or suspend any permit granted or issued under this division at any time for a material false statement contained in the application or for a failure to comply with this article or with any state law regulating massage establishments or massage technicians or whenever he determines the permittee is no longer a person of good moral character or has been convicted of a felony or of a crime of moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, those offenses detailed in Government Code § 51032(a) and (b), or violence or for otherwise conducting such establishment or himself in any manner in a massage establishment which endangers the public welfare or patrons thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.9)  
Sec. 22-294. - Notice of suspension or revocation; appeal. 
(a)  Notice of any suspension or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this division shall be given in writing, delivered or sent by registered or certified mail to the person to whom such permit was issued, and shall take effect at the expiration of the 15th day after such mailing unless the permittee has theretofore filed an appeal to the city council. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police may appeal therefrom to the council in the manner provided in this section. If no appeal is taken by the permit holder, the decision of the chief of police revoking or suspending such permit shall become final and conclusive on expiration of the time affixed in this section for appeal. 
(b)  Upon any permit required by this article being refused, suspended or revoked, the applicant or permittee may, within 15 days after notice thereof has been sent by registered or certified mail, which notice is addressed to him at his address on file with the chief of police, file a written request containing his address with the city clerk for a hearing by the council to reconsider such refusal or revocation. Upon the receipt of any such request, the city clerk shall set such hearing within 30 days and, unless waived in writing by such person, shall send a notice of the time and place thereof by registered or certified mail to the person making such request at the address shown therein at least 15 days in advance of such hearing. The council may order the issuance, continuation or reinstatement of any permit required by this article. The applicant shall have the right to present witnesses on his own behalf, cross examine witnesses, present evidence, and obtain a full and fair determination according to the evidence. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.10)  
Sec. 22-295. - Surrender after revocation or suspension. 
Each person to whom a permit has been issued under this division shall immediately surrender his permit to the chief of police upon its revocation or suspension. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.11)  
Sec. 22-296. - Effect of sale or transfer of business. 
Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, the permit and license shall be null and void. A new application for a permit shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate such massage establishment. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.12)  
Sec. 22-297. - Display. 
Every person to whom or for which a permit shall have been granted pursuant to this division shall display such permit in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises where the massage, bath or treatment is given. 
(Code 1957, § 12B.13)  
Secs. 22-298—22-325. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FORTUNETELLING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-326. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fortunetelling means the act of fortunetelling or prophesying future events or happenings affecting the personal life of another by resorting to any occult or psychic power, faculty, or force; clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind reading, telepathy or other similar activity; cards, talisman, charm, potion; spirit photography, spirit writing, spirit voices, spirit materialization, etherealization; crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic of any kind or nature; when such fortunetelling is carried on as a business activity for compensation or consideration of any kind or nature. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-327. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 22-327 which pertained to penalty and derived from Code 1957, § 9A.12.  
Secs. 22-328—22-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 22-356. - Required. 
No person shall engage in, carry on, practice, or profess to practice the business or act of fortunetelling or other similar business or act and demand or receive directly or indirectly any fee, gift, donation or reward therefor without a permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.1)  
Sec. 22-357. - Fees. 
Under this division, the application, investigation, and permit fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.3)  
Sec. 22-358. - Application generally. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any fortunetelling business shall make application to the chief of police or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for a permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of, or carrying on of any fortunetelling business or act. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.4)  
Sec. 22-359. - Contents of application. 
(a)  Each application for a fortunetelling business permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth. 
(5)  Two photographs of the applicant, with head and shoulder view, at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(6)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(7)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state, or territory under license, has had such license or permit for a fortunetelling business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(8)  All convictions within the last five years of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this division, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(10)  Such other identification and information as the police department may reasonably require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this subsection as required to be set forth in the application. 
(b)  The chief of police shall require the applicant to furnish fingerprints. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.5)  
Sec. 22-360. - Appearance of applicant at police department. 
The applicant for the permit required under this division, if an individual, or the designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the police department and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the information required in section 22-360. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.6)  
Sec. 22-361. - Investigation and issuance. 
The chief of police shall have 60 days to investigate the application for the permit required by this division and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police shall grant the permit if he finds that: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to this division. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors if the applicant is a corporation or any of the partners including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership has not, within the last five years, been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude. 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.7)  
Sec. 22-362. - Denial; appeal. 
If the chief of police, following investigation of the applicant for the permit required by this division, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this division, he shall notify the city administrative officer of such opinion and, within 60 days of the date of the application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city administrative officer. The city administrative officer shall, within 20 days, grant the permit or deny the application and notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit by the city administrative officer may appeal such denial to the city council pursuant to section 22-365. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.8)  
Sec. 22-363. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This division shall not apply to any person solely because of the fact that he is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the business of telling fortunes. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed as exempting any person from the payment of the applicable license fee, if any, required to be paid by article II of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any license for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, or clairvoyant from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith, provided that the fees, gratuities, emoluments, and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the church or religious association and provided, further, that the person holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as set forth in this section shall, before practicing the profession specified in this article, file with the tax collector a certified copy of his certificate of ordination with his name, age, and street address in the city where he intends to carry on the business. Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, may, however, pay to its ministers, missionaries, mediums, or workers a salary or compensation based on a percentage basis, provided that the agreement between the church and the minister, missionary, medium or worker is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association. 
(c)  No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any license for carrying on the art of reading tea leaves in any bona fide, regularly established restaurant for the purpose of amusement of the patrons of the restaurant, where no charge for such readings is made. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.9)  
Sec. 22-364. - Revocation of permit and license. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this division and any license issued under article II of this chapter may be revoked by the administrative officer after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Material false statements contained in the application for the permit. 
(2)  Material false statements by the permittee in the course of carrying on his business. 
(3)  Failure of the permittee or any employees or subcontractors of the permittee to comply with the regulations set forth in this division. 
(4)  Conviction of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit and license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.10)  
Sec. 22-365. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of an application for the permit, as provided in this division, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a permit, as provided in this division, and a license under article II of this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action to deny the permit or revoke the permit and license has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in this division for the notice of the hearing of revocation. The appeal shall be heard and decided by the council within 30 days from the date such appeal was filed, unless such time limit is extended, with the written consent of the appellant. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 9A.11)  
Secs. 22-366—22-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-391. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Body piercing means the creation of an opening in the body of a human being for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. This includes, but is not limited to, piercing of an ear, lip, tongue, nose, or eyebrow. Body piercing does not, for the purposes of this article, include piercing an ear with a disposable, single-use stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
Direct supervision means physical presence during and visual observance of the entire tattooing or body piercing procedure, including the preparation of the area to be tattooed or pierced and any necessary bandaging of the area following tattooing or piercing, to ensure that the tattooing or body piercing is performed in a safe and sanitary manner. 
Licensed physician means a person licensed to practice medicine pursuant to Business and Professions Code §§ 2000—2521. 
Tattooing means to insert pigment under the surface of the skin of a human being, by pricking with a needle or otherwise, to produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the skin. 
(Code 1957, § 17B.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-392. - Restrictions. 
No person shall perform tattooing or body piercing, except that tattooing or body piercing may be performed by a licensed physician or by a person under the direct supervision of a licensed physician after the licensed physician has had personal contact with the person to be tattooed or pierced and determined that the procedure will not be harmful to the health of the person to be tattooed or pierced. 
(Code 1957, § 17B.2)  
Sec. 22-393. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 22-393 which pertained to violations and derived from Code 1957, § 17B.6.  
Secs. 22-394—22-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 22-421. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, in or upon any premises within the city, the business of tattooing or body piercing without first obtaining a permit. Except as stated in this division, permits shall be acquired pursuant to and subject to article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 17B.3)  
Sec. 22-422. - Application. 
Any application for a permit required pursuant to this division shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The address of the site where the proposed business of tattooing or body piercing will be conducted. 
(3)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years. 
(4)  The applicant's height and weight, and the color of the applicant's eyes and hair. 
(5)  Two photographs, at least two inches by two inches, showing the full front of the applicant's face only. 
(6)  A history of past permits or licenses for tattooing or body piercing held by the applicant indicating the identification numbers of such permits or licenses and the issuing agencies. The history shall also indicate whether the applicant has had any such permit or license revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor. 
(7)  The name, address, and state license number of the licensed physician who will perform or directly supervise the performance of tattooing or body piercing. 
(Code 1957, § 17B.4)  
Sec. 22-423. - Investigation of information. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required under this division, the city council shall cause to be investigated the information provided in the application. 
(Code 1957, § 17B.5)  
Secs. 22-424—22-429. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TOBACCO RETAILING 
 
Sec. 22-430. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to discourage violations of laws that prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors, but not to expand or reduce the degree to which the acts regulated by state law are criminally proscribed. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-431. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department shall mean the administrative services department of the city. 
Tobacco paraphernalia shall mean cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. 
Tobacco product shall have the meaning set forth in section 106-941 of chapter 106 of this Code. 
Tobacco retailer shall mean any person who sells or offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia; including tobacco giveaways or tobacco-related products; "tobacco retailed" shall mean the doing of any of these things. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-432. - Requirement for tobacco retailer permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's permit pursuant to this article for each location at which that activity is to occur. No permit may issue to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location; peripatetic tobacco retailing and tobacco retailing from vehicles are prohibited. 
(b)  The permit shall be valid for the remaining portion of the then current year, and shall automatically expire on December 31 following the date of issuance. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's permit prior to its expiration. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-433. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Application for a tobacco retailer's permit shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by such person or an authorized agent thereof. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the department and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The business name, address, and telephone number of each location for which a retailer's permit is sought. 
(3)  Such other information as the department deems necessary for enforcement of this article. 
(b)  No person shall make any false, misleading or fraudulent statement or misrepresent any fact in any application for a permit required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-434. - Issuance of permit. 
Upon the receipt of an application for a tobacco retailer's permit, the department shall issue a permit unless substantial record evidence demonstrates one of the following bases for denial: 
(1)  The application is incomplete or inaccurate; 
(2)  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing by a person or at a location for which a suspension is in effect pursuant to section 22-438; 
(3)  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is unlawful pursuant to chapter 106, article V of this Code; or 
(4)  The applicant fails, refuses or neglects to comply with the provisions of this Code relating to the business where the tobacco retailing is proposed to occur. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-435. - Display of permit. 
Each permittee shall prominently display the permit at each location where tobacco retailing occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-436. - Fees for permit. 
A fee shall be charged for a Tobacco Retailer's Permit. The amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of both the administration and enforcement of the permit, including but not limited to the cost of reviewing permit applications, issuing the permit, renewing the permit, administering the retailer permit program, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators. All fees are non-refundable, except as required by law and shall be used exclusively to fund the program and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 1584, § 1, 10-20-2008)  
Sec. 22-437. - Permit non-transferable. 
A tobacco retailer's permit is nontransferable. In the event a person to whom a permit has been issued changes business location or sells the business referenced in that person's permit, that person must apply for a new permit prior to acting as a tobacco retailer at the new location. The transferee of the permittee must apply for a permit in the transferee's name before acting as a tobacco retailer. Any permit reissued pursuant to this section shall expire on the date the previous permit for the business or person would have otherwise expired. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-438. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(1)  A tobacco retailer's permit shall be revoked if the department finds, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a permit under section 22-434 exist. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for a permit following correction of the conditions that required revocation of the permit. 
(2)  A tobacco retailer's permit shall be suspended if the department finds, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that the permittee or his or her agent or employee has violated any local, state, or federal law governing the sale, advertisement or display of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia. 
(b)  Suspension of permit. If the department finds that there are grounds for suspension of a permit, the following sanctions shall be imposed: 
(1)  Upon a first finding by the department of a violation by a permittee or any agent or employee of a permittee within any 12-month period, the permit shall be suspended for 30 days unless: (1) the permittee submits a training plan within a reasonable time established by the department in form and content acceptable to the department, for the training of all sales employees in the laws pertaining to the sale, advertisement, and display of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia to minors, and, techniques to ensure future compliance with such laws; and (2) the permittee files with the department, within such time as is reasonably established by the department, satisfactory evidence that the training described in the training plan has been completed. 
(2)  Upon the second finding by the of a violation by a permittee or by any agent or employee of a permittee within any 12-month period, the permit shall be suspended for 90 days. 
(3)  Upon each subsequent finding by the department of a violation by a permittee or by any agent or employee of a permittee within any 12-month period, the permit shall be suspended for one year. 
(c)  Appeal of suspension and/or revocation. The decision of the department is appealable to the city administrator or his/her designee and must be filed with the city clerk within ten days of receipt of the department's determination of violation. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the appealed action. Any such appeal shall follow the process set forth in paragraphs (d), (e), and (f) of section 22-439. 
(d)  Carrying on business after suspension or revocation. No person whose permit has been revoked or suspended pursuant to this article shall engage in or carry on any tobacco retailing until a new permit shall have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-439. - Administrative fines/penalties. 
(a)  Grounds for fine. If the department finds, based on substantial record evidence, that any permitted or unpermitted person has engaged in tobacco retailing activities in violation of section 22-432, the department shall fine that person as follows: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a first violation in any 12-month period; or 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for a second violation in any 12-month period; or 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $1,500.00 for a third or subsequent violation in any 12-month period. 
Each day that a person without a valid tobacco retailer's permit offers tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for sale or exchange shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Notice of violation. A notice of violation and of intent to impose a fine shall be personally served on, or sent by certified mail to the person or persons subject to the fine. The notice shall state the basis of the department's determinations and include an advisement of the right to request for a hearing before the city administrator or his or her designee to contest the imposition of the fine. Any request for a hearing must be delivered to the city clerk in writing within ten calendar days of receipt of the notice of violation. 
(c)  Imposition of fine. If no request is timely filed for a hearing, the department's determination on the violation and the imposition of a fine shall be final and payment shall be made within 30 calendar days of written demand made in the manner specified above for a notice violation. If the fine is not paid within that time, the fine may be collected, along with interest at the legal rate, in any manner provided by law. In the event that a judicial action is necessary to compel payment of the fine and accumulated interest, the person or persons subject to the fine shall also be liable for the costs of the suit and attorneys' fees incurred by the city in enforcing the fine. 
(d)  Notice of hearing. If a hearing is requested pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section 22-439, the city clerk shall provide written notice, within 45 calendar days of its receipt of the request, to the person or persons subject to the proposed fine of the date, time, and place of the hearing in the manner specified above for a notice of violation. 
(e)  Hearing procedure. The hearing shall be recorded on audio- or video-tape. Any party to the hearing may, at his or her own expense, cause the hearing to be recorded by a certified court reporter. During the hearing, evidence and testimony may be presented to the hearing officer (the city administrator, or his or her designee). The person or persons subject to the proposed fine may be represented by counsel and have the right to cross-examine witnesses. All testimony shall be given under oath. The hearing officer shall render a written decision and findings within 20 working days of the hearing. Copies of the decision and findings shall be provided to the person or persons subject to the fine in the manner specified above for a notice of violation. 
(f)  Finality of the hearing officer's decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be the final decision of the city. 
(g)  Appeal to municipal court. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 1094.5 or § 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, within 20 days after service of the hearing officer's decision and findings, any person subject to a fine may seek review of the hearing officer's decision and findings by the municipal court. A copy of the notice of appeal to the municipal court shall be served in person or by first-class mail upon the department by the contestant. The appeal shall be heard de novo, except that the contents of the department's file in the case shall be received in evidence. A copy of the records of the department of the notices of the violation and of the hearing officer's decision and findings shall be admitted into evidence as prima facie evidence of the facts stated. 
(h)  Failure to pay fine. If no timely notice of appeal to the municipal court is filed, the hearing officer's decision and findings shall be deemed confirmed and the fine shall be collected pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 22-440. - Enforcement. 
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a violation. 
(Ord. No. 1526, § 2, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 1537, § 12, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 22-441—22-449. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - COMMERCIAL FILMING AND PHOTOGRAPHY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-450. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to provide rules and regulations governing permits for filming, videotaping, or still photography on location within the city. These rules will promote these activities while protecting public health and safety and public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-451. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Charitable films shall mean motion picture production, television production or still photography by a non-profit organization that qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of these films, tapes or photos or from showing these films, tapes, or photos. 
City produced public access films shall mean motion picture production, television production or still photography produced by or in association with the city. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of these films, tapes, or photos or from showing the films, tapes, or photos. 
Family video shall mean the filming or videotaping of motion pictures or taking of still photography solely for private non-commercial use. 
Producing, filming, videotaping, or photographing shall mean and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials and to taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or commercial use where the photographer sets up stationary equipment in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes. 
News reporters shall mean reporters, photographers, or camera operators in the employ of a newspaper, news service, television or radio broadcasting station, or similar entity, engaged in on location filming or photography of news events concerning people, scenes, or occurrences that are in the news or of general public interest. 
Student films shall mean motion picture, television or still photography produced to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational institution. The student must supply proof that he/she is currently enrolled. 
Studios shall mean an established or fixed place of business where filming or video taping for motion picture or television production is regularly conducted upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 22-452. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public or private property, public right-of-way, facility or residence for the purpose of engaging in the business of producing, filming, videotaping, or photographing without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-453. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect: 
a.  Charitable films. 
b.  City produced public access films. 
c.  Family video. 
d.  News reporters. 
e.  Student films. 
f.  Studios. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-454. - Application and issuance. 
Any person or business desiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make an application on the appropriate form provided by the city. The form must be signed and accompanied by all fees and insurance certificates required by this chapter. Applications shall be filed a minimum of 15 days prior to the date requested for the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-455. - Criteria for issuance or denial of a permit. 
A permit for the activities covered by this resolution will be issued by an official designated by the city to act on the permit application unless the official finds that: 
(1)  The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application; or 
(2)  The production, filming, videotaping, or photography will substantially disrupt the peace and quiet of any area in the city; or 
(3)  The production, filming, videotaping, or photography will substantially impact upon traffic within any area of the city; or 
(4)  The production, filming, videotaping, or photography at the proposed location will be incompatible with other uses in the vicinity; or 
(5)  If the application is for renewal of a permit, that the applicant has violated conditions of a previous permit, or ordinances or regulations of the city in the conduct of business or activity; or 
(6)  That the production, filming, videotaping, or photography fails to comply with conditions imposed on the permit; or 
(7)  The building, structure, premises, or the equipment used to conduct the production, filming, videotaping, or photography fails to comply with all applicable health, zoning, fire, building and safety laws of the State of California or the city. 
Where one of more of these findings is negative to the applicant, a permit may be conditionally issued to the applicant where unique circumstances exist that justify issuance of the permit, provided that appropriate conditions are imposed on the permit to protect the public health, welfare, and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-456. - Notice of permit denial. 
Where the permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-457. - Appeals. 
Appeals of permit denials under this article may be made pursuant to chapter 22, section 22-75 of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-458. - Conditions imposed on permit. 
Conditions may be imposed on the permit as are reasonably necessary to protect the peace and tranquility of any residential area, to mitigate traffic impacts, to protect other uses in the area, or to protect the public health, welfare and safety. Any person issued a permit pursuant to this title shall comply with all conditions imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-459. - Violation of rules and regulations. 
A permit issued may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A material false statement contained in the application; or 
(2)  Failure to comply with federal, state or local laws and regulations; or 
(3)  Failure to comply with any conditions imposed by the city on the issuance of the permit; or 
(4)  Failure to conduct production, filming, videotaping, or photography in accordance to such orders, rules and regulations as may be applicable; or 
(5)  Conduct of the production, filming, videotaping, or photography in a fraudulent or disorderly manner, or in a manner that endangers the public health, welfare or safety. 
Violation of the terms and conditions of the film permit is considered a misdemeanor and a penalty fee may be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 1597, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-460. - Term of permit. 
The permit shall designate specific dates for which it is effective. 
(Ord. No. 1597, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-461. - Permit fees and exceptions. 
Every person engaged in the business or activity of filming, videotaping or producing motion pictures shall pay a permit fee as required by section 22-144 of article II of chapter 22 of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1597, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-462. - Liability requirements. 
A certificate of liability insurance will be required in an amount no less than $1,000,000.00 naming the city, its officials and employees as additionally insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to city property from filming activities. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modifications until after 30 days written notice to the city. The standard general liability special endorsement form mandated by the California Film Commission shall be presented. A copy of the certificate shall remain on file. 
(Ord. No. 1597, § 2, 8-6-2007)  
Chapter 23 - OUTDOOR SMOKING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Tobacco retailing, § 22-430 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; smoking prohibited in parks, playgrounds and recreation centers, § 54-27. 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, or other entity formed for profit-making purposes. 
Dining area means any area, including streets and sidewalks, which is available to or customarily used by the general public or an employee, and which is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink. 
Employee means any person who is employed or retained as an independent contractor by any employer or nonprofit entity in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer or nonprofit entity. 
Employer means any business or nonprofit entity that retains the service of one or more employees. 
Enclosed area means an area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to all parts of the area, and includes an area that has: 
(1)  Any type of overhead cover whether or not that cover includes vents or other openings and at least three walls or other vertical boundaries of any height whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings; or 
(2)  Four walls or other vertical boundaries that exceed six feet in height whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings. 
Grounds shall include, without limitation, landscaped areas, patios, stairways, walls, parking lots, and walkways on publicly owned property adjacent to the San Fernando Plaza and San Fernando Library Plaza. 
Nicotine means a toxic colorless or yellowish oily liquid that is the chief active constituent of tobacco. 
Nonprofit entity means any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A government agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this chapter. 
Person means any natural person, business, cooperative association, nonprofit entity, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity including government agencies. 
Place of employment means any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer, that an employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the normal course of the operations, regardless of the hours of operation. 
Public place means any place, publicly or privately owned, which is open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement. 
Reasonable distance means a distance of 25 feet in any direction from an area in which smoking is prohibited. 
Recreational area means any area, including streets and sidewalks, that is publicly or privately owned /owned, controlled or used by the city and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes but is not limited to parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, skateboard parks, amusement parks, and beaches. 
Service area means any publicly or privately owned area, including streets and sidewalks, that is designed to be used or is regularly used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service or to make a transaction, whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange of money. The term "service area" includes but is not limited to areas including or adjacent to information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines or cab stands. 
Smoke means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term "smoke" includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, and marijuana smoke. 
Smoking means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as, for example: possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, an operating electronic cigarette, a lighted cigar, or a lighted cigarette of any kind; or lighting or igniting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar, or a cigarette of any kind. 
Tobacco product means any substance containing tobacco leaf, and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into a human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. 
Unenclosed area means any area that is not an enclosed area. 
Vaping means to inhale and exhale the vapor produced by an electronic cigarette or similar device, such as, for example: mini E-cigarettes, Gig-A-likes, mid-sized vaporizers, vape pens, and mods. 
(Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 2-20-2018)  
Sec. 23-2. - Prohibition of smoking and tobacco product use in unenclosed areas. 
(a)  All forms of vaping, smoking and the use of tobacco products is prohibited in the unenclosed areas of the following places within the city, except places where smoking or the use of tobacco products is already prohibited by state or federal law, in which case those laws apply: 
(1)  Recreational areas; 
(2)  Service areas; 
(3)  Dining areas; 
(4)  Places of employment; 
(5)  Other public places, when being used for a public event, including but not limited to a farmers' market, parade, craft fair, festival, or any other event which may be attended by the general public, provided that smoking is permitted on streets and sidewalks being used only in a traditional capacity as pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfares, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter or other law. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person, employer, or nonprofit entity with legal control over any property from prohibiting vaping, smoking and tobacco product use on any part of such property, even if vaping, smoking or the use of tobacco products is not otherwise prohibited in that area. 
(Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 2-20-2018)  
Sec. 23-3. - Reasonable smoking distance required. 
(a)  Vaping, smoking and the use of tabaco products in all unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which vaping and smoking is prohibited, except while the person smoking or vaping is actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. 
(b)  Vaping, smoking and the use of tobacco products in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any unenclosed areas in which smoking is prohibited under sec. 23-2 of this chapter, except while the person smoking is actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 2-20-2018)  
Sec. 23-4. - Other requirements and prohibitions. 
(a)  No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit vaping, smoking or the use of tobacco products in an area which is under the legal or de facto control of that person, employer or nonprofit entity and in which vaping, smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited by law, unless otherwise required by state or federal law. 
(b)  No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly or intentionally permit the presence or placement of ash receptacles, such as, for example, ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the legal or de facto control of that person, employer or nonprofit entity and in which vaping, smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited by law, including, without limitation, within a reasonable distance required by this chapter from any area in which vaping, smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited. notwithstanding the foregoing, the presence of ash receptacles in violation of this subsection shall not be a defense to a charge of vaping, smoking or the use of tobacco products in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(c)  No person shall dispose of used vaping, smoking or tobacco product waste within the boundaries of an area in which vaping and smoking is prohibited, including within any reasonable distance required by this chapter. 
(d)  A person, employer, or nonprofit entity that has legal or de facto control of an unenclosed area in which vaping, smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited by this chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous "no smoking no vaping" or no use of tobacco products or "smokefree" or "tobacco-free" sign at each point of ingress to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area. The signs shall have letters of no less than one inch in height and shall include the international "no smoking no vaping" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette and e-cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). Signs posted on the exterior of buildings to comply with this section shall include the reasonable distance requirement set forth in section 23-3. For purposes of this section, the city administrator or his/her designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs in regulated facilities owned or leased in whole or in part by the city. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge of vaping, smoking or the use of tobacco products in violation of any other provision of this chapter. 
(e)  No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to attain compliance with this chapter. 
(f)  Each instance of vaping, smoking or tobacco product use in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. For violations other than for vaping or smoking, each day of a continuing violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 2-20-2018)  
Sec. 23-5. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(b)  Each incident of vaping, smoking or use of tobacco products in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject chapter 1, articles II and III of the City Code. Other violations of this chapter may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be prosecuted as infractions when the interests of justice so requires. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of city administrator or his/her designee. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement official also may enforce this chapter. 
(c)  Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(d)  In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 2-20-2018)  
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the following: 
(1)  The preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in an emergency; 
(2)  The direction of the emergency organization; and 
(3)  The coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Code 1957, § 7.1)  
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Local emergency means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the state public utilities commission. 
State of emergency means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a "state of war emergency," which conditions, because of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single county, city and county, or city, and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the state public utilities commission. 
State of war emergency means the condition which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever this state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent. 
(Code 1957, § 7.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-3. - Violations and penalties. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-10, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the state emergency agency. 
(Code 1957, § 7.10)  
Secs. 26-4—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Emergency plan. 
The city disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city's emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 7.8)  
Sec. 26-32. - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 7.9)  
Secs. 26-33—26-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 26-61. - Composition. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under subsection 26-63(a)(6)c of this division, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the city's emergency organization. 
(Code 1957, § 7.7)  
Sec. 26-62. - Officers. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The city administrator shall be the director of emergency services. 
(b)  There is hereby created the office of vice director of emergency services. The chief of police shall be the vice director of emergency services. 
(c)  There is hereby created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be the director of public works. 
(d)  There is hereby created the office of coordinator of emergency services, who shall be a representative of the San Fernando Police Department. 
(Code 1957, § 7.5; Ord. No. 1546, § 5, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 1576, § 1, 11-20-2006) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-91 et seq.  
Sec. 26-63. - Powers and duties of officers. 
(a)  The director of emergency services is empowered to: 
(1)  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
(2)  Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
(3)  Control and direct the effort of the city's emergency organization for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter. 
(4)  Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the city's emergency organization and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
(5)  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter. 
(6)  If the proclamation of a local emergency is made as provided in this section, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered to: 
a.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
b.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, commandeer the supplies, equipment and other properties for public use; 
c.  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, if the proclamation of a state of emergency is declared in the county in which this city is located or there is the existence of a state of war emergency, command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of his/her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers; 
d.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and 
e.  Execute all of his/her ordinary powers as city administrator; all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this chapter adopted by the city council; all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
(b)  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect if the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his/her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
(c)  The vice-director shall be responsible for direction of emergency service activities under the direction of the director and city council and shall, in the absence or inability of the director to act, act as director. 
(d)  The assistant director shall, in the absence or inability to act of the vice-director, be responsible for direction of emergency service activities under the direction of the director and city council and act as vice-director and, in the absence or inability to act of the director, act as director and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(e)  The coordinator shall, under the supervision of the director and vice-director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Code 1957, § 7.6; Ord. No. 1576, §§ 2, 3, 11-20-2006)  
Secs. 26-64—26-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DISASTER COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees, agencies and authorities, § 2-401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-91. - Created; composition. 
(a)  The city's disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
(2)  A councilmember who shall be appointed by the mayor, shall be vice chairperson; 
(3)  The assistant director of emergency services; 
(4)  The coordinator of emergency services; 
(5)  A disaster communications representative; 
(6)  A representative of the fire department; 
(7)  A representative of the American Red Cross; 
(8)  A representative of the Los Angeles Unified School District; and 
(9)  A representative of the California Emergency Mobile Patrol or other similar trained volunteer organization. 
(b)  The disaster council shall be composed of nine members, each with full participation and voting rights. Except for those members included pursuant to subsection (a)(1) through (4) of this section, the terms of office of members of the disaster council shall be for periods of two years. 
(Code 1957, § 7.3; Ord. No. 1576, § 4, 11-20-2006) 
State Law reference— Local councils authorized, Government Code § 8610.  
Sec. 26-92. - Powers and duties; meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the disaster council and it is empowered to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet at least quarterly and upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. 
(Code 1957, § 7.4)  
Sec. 26-93. - Absences from meetings. 
(a)  Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the disaster council by a member without consent of the disaster council shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and his/her office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city council of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(b)  Absence from three regular meetings of the disaster council in a 12-month period by a member without consent of the disaster council or absence from more than four regular meetings of the disaster council within a 12-month period by a member with the consent of the disaster council shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and his/her office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city council of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(c)  Any member whose absences from regular meetings of the disaster council are deemed to constitute a retirement of such member under this section shall have the right to appeal the deemed retirement to the city council within ten days of notification of the deemed retirement. The city council may overturn the deemed retirement if it determines that the absences of the member were the result of unusual circumstances. 
(Code 1957, § 7.4.1; Ord. No. 1576, § 5, 11-20-2006)  
Sec. 26-94. - Compensation. 
Each of the members of the disaster council shall receive such compensation as the city council shall, from time to time, determine and fix by resolution. 
(Code 1957, § 7.4.2)  
Secs. 26-95—26-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POST-DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS 
 
Sec. 26-121. - Intent. 
This article establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or manmade disaster. This article further authorizes the department of community development, as well as authorized representatives of the department, to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. 
(Code 1957, § 7.20)  
Sec. 26-122. - Applicability. 
This article is applicable following each natural or manmade disaster to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city. The council may extend the provisions as necessary. 
(Code 1957, § 7.21)  
Sec. 26-123. - Safety assessment. 
For the purposes of this article, a safety assessment is a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy following a natural or manmade disaster. Such assessment shall be made by the building official, licensed structural engineer, or other authorized representatives of the community development department possessing demonstrated knowledge of determining structural conditions. 
(Code 1957, § 7.22)  
Sec. 26-124. - Placards. 
(a)  The following are descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures as provided in this article. Copies of actual placards are attached to Ordinance No. 1455 as exhibit A and are kept on file in the city clerk's office: 
(1)  Inspected—Lawful occupancy permitted (green) is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
(2)  Restricted use (yellow) is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
(3)  Unsafe—Do not enter or occupy (red) is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the department that posted the building. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered. 
(b)  The number of the ordinance from which this section derives (Ord. No. 1455), the name of the department, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard. 
(c)  Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the department or upon written notification from the department. 
(Code 1957, § 7.23)  
Secs. 26-125—26-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 26-151. - Statutory authorization and purpose. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the City of San Fernando does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(b)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 1572, § 1, 7-17-2006)  
Sec. 26-152. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood). 
Building see Structure. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flooding. 
Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain management regulations means this ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See Base flood. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(Ord. No. 1572, § 2, 7-17-2006)  
Sec. 26-153. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for establishing flood-prone areas. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from federal or state agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the city. This data will be on file at: Office of the City Clerk, City of San Fernando, 117 Macneil Street, San Fernando, CA 91340. 
(c)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(d)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(e)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city of San Fernando; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(f)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1572, § 3, 7-17-2006)  
Sec. 26-154. - Administration. 
(a)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be obtained for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such construction or other development is within flood-prone areas. 
(b)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The community development director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this ordinance by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following. 
(1)  Permit review. Review all development permit applications to determine that: 
a.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review and use of any other base flood data. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agency or other source. 
(Ord. No. 1572, § 4, 7-17-2006)  
Sec. 26-155. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  Standards of construction. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall: 
(1)  Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Be constructed: 
a.  With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(b)  Standards for subdivisions or other proposed new development. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that: 
(1)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the floodprone area; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(c)  Standards for utilities. 
(1)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and 
b.  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
(2)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 1572, § 5, 7-17-2006)  
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, Business and Professions Code § 7592.8. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-26. - Purpose. 
The city finds and determines that the regulation of alarm systems and the control of false alarms is necessary to promote the health, welfare and safety of the people in that some of the public are using alarm systems which either mechanically malfunction or are not operated properly by their users, causing an increase in false alarm reports thereby constituting a hazard to the safety of peace officers and the public in general. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.1)  
Sec. 30-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm agent means a person employed by an alarm company operator whose duties include selling on premises, altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, responding, or monitoring an alarm system; or a person who manages or supervises a person employed by an alarm company to perform any of the duties described in this article or any person in training for any of the duties described in this article. 
Alarm company operator means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in business or accepts employment to install, maintain, alter, sell on premises, monitor, or service alarm systems or who responds to alarm systems except for any alarm agent. The term "alarm company operator" includes any entity that is retained by a licensed alarm company operator, a customer, or any other person or entity to monitor one or more alarm systems, whether or not the entity performs any other duties within the definition of an alarm company operator. The sections of this article, to the extent that they can be made applicable, shall be applicable to the duties and functions performed in monitoring alarm systems. A person licensed as an alarm company operator may not conduct any investigation except one that is incidental to personal injury or the theft, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation, or concealment of any property or any other thing enumerated in this definition, which the person has been hired or engaged to protect. 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. 
Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of the unauthorized entry on or attempted entry into a premises or structure or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act or both and which, when actuated, generates an audible sound beyond the business, premises or residential unit or dwelling protected by such device, and which device is not monitored by an alarm business. 
False alarm means an activated alarm or alarm signal from any alarm system which is responded to by the police department but for which no emergency situation exists or where there is no evidence to indicate that there was an emergency situation as determined by the responding officer. The term "false alarm" does not include those alarms actuated by extraordinary meteorological, atmospheric, or other conditions or means as determined by the chief of police. 
Fiscal year means the period from and including July 1 of any year to and including June 30 of the following year. 
Proprietor alarm means an alarm which is not monitored or serviced by an alarm company operator. 
Subscriber means a person contracting with an alarm company operator for the leasing, servicing or maintaining of an alarm system. 
Visible means capable of being seen or perceived by the naked eye. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-28. - Alarm reports required. 
A report shall be filed with the chief of police for each alarm transmitted to the police department, which shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the subscriber, in addition to whether or not the alarm was a false alarm. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.8)  
Sec. 30-29. - Audible alarm requirements. 
(a)  Every person owning or maintaining an audible alarm shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of the persons to be notified to render repairs or services during any hour of the day or night the burglar alarm is activated. Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground-level adjacent to the building. In addition to the posting requirements, the occupant of the premises upon which an audible alarm is installed shall notify the police department of the name and telephone number at which he may be reached at any time of the day or night. 
(b)  The owner of any audible alarm or subscriber to an alarm service shall be responsible for deactivating any alarm within one hour after notification or after reasonable efforts have been made to notify the owner or alarm company operator that such alarm has been activated and is ringing. The ringing of any alarm for a period in excess of one hour after such notification or efforts of notification have been made is to be considered a public nuisance making the owner/subscriber subject to prosecution. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.9)  
Sec. 30-30. - Prerecorded messages. 
No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects any public telephone trunk line to report a burglary or emergency by prerecorded message. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.10)  
Sec. 30-31. - Motor vehicle alarms. 
No person shall cause, allow or permit any alarm located in a motor vehicle to emit any audible sound in the city for a period more than 15 minutes. The police department may take such steps as are reasonably necessary to enter the vehicle, disconnect the alarm, and remove the vehicle for safekeeping. Any fees incurred as a result of false alarms shall be assessed to the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.11)  
Sec. 30-32. - False alarm prevention payment. 
The owner or lessee of any alarm system which has caused any signal, message or alarm to be transmitted to the police department, either by direct telephone or other direct communication or by communication from an alarm agent or an alarm company operator or by a person responding to an audible alarm and which is proved to be a false alarm, shall pay a false alarm prevention fee established by resolution of the city council for the following: 
(1)  For false alarms in excess of three received in any fiscal year by the police department, the owner or lessee shall be assessed a fee for each such alarm. 
(2)  For false alarms in excess of six received in any fiscal year by the police department, the owner or lessee shall be assessed an increased fee for each such alarm. 
(3)  For each false alarm indicating a violation of Penal Code § 211 (robbery). 
(4)  For each false motor vehicle alarm emitting an audible sound for more than 15 minutes. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.12)  
Sec. 30-33. - Penalties for failure to pay fees. 
Any person who fails to pay any fee required to be paid by this article within 60 days from the date of the bill or invoice shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the fee, in addition to the amount of the fee. Additional penalties at a rate of ten percent per month will be imposed thereafter until such time as payment has been received. Penalties shall not exceed the amount of the original fee imposed. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.13; Ord. No. 1574, § 3, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 1579, § 3, 8-6-2007)  
Sec. 30-34. - Right to discontinue response. 
The police department will not respond to any alarm at the location where the alarm has been installed if one or more of the following exist: 
(1)  Fees from past due accounts are not paid within 60 days after written notice has been given that such response will be discontinued. Such notice may be given if the fees are past due for 60 days or more after the date of the bill or invoice. Service response will be resumed after full payment has been received. 
(2)  More than eight false alarms have been received by the police department during any fiscal year. Response will be resumed after submission to and approval by the police department of an alarm plan to reduce the number of false alarms to less than three in any fiscal year. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.14; Ord. No. 1574, § 3, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 1579, § 3, 8-6-2007)  
Secs. 30-35—30-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AGENTS 
 
Sec. 30-61. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner of an alarm company operator, to act as an alarm agent within the city without first having registered his name and filed with the chief of police a copy of the alarm agent registration card issued to him by the state director of consumer affairs pursuant to the provisions of Business and Professions Code § 7598.14. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.5)  
Sec. 30-62. - Notification of changes. 
Any alarm company operator or alarm agent registered with the police department shall report, within five working days to the chief of police, any change of address, ownership, name of business or location of business. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.6)  
Sec. 30-63. - Carrying registration card. 
Every person acting as an alarm agent within the city shall carry on his person at all times while so engaged a valid state alarm agent's registration card and shall display such card to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.7)  
Secs. 30-64—30-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 30-91. - Required; application; fee. 
(a)  No person shall install or cause to be installed or used, maintain or possess an alarm system on any business or residential premises owned or in the possession or control of such person within the city without first having obtained an alarm permit from the chief of police in accordance with this division. 
(b)  The application for an alarm permit shall be filed with the chief of police, together with a fee for the alarm permit as established by resolution of the city council. The chief of police shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. The application shall include the address of the premises where the system is to be located and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the person who will render service or repairs during any hour of the day or night. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.3)  
Sec. 30-92. - Change of application information. 
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information as may be required in section 30-91, the permit holder or his designee shall give written notice of such change to the chief of police within five working days. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.4)  
Sec. 30-93. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
If at any time it shall come to the attention of the chief of police that the holder of an alarm permit issued under this division has violated any section of this article or any rules or regulations made pursuant to this article, including but not limited to false alarms which exceed the numbers permitted pursuant to section 30-32 of this article, or has failed or refused to pay the false alarm prevention payment fee as provided in section 30-32, the chief of police may suspend or revoke the permit. If an alarm permit is to be suspended or revoked, as provided in this section, the chief of police shall notify the holder of the permit in writing of his intention to revoke such permit 72 hours before the effective hour of the suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.15)  
Sec. 30-94. - Appeal of suspension or revocation. 
Any alarm user aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police to suspend or revoke the permit issued pursuant to this division may appeal to the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 3A.16)  
Secs. 30-95—30-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE PATROLS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Patrol officer means an individual engaged in the act of guarding property as the owner, member or employee of a patrol system. 
Patrol system means any private service or private system which purports to furnish or does furnish to members or subscribers any watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any part of the city or to guard or watch any property, including guarding against theft, fire, or both, or to perform any service usually and customarily performed by the police department. The term "patrol system" does not include the guarding of property of a single owner, while such property is not open to the public, by one or more individuals whose entire salary or wage is paid by such owner, irrespective of whether such salary or wage is paid directly to the individuals performing such guard duty or to another, or service of any nature performed by an employee whose main or principal duty is not that of guarding or protecting property. 
(Code 1957, § 21.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-122. - Rules and regulations of council. 
The city council may make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article or with state law governing patrol systems and patrol officers, as the council may deem reasonable. 
(Code 1957, § 21.9)  
Sec. 30-123. - Rules and regulations of state. 
Every patrol system licensed under this article shall comply with rules, regulations and laws of the state governing the operations of patrol systems. 
(Code 1957, § 21.10)  
Sec. 30-124. - Conduct of patrol officers generally. 
A patrol officer shall not, either by himself or through the actions of another, harass, annoy or commit a nuisance against or injure the property of, unnecessarily enter, or otherwise trespass upon the property of any person whose property the patrol system of such patrol officer is not employed to protect. 
(Code 1957, § 21.2)  
Sec. 30-125. - Report of property patrolled. 
Any patrol system licensed under this article shall file with the police department the address of each property that it is watching or patrolling, together with the name and address of the person employing the operator for such purpose. 
(Code 1957, § 21.3)  
Sec. 30-126. - Performance of police activities; report of offenses. 
No patrol officer shall perform official police or investigation activities, but shall immediately report every violation of law and every unusual occurrence to the police department without unnecessary delay. 
(Code 1957, § 21.4)  
Sec. 30-127. - Use of rank or title. 
No patrol officer shall assume or use a rank or title the same as or similar to any rank or title used by the sheriff or by any police department within the county, nor shall any patrol system use, grant or bestow or permit any patrol officer to assume or use any such rank or title. 
(Code 1957, § 21.5)  
Sec. 30-128. - Uniform. 
A patrol officer shall not wear any uniform which is in imitation of or can be mistaken for an official sheriff's uniform or an official police uniform of the police force of any city within the county or an official uniform of any state officer. 
(Code 1957, § 21.6)  
Sec. 30-129. - Police equipment. 
A list of police equipment, including weapons which patrol officers will wear while on duty, shall be furnished to the chief of police. A patrol officer shall not wear any equipment or carry any weapon to which the chief of police has objected. 
(Code 1957, § 21.7)  
Sec. 30-130. - Notice when patrol officer leaves service. 
The person holding the license for a patrol system shall so inform the city clerk in writing within five days after any patrol officer no longer is an owner, member or employee of such licensee. 
(Code 1957, § 21.8)  
Secs. 30-131—30-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE FOR SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 30-156. - Required. 
Every person conducting a patrol system shall first procure a state license, pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 7520. In addition, each patrol system must obtain a business permit pursuant to section 22-215 of this Code and a business license from the city. 
(Code 1957, § 21.11)  
Sec. 30-157. - Information required. 
(a)  Every person conducting a duly licensed patrol system shall file a statement with the city clerk containing the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the licensee. 
(2)  If the licensee is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners. 
(3)  If the licensee is a corporation, the names and addresses of the corporate officers and manager, and a certified copy of the resolution authorizing such a license. 
(4)  The district or territory to be served by the patrol system, as well as a description of each parcel of property patrolled. 
(5)  A description of the methods of operation. 
(6)  The names and addresses of all patrol officers who are or will be owners, officers or employees of the patrol system. 
(7)  A statement as to what offenses, if any, any person mentioned in subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section has been convicted or arrested for and of the time, place and circumstances thereof. 
(8)  Such other information as either the council or the chief of police may require. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to provide any false information in the required statement. 
(Code 1957, § 21.12)  
Secs. 30-158—30-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE FOR PATROL OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 30-186. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a patrol officer without first obtaining a state license to do so, pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 7520. It shall likewise be unlawful for the operator of a patrol system to employ or utilize the services of any patrol officer who does not have a valid and subsisting license. 
(Code 1957, § 21.13)  
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; dangerous buildings, § 18-181 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 62; solid waste and recyclables collection services, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 106; hazardous waste management facilities, § 106-1336 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Noise from collection and disposal of solid waste, § 70-35. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-26. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds emanating from incorporated areas of the city, it is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in this article. 
(b)  It is determined that certain noise levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to public interest; therefore, the city council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to create, maintain or cause any noise in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with this article is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1957, § 14.1)  
Sec. 34-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative services officer means the city administrative officer. 
Ambient noise level means the noise level exceeded 90 percent of the time for the period being measured. The ambient noise level is the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of all sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. For the purposes of enforcement of this article, the maximum permissible ambient noise level shall be no greater than the following noise levels for each of the indicated zones: 
		7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
dB(A) 	10:00 p.m. to 7.00 a. m. 
dB(A) 
Residential, including mixed-use: 		
	Exterior 	55 	50 
	Interior 	50 	40 
Commercial 	65 	60 
Industrial 	70 	70 
 
Building official means the director of building and planning or the director's duly authorized representative. 
Commission means the planning and preservation commission. 
Cumulative period means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio. 
Development means the activity of preparing land and constructing facilities in order to establish a land use. A development also means a lot or project area together with the completed facilities and improvements thereon. 
Director , with respect to amplified sound permit applications for use of sound amplifying equipment on public streets or public right-of-ways, means the director of the public works department, or the director's duly authorized representative, and with respect to amplified sound permit applications for use of sound amplifying equipment in or outside of rooms, stadiums, structures or public places, means the director of the community development department, or the director's duly authorized representative. 
Dwelling unit means one or more habitable rooms constituting a permanent, self-contained unit with a separate entrance and used or intended to be used continuously for living and sleeping purposes for not more than one family and containing one, but not more than one, kitchen or kitchenette. 
Emergency machinery, vehicle or work means any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Fixed noise source means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment. 
Grading means any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination thereof conducted at a site to prepare the site for construction or other improvements thereon. 
Impact noise means the noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest. 
Lot means that portion of any geographical location under the direct custody and control of the applicant. 
Mixed-use means a development containing both residential and nonresidential land uses. 
Mobile noise source means any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
Noise means loud and excessive sound which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace or good order, including that produced by persons, pets and livestock, industrial equipment, construction, motor vehicles, home appliances, electric motors, combustion engines, and any other sound-producing objects. 
Noise level means the A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of 20 micronewtons per square meter. The unit of measurement shall be designated as dB(A). 
Person means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private in nature. 
Residential property means a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, including mixed-use developments, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels. 
Simple tone noise means a noise characterized by a predominant frequency so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished. 
Sound level meter means an instrument meeting American National Standard Institute's Standard 51.4-1971 for type 1 or type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
Sound pressure level of a sound, in decibels, means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a referenced pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
(Code 1957, § 14.2; Ord. No. 1546, § 6, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 1593, §§ 1—9, 1-19-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-28. - Specific noises prohibited. 
(a)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is, for any reason, held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating of or the permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure, except as permitted in section 34-66. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repair of buildings. The creation of noise in connection with the erection including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building on Sundays and federal holidays, or other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building official should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while such is in use or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospitals, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that such is a school, hospital or court street. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention, creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(14)  Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(15)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hose or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)  Blowers/lawn mowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower, lawn mower, or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower, lawn mower, or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device to deaden such noise. 
(b)  Any of the noises stated in subsection (a) of this section violating section 34-29 shall be considered a prima facie violation of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 14.3; Ord. No. 1512, § 1, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1593, § 10, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 34-29. - Exterior noise standards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, at any location within the incorporated area of the city, to create any noise or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured by a sound level meter on any other property, to exceed the permitted ambient noise level more than ten minutes per hour. 
(Code 1957, § 14.4)  
Sec. 34-30. - Interior noise standards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the city to create any noise or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured within any other dwelling unit on any residential property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed the following: 
(1)  The interior ambient noise level plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; 
(2)  The interior ambient noise level plus ten dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
(3)  The interior ambient noise level plus 15 dB(A) for any period of time. 
(b)  If the alleged offensive noise consists of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the noise levels in subsection (a) of this section shall be reduced by five dB(A). 
(Code 1957, § 14.5)  
Sec. 34-31. - Exclusions. 
The following activities shall be exempted from this article: 
(1)  Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college. 
(2)  Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertaining events, provided such events are conducted pursuant to a license and/or permit issued by the city pursuant to article III of chapter 22 of this Code relative to the staging of such events. 
(3)  Activities conducted on any park or playground, provided such park or playground is owned and operated by a public entity. 
(4)  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicles or work. 
(5)  Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling or grading of any real property are allowed up to 70 dB measured at the property line, provided such activities do not take place between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, or at any time on Sundays or on federal holidays. 
(6)  Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property, provided the activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Saturdays, Sundays, or on federal holidays, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays or on federal holidays. 
(7)  Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. 
(8)  Activities of the federal, state or local government and its duly franchised utilities. 
(9)  Trains operated in conformity with and regulated by any federal or state agency. 
(10)  Activities necessary to continue to provide utility services to the general public, whether this service is installing additional facilities, restoring worn or damaged facilities and/or maintaining existing services. 
(Code 1957, § 14.6; Ord. No. 1512, § 1, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1593, § 11, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 34-32. - Noise level measurement. 
The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected dwelling unit. The measurement shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the alleged offensive noise source and may be made with the windows of the affected unit open. 
(Code 1957, § 14.7)  
Sec. 34-33. - Manner of enforcement. 
(a)  The chief of police and his duly authorized representatives are directed to enforce this article. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with enforcement of this article while such person is engaged in the performance of his duty. 
(Code 1957, § 14.12)  
Sec. 34-34. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a noise source which violates any of the sections of this article may file an application with the city administrative services officer for a variance from this article, wherein such owner or operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with this article, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, and its accomplishment. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the city administrative officer shall take action thereon in accordance with this article. 
(b)  An applicant for a variance shall remain subject to prosecution under the terms of this article until a variance is granted. 
(c)  The city administrative services officer shall evaluate all applications for variance from the requirements of this article and may grant the variances with respect to time for compliance, subject to such terms, conditions and requirements as may be deemed reasonable to achieve maximum compliance with this article. Such terms, conditions and requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, limitations on noise levels and operating hours. Each such variance shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving maximum compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment. In his determinations, the city administrative services officer shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise; the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise; the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work; the economic factors related to age and useful life of equipment; and the general public interest and welfare. Any violation of the terms of the variance shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1957, § 14.13)  
Sec. 34-35. - Appeals. 
(a)  Within 15 days following the decision of the city administrative services officer on an application filed pursuant to this division, the applicant may appeal the decision to the commission by filing a notice of appeal with the secretary of the commission. For an appeal by the applicant for a variance, the notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a fee to be computed by the secretary on the basis of the estimated cost of preparing the materials required to be forwarded to the commission as discussed in this section. If the actual cost of such preparation differs from the estimated cost, appropriate payments shall be made to the secretary. 
(b)  Within 15 days following receipt of a notice of appeal and the appeal fee, the secretary of the commission shall forward to the commission copies of the application for variance, the recommendation of the city administrative services officer, the notice of appeal, all evidence concerning the application received by the city administrative services officer, and his or her decision thereon. In addition, any person may file with the commission written arguments in support or in opposition of the decision, and the commission may, in its discretion, hear oral arguments thereon. The city clerk shall mail to the applicant a notice of the date set for hearing the appeal. The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing date. 
(c)  Within 60 days following its receipt of the notice of the appeal, the commission shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city administrative services officer. Such decision shall be based upon the commission's evaluation of the matters submitted to the commission in light of the powers conferred on the city administrative services officer and the factors to be considered. 
(d)  As part of its decision, the commission may direct the city administrative services officer to conduct further proceedings on the application. Failure of the commission to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city administrative services officer within the 60-day period shall constitute an affirmance of the decision. 
(Code 1957, § 14.14; Ord. No. 1593, § 12, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 34-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 34-36 which pertained to violations and derived from Code 1957, § 14.15.  
Secs. 34-37—34-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMPLIFIED SOUND PERMIT 
 
Sec. 34-66. - Required. 
(a)  The term "sound amplifying equipment," as used in this division, shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. 
(b)  The use of amplified sound, including the electronically amplified sound, of music, human voice, or other sound on any public street or other public right-of-way is not permitted except under a permit granted by the director. In granting such a permit, the director shall consider the potential of such amplified sound to result in a violation of other sections of this article and shall establish amplifier settings and other limitations on use of such amplified sound as conditions of approval. Such approval shall not consider the information content of the amplified sound, but only its noise level and resulting potential to violate other sections of this article. 
(c)  No person, without first obtaining a permit from the director, shall use or operate any sound amplifying equipment so as to produce or reproduce sound in such a manner that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of more than 25 feet from the room, stadium, structure or public place in which such sound amplifying equipment is located or use such sound amplifying equipment outside of any structure or public place so as to produce or reproduce sound in such a manner that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of more than 25 feet from the building, structure or vehicle on which such sound amplifying equipment is located. In granting such a permit, the director shall consider the potential of such amplified sound to result in a violation of other sections of this article and shall establish amplifier settings and other limitations on use of such amplified sound as conditions of approval. Such approval shall not consider the information content of the amplified sound, but only its noise level and resulting potential to violate other sections of this article. 
(d)  An amplified sound permit application shall be submitted to the director 15 calendar days prior to the event, unless otherwise reasonably permitted later by the director. The applicant shall pay an application fee as determined by city council resolution for processing an amplified sound permit application. 
(Code 1957, § 14.8; Ord. No. 1593, § 13, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 34-67. - Issuance; term. 
If approved, the director shall issue an amplified sound permit to the applicant upon such conditions specified in section 34-69, which permit shall be for such period of time as may be prescribed in the permit. 
(Code 1957, § 14.9; Ord. No. 1593, § 14, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 34-68. - Application. 
The application for any amplified sound permit shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk and shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and home address of the applicant. 
(2)  The address of the place of business of the applicant. 
(3)  The name and address of the person having direct charge of the sound amplifying equipment desired to be used. 
(4)  The purpose for which the sound amplifying equipment will be used. 
(5)  The address and type of place where such sound amplifying equipment will be used. 
(6)  The hours during which such sound amplifying equipment will be used. 
(7)  The proposed days and number of days of the operation. 
(8)  A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used. 
(9)  The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment to be used, and: 
a.  The wattage to be used. 
b.  The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from the room, stadium, structure, public place or lot in or on which such sound amplifying equipment will be located. 
(Code 1957, § 14.10; Ord. No. 1593, § 15, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 34-69. - Conditions of use. 
All permits issued for the use of sound amplifying equipment shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Such sound amplifying equipment shall not be used between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  Sound from such sound amplifying equipment shall not be cast such a distance that it will interfere with or disturb the occupants of any hospital, sanitarium, school, church, courtroom, place of residence or public assemblage. 
(3)  Such sound amplifying equipment shall be used only in accordance with and in compliance with the statements set forth in the application for the permit. 
(4)  Such other conditions as the director may determine and impose in the permit for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 14.11; Ord. No. 1593, § 16, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 34-70. - Notice of denial of amplified sound permit application. 
Within five calendar days after the director's decision to deny an amplified sound permit application, the director shall mail notice of the denial to the applicant at the address shown upon the application. The written notice shall state the date of denial, the reason(s) for denial, and the applicant's right to an appeal hearing pursuant to section 34-71. 
(Ord. No. 1593, § 17, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 34-71. - Appeal of action on an amplified sound permit application. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any determination, interpretation, decision, judgment or similar action taken by the director under this division may appeal such action to the city council. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within five calendar days following the date of action on an amplified sound permit application. Appeals shall be accompanied by the filing fee as determined by city council resolution. 
(b)  Within five calendar days after the city clerk's receipt of the appeal filing, the director shall mail notice of the date and time of an appeal hearing to the appellant at the address shown upon the appeal filing and to the applicant, if different. The notice shall be mailed at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing date. 
(c)  The council may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the amplified sound permit application and shall render its decision within five calendar days after the conclusion of the appeal hearing. The city clerk shall mail notice of the decision and the reason(s) for the decision to the appellant and to the applicant, if different. The decision of the city council is final. 
(Ord. No. 1593, § 18, 1-19-2010)  
Secs. 34-72—34-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) REQUIREMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1642, § 1, adopted June 15, 2015, amended and restated former Art. III, §§ 34-96—34-106, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the of Code of 1957, §§ 22A.70—22A.80, Ord. No. 1517, §§ 1—6, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 1519, §§ 1—7, 2-5-2001; Ord. No. U-1534, §§ 1—5, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 1535, §§ 1—5, 9-2-2002. 
 
Sec. 34-96. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the City of San Fernando Stormwater and Urban Runoff Pollution Control Low Impact Development (LID) Requirements pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit Requirements for the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-97. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the future health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and the water quality of the receiving waters of the county and surrounding coastal areas by: 
(1)  Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent possible; 
(2)  Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges and thereby reducing the level of contamination of stormwater and urban runoff into the city stormwater system; and 
(3)  Regulating nonstormwater discharges to the city stormwater system. 
(b)  The intent of this article is to protect and enhance the quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands within the city in a manner consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and the city National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
(c)  This article is also intended to provide the city with the legal authority necessary to control discharges to and from those portions of the city stormwater system over which it has jurisdiction, as required by the city NPDES permit, and thereby fully and timely comply with the terms of the city NPDES permit while the Countywide Storm Water Management Plan CSWMP and the Upper Los Angeles River Enhanced Watershed Management Plan or 'ULAR EWMP" is being developed by the permittees under the city NPDES permit, and in contemplation of the subsequent amendment of this article or adoption by the city of additional provisions of this article to implement the subsequently adopted CSWMP and ULAR EWMP or other programs developed under the city NPDES permit. 
(d)  This chapter also sets forth requirements for the construction and operation of certain "Commercial Development", "New Development", "Redevelopment", "Priority Planning Projects" and other projects (as further defined herein) that are intended to ensure compliance with the stormwater mitigation measures prescribed in the current version of the Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan (SUSMP), ULAR EWMP, or other documents approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board-Los Angeles Region ("LARWQCB"), and on file in the office of the city clerk of this city. This chapter authorizes the Director (herein identified as the city's Public Works Director) to define and adopt applicable Best Management Practices and other stormwater pollution control measures, to grant waivers from certain requirements, as provided herein, to cite infractions and to impose fines pursuant to this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article of this chapter of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-98. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically provided herein, any term used in this article shall be defined as that term is defined in the current city NPDES permit, or in the most recent version of the standard urban storm water mitigation plan ("SUSMP"), ULAR EWMP, or other documents approved by the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board, State Water Resources Control Board, or if it is not specifically defined in either the city NPDES permit or LARWQCB approved planning documents, then as such term is defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder. If the definition of any term contained in this section conflicts with the definition of the same term in the current city NPDES permit or LARWQCB approved planning document, then the definition contained in the city NPDES permit shall govern and, if not set forth in the city NPDES permit, the definition contained in the ULAR EWMP shall govern. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter: 
Area susceptible to runoff means any surface directly exposed to precipitation or in the path of runoff caused by precipitation, which path leads off the parcel on which the surface is located. 
Automotive service facilities means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539 (as amended). 
Best management practices (BMPs) means activities, practices, facilities, and/or procedures that when implemented to their maximum efficiency will prevent or reduce pollutants in discharges and any program, technology, process, siting criteria, operational methods or measures, or engineered systems that when implemented prevent, control, remove, or reduce pollution. Examples of BMP's may include, but are not limited to public education and outreach, proper planning of development projects, proper cleaning of catch basin inlets, and proper sludge or waste-handling and disposal. 
Biofiltration means a low impact development (LID) BMP that reduces stormwater pollutant discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through incidental Infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Incidental Infiltration is an important factor in achieving the required pollutant load reduction. 
Bioretention means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration and Infiltration. 
City means the City of San Fernando. 
Clean Water Act or CWA means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted in 1972, by Public Law 92-500, and amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987. The Clean Water Act prohibits the Discharge of Pollutants to Waters of the United States unless the Discharge is in accordance with an NPDES permit. 
Commercial development means any development on private land that is not heavy industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to: hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities, mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes. 
Construction means constructing, clearing, grading, or excavation that results in soil disturbance. Construction includes structure teardown. It does not include: routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility; emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety; interior remodeling with no outside exposure of construction material or construction waste to storm water; mechanical permit work; or sign permit work. 
Control means to minimize, reduce, eliminate, or prohibit by technological, legal, contractual or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an activity or activities. 
CSWMP means the countywide stormwater management plan being developed by the permittees under the city NPDES permit. 
Development means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development, or mixed-use developments); industrial, commercial, retail and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
Directly adjacent means situated within 200 feet of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the environmentally sensitive area. 
Director means the city's public works director, or his or her designee, and shall be considered the authorized "enforcement officer" of this article of this chapter of the city Code. 
Discharge means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance. 
Discharge of a pollutant means any addition of any "pollutant" or combination of pollutants to "waters of the United States" or "waters of the State" from any "point source" or, any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the "contiguous zone" or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft that is being used as a means of transportation. The term "discharge" includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from: surface runoff that is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, city, or other person that do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works. 
Discharging directly means outflow from a drainage conveyance system that is composed entirely or predominantly of flows from the subject property, development, subdivision, or industrial facility, and not commingled with the flows from adjacent lands. 
Discretionary project is defined in the same manner as section 15357 of the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act contained in Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, as amended, and means a project that requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the city decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the city merely has to determine whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
Disturbed area means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation. 
Environmentally sensitive area ("ESA") means an area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and that would be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments (Public Resources Code § 30107.5). Areas subject to storm water mitigation requirements are areas designated as significant ecological areas by the county (Los Angeles County Significant Areas Study, Los Angeles County Department of Regional Planning (1976) and amendments); an area designated as a significant natural area by the State department of fish and game's significant natural areas program, provided that area has been field verified by the State department of fish and game; an area listed in the basin plan as supporting the rare, threatened, or endangered species (RARE) beneficial use; and an area identified by the city as environmentally sensitive. 
Flow-through BMPs means a modular, vault type "high flow biotreatment" devices contained within an impervious vault with an underdrain or designed with an impervious liner and an underdrain. 
Green roof means a LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to intercept rainfall on the roof surface. 
Good housekeeping practices means common practices related to the storage, use, or cleanup of materials, performed in a manner that minimizes the discharge of pollutants. Examples include, but are not limited to: purchasing only the quantity of materials to be used at a given time; use of alternative and less environmentally harmful products; cleaning up spills and leaks; and, storing materials in a manner that will contain any leaks or spills. 
Greater-than-nine unit home subdivision means any subdivision being developed for ten or more single-family or multifamily dwelling units. 
Hillside means property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is 25 percent or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes. 
Infiltration means the downward entry of water into the surface of the soil. 
Illicit connection means any human-made conveyance that is connected to the storm drain system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the storm drain system. 
Illicit discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is prohibited under local, state or federal statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations. This includes all nonstormwater discharges except discharges pursuant to a separate NPDES permit and discharges that are exempted or conditionally exempted in accordance with the city NPDES permit. 
Low Impact Development or LID consists of building and landscape features designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff. 
Material means any substance, including, but not limited to, garbage and debris; lawn clippings, leaves, and other vegetation; biological and fecal waste; sediment and sludge; oil and grease; gasoline; paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing chemicals. 
City NPDES permit means the "Waste Discharge Requirements for City Storm Water and Urban Runoff Discharges within the County of Los Angeles, and the Incorporated Cities therein, except the City of Long Beach, which became effective on December 28, 2012, issued by the State regional water quality control board, Los Angeles Region, and any successor permit to that permit. 
City separate storm sewer system or MS4 means streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourses, or other facilities that are owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of stormwater. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA Section 307, 402, 318, and 405. 
New development means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision. 
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to a city stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Parking lot means land area or a facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of 5,000 square feet or more of surface area, or with 25 or more parking spaces. 
Planning priority projects means those projects that are required to incorporate appropriate storm water mitigation measures into the design plan for their respective project, including: 
(1)  All new development projects equal to one acre or greater of disturbed area and adding more than 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area; 
(2)  New industrial parks 10,000 square feet or more of surface area; 
(3)  New commercial malls 10,000 square feet or more surface area; 
(4)  New single-family Hillside homes; 
(5)  New streets and roads construction of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area, including standalone streets, roads, highways, freeway projects, and streets within larger projects; 
(6)  Ten or more unit homes (includes single-family homes, multifamily homes, condominiums, and apartments); 
(7)  One acre or more square feet of impervious surface area industrial/commercial development (including parking area); 
(8)  Automotive service facilities (SIC 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, and 7536-7539); 
(9)  Retail gasoline outlets; 
(10)  Restaurants (SIC 5812); 
(11)  Parking lots 5,000 square feet or more of surface area or with 25 or more parking spaces; 
(12)  Redevelopment projects in subject categories that meet redevelopment thresholds; 
(13)  Projects located in or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to an ESA that meet the thresholds described herein; and 
(14)  Those projects that require the implementation of a site-specific plan to mitigate post development storm water for new development not requiring a SUSMP but which may potentially have adverse impacts on post-development storm water quality, and where the following project characteristics exist: 
a.  Vehicle or equipment fueling areas; 
b.  Vehicle or equipment maintenance areas, including washing and repair; 
c.  Commercial or industrial waste handling or storage; 
d.  Outdoor handling or storage of hazardous materials; 
e.  Outdoor manufacturing areas; 
f.  Outdoor food handling or processing; 
g.  Outdoor animal care, confinement, or slaughter; or 
h.  Outdoor horticulture activities. 
Pollutant means those pollutants defined in section 502(6) of the federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1362(6)), or incorporated into Water Code § 13373. Examples of pollutants include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Commercial and industrial waste, such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge. 
(2)  Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium; and nonmetals such as phosphorus and arsenic. 
(3)  Petroleum hydrocarbons, such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease. 
(4)  Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state. 
(5)  Animal wastes, such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities. 
(6)  Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six or greater than nine, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform or fecal streptococcus or enterococcus. 
The term "pollutant" does not include uncontaminated stormwater, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility. The term "pollutant" also shall not include any substance identified in this definition if, through compliance with the best management practices available, the discharge of such substance has been reduced or eliminated to the maximum extent possible. In an enforcement action, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish the reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent possible through compliance with the best management practices available. 
Project means all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities. 
Redevelopment means land disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition or replacement of at least 5,000 square feet of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to the following activities that meet the minimum standards set forth in this definition: 
(1)  The expansion of a building footprint; 
(2)  Addition or replacement of a structure; 
(3)  Replacement of impervious surface that that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and 
(4)  Land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. 
Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. 
Regional board or LARWQCB means the California Regional Water Quality Control, Los Angeles Region. 
Restaurant means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption. (SIC Code 5812). 
Retail gasoline outlet means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils. 
Routine maintenance means recurring, preventative, and on-going maintenance necessary to delay and/or prevent the failure of critical and non-critical building systems and equipment including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility; or 
(2)  Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities; or 
(3)  Includes road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts; or 
(4)  "Update existing lines" and facilities to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such Projects result in increased capacity; or 
(5)  Repair leaks. 
Routine maintenance does not include construction of "new lines" or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and regulations. 
"Update existing lines" includes replacing existing lines with new materials or pipes. 
"New lines" are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines. 
Runoff means any runoff including storm water and dry weather flows from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated, and nuisance flows. 
Site means the land or water area where any "facility or activity" is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
Source control BMP means any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim to prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. 
Storm event means a rainfall event that produces more than 0.1 inch of precipitation and that is separated from the previous storm event by at least 72 hours of dry weather. 
Stormwater means runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(13); 55 Fed. Reg. 47990, 47995 (Nov. 16, 1990)). 
Stormwater quality design volume or SWQDV means the runoff from either of the following, whichever is greater: 
(1)  The 85th percentile 24-hour runoff event as determined from the Los Angeles County 85th percentile precipitation isohyetal map; or 
(2)  The volume of runoff produced from a 0.75 inch, 24-hour rain event. 
Stormwater runoff means that part of precipitation (rainfall or snowmelt) which travels via flow across a surface to the MS4 or receiving waters from impervious, semipervious or pervious surfaces. 
Structural BMP means any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of stormwater and urban runoff pollution (e.g. canopy, structural enclosure). Structural BMPs may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs. 
Treatment means the application of engineered systems that use physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include, but are not limited to: filtration, gravity settling, media adsorption, biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation and UV radiation. 
Treatment control BMP means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. 
Urban runoff means surface water flow produced by nonstormwater resulting from residential, commercial, and industrial activities involving the use of potable and nonpotable water. 
Waters of the state means any surface water or groundwater, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the State of California. 
Waters of the United States or waters of the U.S. shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  All waters that are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; 
(2)  All interstate waters, including interstate "wetlands"; 
(3)  All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, "wetlands," sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds the use, degradation, or destruction that would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: 
a.  Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; 
b.  From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or 
c.  Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; 
(4)  All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; 
(5)  Tributaries of waters identified in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this definition; 
(6)  The territorial sea; and 
(7)  "Wetlands" adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in paragraph (1) through (6) of this definition. 
Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of CWA (other than cooling ponds as defined in 40 CFR section 423.22(m) that also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United States. This exclusion applies only to man-made bodies of water that neither were originally created in waters of the United States (such as disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from the impoundment of waters of the United States. Waters of the United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area's status as prior converted cropland by any other federal agency, for the purposes of the CWA, the final authority regarding CWA jurisdiction remains with USEPA. 
Wet season means the calendar period beginning October 1 through April 15. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-99. - Construction and application. 
This article shall be construed to ensure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and the city NPDES permit and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-100. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Illicit discharges and connections. It is prohibited to commence, establish, use, maintain, or continue any illicit connections to the city separate storm sewer system or any illicit discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. This prohibition against illicit connections applies to the use, maintenance, or continuation of any illicit connection, whether that connection was established prior to or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(b)  Littering. It is prohibited to throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, or maintained or kept any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or accumulations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catchbasin conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the city, so that such might be or become a pollutant. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water within the city. This subsection shall not apply to refuse, rubbish or garbage deposited in containers, bags or other appropriate receptacles which are placed in designated locations for regular solid waste pickup and disposal. 
(c)  Disposal of landscape debris. It is prohibited to intentionally dispose of leaves, dirt, or other landscape debris into the city separate storm sewer system. 
(d)  Nonstormwater discharges. 
(1)  Except as specified by this chapter, discharging any material other than storm water to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  The following non-stormwater discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in section 34-100(d)(1): 
a.  Any discharge regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California pursuant to Chapter 5.5, division 7 of the California Water Code under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws and regulations. 
b.  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to waters of the United States when properly managed: 
1.  Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources subject to a written agreement with the city; 
2.  Landscape irrigation and lawn watering using potable water; 
3.  Rising ground waters; 
4.  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration as defined by the MS4 permit; 
5.  Water from crawl space pumps; 
6.  Air conditioning condensation; 
7.  Natural springs; 
8.  Non-commercial washing of vehicles by a non-profit organization, which has provided written notice to the city at least five business days prior to the event, or by a resident at his or her residence provided the non-profit organization or resident, as applicable: 
i.  Obtains a permit or written approval from the director; 
ii.  Implements BMPs and ensure discharge avoids potential sources of pollutants in the flow path to prevent introduction of pollutants prior to discharge to the MS4 or receiving water; 
iii.  Minimizes the amount of water used by employing water conservation practices such as turning off nozzles and using a low volume pressure washer; 
iv.  When possible, use biodegradable, phosphate free detergents and non-toxic cleaning products; 
v.  Where possible, wash cars on a permeable surface where wash water can percolate into the ground (e.g. gravel or grassy areas); and 
vi.  Empty buckets of soapy or rinse water into the sanitary sewer system (e.g., sinks or toilets). 
9.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
10.  Dechlorinated/ debrominated swimming pool and dewatering of decorative fountain discharges, provided: 
i.  The discharger implements BMPs and ensure discharge avoids potential sources of pollutants in the flow path to prevent introduction of pollutants prior to discharge to the MS4 and receiving water; 
ii.  The discharge is dechlorinated or debrominated using holding time, aeration, and/or sodium thiosulfate. Chlorine residual in the discharge shall not exceed 0.1 mg/L; 
iii.  The discharge does not contain any detergents, wastes, or algaecides, or any other chemicals including salts from pools commonly referred to as "salt water pools" in excess of applicable water quality objectives; 
iv.  The discharge has a pH adjusted, if necessary, to be within the range of 6.5 and 8.5 standard units; 
v.  The discharge is volumetrically and velocity controlled to promote evaporation and/or infiltration; and 
vi.  For discharges of 100,000 gallons or more, require the authorization of the Director and verification that the discharge pathway to the MS4 inlet is cleared of debris and mobilization of pollutants. 
11.  Flows from emergency firefighting activities; 
12.  Street/sidewalk wash water resulting from use of high pressure, low volume spray washing using only potable water with no cleaning agents at an average usage of 0.006 gallon per square feet of sidewalk area; and 
13.  Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code § 13050(d) and the California Health and Safety Code § 25117. 
(e)  Discharges in violation of city NPDES permit. Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the city NPDES permit, either separately or in combination with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City from all losses, liabilities, claims, or causes of actions in any administrative or judicial action relating to such discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-101. - Exempted discharges, conditionally exempted discharges, or designated discharges. 
Discharges from those activities specifically identified in or pursuant to Part III, Section A of the city NPDES permit as being exempted discharges, conditionally exempted discharges, or designated discharges shall not be considered a violation of this article, provided that any applicable best management practices developed pursuant to the city NPDES permit are implemented to minimize any adverse impacts from such identified sources. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-102. - Good housekeeping practices. 
Pursuant to this article, owners and occupants of property within the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Septic waste. No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste to precipitation in an area where a discharge to city streets or the MS4 may or does occur. 
(2)  Use of water. Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the permitted washing down of paved areas shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  Storage of materials, machinery, and equipment. Machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to or exposed to stormwater shall be placed in a manner so that leaks, spills and other maintenance-related pollutants are not discharged to the MS4. 
(4)  Removal and disposal of debris from industrial/commercial motor vehicle parking lots. Industrial/commercial motor vehicle parking lots with more than 25 parking spaces that are located in areas potentially exposed to stormwater shall be swept regularly or other equally effective measures shall be utilized to remove debris from such parking lots. 
(5)  Food wastes. Food wastes generated by nonresidential food service and food distribution sources shall be properly disposed of and in a manner so such wastes are not discharged to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Best management practices. Best management practices shall be used in areas exposed to stormwater for the removal and lawful disposal of all fuels, chemicals, fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, or other materials which have potential adverse impacts on water quality. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-103. - Requirements for industrial/commercial and construction activities. 
For the purposes of this article, each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional Board shall comply with all requirements of such permit. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any such permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city engineer prior to the issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permits or any other type of permit or license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-104. - Requirements for planning priority projects. 
(a)  Planning priority projects shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume to the maximum extent feasible by minimizing impervious surface area and controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through Infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use. 
(b)  A new single-family hillside home development shall include mitigation measures to: 
(1)  Conserve natural areas; 
(2)  Protect slopes and channels; 
(3)  Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage; 
(4)  Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and 
(5)  Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless the diversion would result in slope instability. 
(c)  New street and road construction of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface shall follow USEPA guidance regarding Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-009) to the maximum extent practicable. 
(d)  Applicants for "priority planning projects," except new single-family hillside home development and new street and road construction of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface, shall prepare a LID Plan to comply with the following: 
(1)  Retain stormwater runoff onsite for the SWQDV. 
(2)  Minimize hydromodification impacts to Natural Drainage Systems as defined in Order No. R4-2012-0175. 
(3)  If partial or complete onsite retention is technically infeasible, in accordance with section 9.20.110 below, the project site may biofiltrate 1.5 times the portion of the remaining SWQDV that is not reliably retained onsite. Biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the design specifications provided in Order No. R4-2012-0175. 
(4)  The remaining SWQDV that cannot be retained or biofiltered onsite must be treated onsite to reduce pollutant loading. BMPs must be selected and designed to meet Pollutant-specific benchmarks as required per Order No. R4-2012-0175. Flow-through BMPs may be used to treat the remaining SWQDV and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of: 
a.  0.2 inches per hour; or 
b.  The one-year, one-hour rainfall intensity as determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal map, whichever is greater. 
(e)  In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection 34-104(d), redevelopment projects shall also comply with the following: 
(1)  Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than fifty percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction stormwater quality control requirements, the entire Project must be mitigated. 
(2)  Where redevelopment results in an alteration of less than fifty percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction stormwater quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire development. 
(3)  Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the Redevelopment requirements unless such Projects create, add, or replace 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-104.1. - Submittal and review of low impact development plans. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of a building permit or a grading permit by the city, LID plans shall be submitted by the property owner or his or her agent to the Director for all "priority planning projects", except as provided in section 34-104.3. below. 
(b)  LID plans shall be submitted in accordance with the Article X, Green Building Code, a copy of which shall be located in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  The director, or his or her designee, shall review and approve LID plans to assure that the applicant has identified the BMPs that are necessary and feasible to protect the MS4. The reviewer shall identify any deficiencies in the plan and return it to the applicant for modification, if necessary. When the plan is found to comply with the provisions of this article, and after compliance with the requirements of section 34-104.2. below, the grading or building permits may be issued for the project. If, during construction, the plan is found to be deficient by the city or any other interested party or responsible agency with authorization/oversight, the applicant shall amend the plan to address the deficiency. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-104.2. - Recording of LID plans. 
Upon acceptance of an LID plan by the city, and prior to the city issuing the grading and/or building permit, the applicant shall file a signed original of the plan with the Los Angeles County recorder. The document shall contain sufficient legal description to identify the property covered and shall be binding on the applicant and all successors in interest to the property. The form shall be provided by the city and shall only be amended or removed from title with the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-104.3. - Waiver of LID plan due to technical infeasibility. 
(a)  The director may waive the requirement of an LID plan if he or she can determine, in writing, the technical infeasibility of the project, as set forth in section 34-104.3(b), below. 
(b)  To demonstrate technical infeasibility, the project applicant shall demonstrate that the project cannot reliably retain 100 percent of the SWQDV onsite, even with the maximum application of "Green Roofs" and rainwater harvest and use, and that compliance with the applicable post-construction requirements would be technically infeasible by submitting a site-specific hydrologic and/or design analysis conducted and endorsed by a registered professional engineer, geologist, architect, and/or landscape architect. 
(c)  Technical infeasibility may result from conditions including the following: 
(1)  The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than 0.3 inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an Infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDV onsite. 
(2)  Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within five to ten feet of surface grade; 
(3)  Locations within 100 feet of a groundwater well used for drinking water; 
(4)  Brownfield development sites or other locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern; 
(5)  Locations with potential geotechnical hazards; 
(6)  Smart growth and infill or Redevelopment locations where the density and/ or nature of the Project would create significant difficulty for compliance with the onsite volume retention requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-104.4. - Maintenance of structural BMP's. 
Structural BMPs required by the city, County of Los Angeles, or state or federal agency shall be properly operated and maintained, consistent with the approved SUSMP or as specified by an approved plan or program, or otherwise determined by the director. Records and documentation of such maintenance shall be provided to the director upon reasonable request. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-104.5. - Inspections. 
(a)  The director may, upon 72-hour written notice, unless exigent circumstances justify a shorter time period, enter upon and inspect any private premises for the purposes of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. Such inspection may include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals and materials used, stored or maintained on the subject premises; 
(2)  Identifying points of discharge of all wastewater, non-stormwater, processed water systems and pollutants; 
(3)  Investigating the natural slope of the premises, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems; 
(4)  Establishing location of all points of discharge from the premises, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; 
(5)  Locating any illicit connection or illicit discharge; 
(6)  Investigating and inspecting a vehicle, truck, trailer, tank or other mobile equipment; 
(7)  A review and inspection of all records of the owner or occupant of public or private property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously stored or occurring on the property, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, and any and all records relating to illicit connections, illicit discharges, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system; 
(8)  Inspecting, sampling and testing any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials with any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharges for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system; 
(9)  Inspecting the integrity the MS4, any connection to other pipelines on the property, including the use dye and smoke tests, video surveys, photographs or videotapes, and the taking of measurements, drawings or any other records reasonably necessary to document conditions as they exist on the premises; 
(10)  The installation and maintenance of monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm drain system; 
(11)  Evaluating compliance with this chapter or the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(b)  The director may enter upon and inspect any private premises for the purposes of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter by any other lawful means including, but not limited to obtaining an inspection warrant issued by a court. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-104.6. - Fees. 
Fees to be charged for LID plan checking, inspection, enforcement, and other activities carried out by the city under this chapter shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-104.7. - California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) compliance. 
Provisions of this section shall be complimentary to, and shall not replace, any applicable requirements for stormwater mitigation required under CEQA. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-105. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Penalties. Violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of this City Code. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Concealment. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any section of this article shall constitute a violation of such section. 
(c)  Violations deemed public nuisance. The following violations shall be deemed a public nuisance: 
(1)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of: 
a.  Any of the provisions of this chapter; or 
b.  Any failure to comply with any applicable requirement of an approved SUSMP, LID plan, or stormwater mitigation plan or program with respect to a property; or 
c.  Any false certification or verification, or any failure to comply with a certification or verification provided by a project applicant or the applicant's successor in interest; or 
d.  Any failure to properly operate and maintain any structural or treatment control BMP on a property in accordance with an approved SUSMP, LID plan, or stormwater mitigation plan or program, is hereby determined to be a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, is declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated or restored by any authorized enforcement officer in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 106-1081 et seq. of this city code, and a civil or criminal action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be brought by the city attorney. 
(2)  The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property, and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the property, as provided by law or ordinance for the recovery of nuisance abatement costs. 
(3)  If any violation of this article constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the Director, or his or her designee, shall so declare. The failure of any person to take appropriate annual precautions to prevent stormwater pollution after written notice of a determination under this subsection shall constitute a public nuisance and a violation of this article. 
(d)  Civil actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this article may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
(1)  A temporary and/or permanent injunction. 
(2)  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection. 
(3)  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from violation. 
(4)  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. 
(e)  Administrative enforcement powers. In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this City Code, any authorized enforcement officer has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies: 
(1)  Cease and desist orders. When an authorized enforcement officer finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this article, the officer may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge or practice or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall: 
a.  Comply with the requirement; 
b.  Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and 
c.  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring. 
(2)  Notice to clean. Whenever an authorized enforcement officer finds any oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in pollutants entering the city separate storm sewer system or a nonstormwater discharge to the MS4, the officer may give notice to the owner or occupant of the adjacent property to remove such oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that the officer may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice. 
(f)  P ermit revocation. To the extent the city makes a section of this article or any identified best management practice a condition of approval to the issuance of a permit or license, any person in violation of such condition is subject to the permit revocation procedures set forth in this City Code. 
(g)  Remedies. Remedies under this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-106. - Taking of property. 
The sections of this article shall not be construed or operate to deprive any property owner of substantially all of the market value of such owner's property or otherwise constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Sec. 34-107. - Article controls over other provisions. 
To the extent any section of this article conflicts with any provision of division 3 of article II of chapter 94, the sections of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 30; alarm systems, § 30-26 et seq.; fires in parks, § 54-4; access to fire hydrants and water gates, § 74-104; poles, hydrants and signs as an obstruction on streets, § 74-193; use of fire hydrants, § 94-191; fire hydrant size, § 94-192; installation or connection of fire hydrant with main, § 94-193; location of fire hydrant, § 94-194. 
State Law reference— Authority of city relative to fire protection generally, Government Code §§ 38600—38611. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform codes, Health and Safety Code § 17958; authority for city to modify uniform codes, Health and Safety Code § 17958.7. 
 
Sec. 38-26. - Adoption of the City of Los Angeles Fire Code. 
(a)  The 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Fire Code, excluding Chapter 1, as adopted by the Los Angeles City Council on May 19, 2017 and in effect May 30, 2017, which code incorporates and amends the 2016 edition of the California Fire Code and the 2015 edition of the International Fire Code, is adopted by reference and may be referred to as the "fire code" of the city, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict between provisions of the 2016 edition of the California Fire Code, the 2015 edition of the International Fire Code, the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Fire Code, as amended, and in effect May 30, 2017, or any amendment to the fire code contained in this Code, the provision contained in the later listed document shall control. 
(c)  One copy of the 2017 edition of the City of Los Angeles Fire Code, as amended, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall at all times be maintained in the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the fire code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of the fire code adopted in this chapter, as such codes may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1507, § 2(6.50), 6-7-1999; Ord. No. U-1540, § 7, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. U-1631, § 2, 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 1682, § 29, 10-15-2018)  
Sec. 38-27. - References. 
All references to the city council contained in the code adopted by section 38-26 shall mean and refer to the city council of this city. All references in such code to the building official shall mean and refer to the building official of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1507, § 2(6.51), 6-7-1999; Ord. No. U-1540, § 7, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 38-28. - Reserved.  
Sec. 38-29. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks prohibited. 
(a)  Limits referred to in the fire code adopted in this article in which storage of inflammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are established in fire zone 2 of the city. 
(b)  The limits pertaining to the establishment of new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids of the fire code are established in fire zone 2 of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 9.4)  
Sec. 38-30. - Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases restricted. 
The limits referred to in the fire code adopted in this article pertaining to bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas are established in fire zone 2 of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 9.5)  
Sec. 38-31. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents prohibited. 
The limits referred to in the fire code adopted in this article in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are established as all the areas within the boundaries of the city limits. 
(Code 1957, § 9.6)  
Sec. 38-32. - Fire districts and zones. 
The entire incorporated area of the city is declared to be and is established as a fire district. The fire district shall be known and designated as fire zone 2 and is outlined and designated on a certain map, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "Fire Zoning Map of the City of San Fernando," dated November 16, 1987, which map is adopted and incorporated in this section by this express reference thereto as the fire zoning map of the city for application of the regulations included in the fire code adopted by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 9.7)  
Sec. 38-33. - Violations and penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of the sections of the fire code adopted in this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to the fire code, or to build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken. It shall also be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any order issued pursuant to the fire code as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed in such code. 
(Code 1957, § 9.8; Ord. No. U-1540, § 8, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 38-34—38-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Fireworks generally, Health and Safety Code §§ 12500—12801. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fireworks means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Firecrackers, buzz bombs, sparklers, sky rockets, bottle rockets, Roman candles, torpedoes, M80's, or other fireworks of like construction, and any object containing any combustible or explosive substance designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation; 
(2)  Blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy guns or toy cannons in which explosives are used; 
(3)  All fireworks which have been classified and registered as "safe and sane" by the state fire marshal; and 
(4)  All fireworks as the term is used in Health and Safety Code §§ 12505, 12511 and 12529. 
The term "fireworks" does not include toy pistols, toy guns, or other similar devices in which paper caps containing not more than 0.25 grain of explosive compound per cap is used. 
Public display of fireworks means an entertainment feature where the public or a private group is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of fireworks under the permit procedures described in division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1957, §§ 9.72, 9.73) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-62. - Possession and sale. 
It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell at retail, sell at wholesale, manufacture, transport, convey, possess, store, display, dispose of, give away, stock, or own any fireworks at any time within the boundaries of the city, except as specifically permitted in division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 9.74)  
Sec. 38-63. - Discharge. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, discharge, light, explode, detonate, or otherwise fire or use or to permit the ignition, explosion or detonation of any fireworks within the boundaries of the city, except as specifically permitted in division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 9.75)  
Sec. 38-64. - Exceptions. 
This division does not prohibit the use of torpedoes, flares or fuses by railroad or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination; the sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial purposes, athletic or sporting events, military ceremonials or demonstrations; or, as provided by this article, in connection with a public display as permitted under division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 9.76)  
Secs. 38-65—38-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC DISPLAYS 
 
Sec. 38-91. - Permit required. 
No person shall make a public display of fireworks unless a permit is first obtained therefor. 
(Code 1957, § 9.92)  
Sec. 38-92. - Permit application generally. 
Any person planning to make a public display of fireworks shall first make written application for a permit to the chief of the fire department at least ten days in advance of the date of the proposed display. 
(Code 1957, § 9.93)  
Sec. 38-93. - Bond and insurance. 
The applicant for a public fireworks display permit shall, at the time of application, furnish proof that he carries compensation insurance for his employees, which insurance shall be in full force and effect during the time of the display, as provided by state laws, and that he has filed with the city clerk a bond with at least two good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the city council in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00, combined single limits for each occurrence, with a deductible not to exceed $15,000.00, conditioned upon the applicant's payment of all damages to persons or property which shall or may result from or be caused by such public display of fireworks or any negligence on the part of the applicant or his agents, servants, employees or subcontractors in the presentation thereof; or the applicant shall furnish proof by filing appropriate certificates with the city clerk evidencing the carrying of appropriate public liability insurance, issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in the state, providing minimum coverage covering and insuring the applicant from and against all damages to persons and property in the amounts specified in this section which may result from or be caused by such display. The policies shall be approved by the city council. All certificates of insurance so filed shall provide that the insurance shall not be cancelled except upon 15 days' prior written notice to the city. If a policy is cancelled and the cancellation date is effective prior to the date of the public display, the council may then revoke and suspend the display permit. 
(Code 1957, § 9.94)  
Sec. 38-94. - Permit fee. 
A fee of $100.00 is fixed and established as the sum to be paid for a permit to conduct a public display of fireworks. 
(Code 1957, § 9.95)  
Sec. 38-95. - Scope of permit. 
A permit issued under this division shall have the effect of making lawful the sale, possession and use of fireworks for public display only. 
(Code 1957, § 9.96)  
Sec. 38-96. - Investigation of permit application. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to make an investigation and submit a report of his findings and recommendations for or against the issuance of the permit to make a public display of fireworks, together with his reasons therefor, to the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 9.97)  
Sec. 38-97. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
The city council shall have power in its discretion to grant or deny the application to make a public display of fireworks. 
(Code 1957, § 9.98)  
Sec. 38-98. - Supervision. 
Every public display of fireworks shall be handled or supervised by a competent and experienced pyrotechnic operator approved by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1957, § 9.99)  
Sec. 38-99. - Character, location and discharge. 
All public displays of fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired as not to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or property. 
(Code 1957, § 9.100)  
Sec. 38-100. - Rules and regulations of fire chief. 
The chief of the fire department shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for and the presentation of public displays of the fireworks. 
(Code 1957, § 9.101)  
DIVISION 3. - LIABILITY AND PENALTIES FOR FIREWORKS VIOLATION 
 
Sec. 38-101. - Definitions. 
Chief, as used in this chapter, means Chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Department. 
Citee means any person served with an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for violation. 
Citation means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this division to remedy a violation. 
Code enforcement officers, (CEO) as used in this Division 3, mean those individuals defined in section 1-32 (Arrests and citations) of the San Fernando Municipal Code and any city employee or agent of the City with the authority to enforce any provision of this San Fernando Municipal Code. 
Code means the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
Director means the city manager or his or her designee. 
Hearing officer means the person appointed by the City Manager or his/her designee to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearing hereunder. 
Issuance or issued means any of the following: 
(1)  The preparation and service of an administrative fine citation to a citee in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article III (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedures; or 
(2)  Mailing of administrative fine citation to the citee by certified mail with return receipt, to the address shown on the official records of the County Assessor; or 
(3)  By personally serving the responsible party by personal delivery of the administrative fine citation or by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows: 
a.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household, and thereafter mailing by First Class Mail, postage pre-paid, a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or 
b.  In the event the responsible party cannot be served by First Class Mail, postage pre-paid, or cannot be personally served by First Class Mail, postage pre-paid, or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made upon the property manager or rental agency or may be affected by posting the property with the administrative fine citation and mailing a copy by First Class Mail, postage pre-paid, to the responsible party in violation at the address of the property where the violation exists. 
Person means a natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant, lessee and/or other person with any right to possession or control of the property where a violation of Article III has occurred. 
Responsible person, as used in this Division 3, means a person who cases a violation of this Article III to occur or allows a violation to exist or continue, by his or her action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a residential parcel, as shown on the county's latest equalized property taxes assessment rolls, and lessee of a residential parcel has notice of any violation existing on said property. For purposes of this Division 3, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation. Any person, irrespective of age, found in violation of this article may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this Division 3. Every parent, guardian or other person, having legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of 18 years, who knows or reasonably should know that a minor is in violation of this Article III, may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this Division 3, in addition to any citation that may be issued to the offending minor. 
Violation or violates, means any violation of any provision of this Article III (Fireworks) of Chapter 38 (Fire Prevention and Protection) of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1645, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 38-102. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  This Division 3 authorizes the imposition of administrative fines or any person who violates any provision of Article III in order to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of Article III for the benefit and protection of the entire community. This section governs the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of all administrative fines related to: the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as "dangerous fireworks" in Health and Safety Code section 12500 et seq. with the exception of a pyrotechnic licensee when operating pursuant to that license; and the use of "safe and sane fireworks" as defined in Health and Safety Code section 12550 et seq. locations other than as permitted by Article III. Said administrative fines are imposed under the authority of Government Code section 53069.4, Health and Safety Code section 12557, and the City's police power. 
(b)  The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the City authorized hereunder; and the issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy available to the City to redress violations of this Division 3 by any person. By adopting this Division 3, the City does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violations of this Code by any person, which the City may otherwise pursue. 
(c)  The imposition of fines related to "dangerous fireworks" under this Division 3 shall be limited to persons who possess, sell, use and/or display, or the seizure of 2) pounds or less (gross weight) of such "dangerous fireworks." 
(Ord. No. 1645, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 38-103. - Fine collection and state fire marshal reimbursement. 
Fines collected pursuant to this Division 3 related to "dangerous fireworks" shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code Section 12706, which section provides that certain fines collected by a court of the state be deposited with, and disbursed by the County Treasurer. However, the city shall provide cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal pursuant to regulations to be adopted by the State Fire Marshal addressing the State Fire Marshal's cost for the transportation and disposal of "dangerous fireworks" seized by the city, which costs will be part of any administrative fine imposed. Unless and until said regulations have been adopted by the State of California, the city shall hold in trust $250.00 or 25 percent of any fine collected, whichever is greater, to cover the cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal for said cost of transportation and disposal of the "dangerous fireworks." 
(Ord. No. 1645, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 38-104. - Residential property owner liability. 
Because of the serious threat of fire or injury posed by the use of fireworks that can result from persistent or repeated failures to comply with the provisions of this code and the effect of such conditions or activities on the safety and the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties and to the public health, safety and welfare, this Division 3 imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of residential real property for all violations of this code existing on their residential real property. Each contiguous use, display and/or possession shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate administrative fine. 
(Ord. No. 1645, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Sec. 38-105. - Administrative citations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding San Fernando Municipal Code Chapter 1, Article III, the procedure set forth in this Division 3 shall govern the issuance of administrative citations for violations of this Article III of Chapter 38 of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(b)  Whenever a code enforcement officer (CEO) determines that a violation of this Article III of Chapter 38 has occurred, the CEO may issue an administrative citation on a city form listing the Code violation(s) and the amount of the administrative fine required to be paid by the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of this Division 3. 
(c)  Each administrative citation shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, date of birth, California Drivers License number, and home or business telephone number of the responsible person charged with any violation of this Code; 
(2)  The address or description of the location of the violation; 
(3)  The date or dates on which the person violated this Code; 
(4)  The section or sections of this Code that were violated; 
(5)  A description of the violations(s); 
(6)  The amount of the administrative fine for each violation, the procedure in place to pay the fines, and any late fee and interest charge(s), if not timely paid, and notice that if the city is required to take action to collect such fines, the responsible person may be charged costs and attorneys' fees; 
(7)  Notice of the procedure to request an administrative hearing to contest the citation (including the form to be used, how to obtain the form, and the period within which the request must be made in order for it to considered timely); 
(8)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of any witnesses to the violations(s); 
(9)  The name and signature of the CEO who issued the citation and the name and signature of the citee, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of issuance. The refusal of a citee to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceedings, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person is responsible for a violation of the Code; 
(10)  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director for enforcement or collection purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1645, § 2, 9-21-2015) 
_____ 
Sec. 38-106. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  Each person who violates any provision of this Code as it relates to the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of "dangerous fireworks" shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of offense in 1-year period 	Amount of 
Administrative 
Penalty 	Late Charge 	Total Amount of Penalty Plus Late Charge 
First 	$1,000.00 	$250.00 	$1,250.00 
Second 	$2,000.00 	$500.00 	$2,500.00 
Third 	$3,000.00 	$1,000.00 	$4,000.00 
 
(b)  Any person who fails to obtain a permit for the public display of fireworks, in accordance with Division 2 of this Article III, shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offense in 1-Year Period 	Amount of 
Administrative 
Penalty 	Late Charge 	Total Amount of Penalty Plus Late Charge 
First 	$500.00 	$125.00 	$625.00 
Second 	$1,000.00 	$250.00 	$1,250.00 
Third 	$1,500.00 	$500.00 	$2,000.00 
 
(c)  Any person who does obtain a permit for the public display of fireworks as required by Division 2 of this Article III and who violates a condition imposed pursuant to section 38-100 shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offense in 1-Year Period 	Amount of 
Administrative 
Penalty 	Late Charge 	Total Amount of Penalty Plus Late Charge 
First 	$1,500.00 	$375.00 	$1,875.00 
Second 	$3,000.00 	$750.00 	$3,750.00 
Third 	$5,000.00 	$2,000.00 	$7,000.00 
 
(d)  Each person who uses "safe and sane fireworks" other than those uses permitted in this Article III shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offense in 1-Year Period 	Amount of 
Administrative 
Penalty 	Late Charge 	Total Amount of Penalty Plus Late Charge 
First 	$250.00 	$75.00 	$325.00 
Second 	$500.00 	$150.00 	$650.00 
Third 	$750.00 	$300.00 	$1,050.00 
 
_____
(e)  In the In the case of a violation of any of the provisions listed above, the administrative fine(s) shall be due and payable within 30 calendar days from the issuance of the administrative fine citation, and the citee shall be required to abate the violation, and surrender all dangerous fireworks to the CEO, immediately. For penalties not paid in full within that time, a late charge in the amount set forth above is hereby imposed and must be paid to the city by the citee. Fines not paid within the time established by this division shall accrue interest at the prevailing established rate. On the second and each subsequent time that a person is issued a citation for the same violation in any 12-month period, the fine is increased as indicated above and the citee shall be liable for the amount of the new fine until it is paid, in addition to being responsible for payment of previous fines. 
(f)  All administrative fines and any late charges and interest due shall be paid to the city at such location or address as stated on the citation, or as otherwise be designated by the city manager or his or her designee. Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the Code. The issuance of the citation and/or payment of any fine shall not bar the city from employing any other enforcement action or remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of the Code so violated including the issuance of additional citations and/or criminal prosecution pursuant to Article II (General Penalties) of Chapter 1 (General Provisions and Penalties) of this Code. 
(g)  Upon confirmation of the citation or when the citation is deemed confirmed, all unpaid administrative fines, late fees and/or interest shall constitute a judgment which may be collected in any manner allowed by law for collection of judgments including but not limited to recordation to create a lien on any real property owned by the responsible person. The city shall be entitled to recover its attorney's fees and costs incurred in collecting any administrative fines, late charges and/or interest. 
(h)  Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee form the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of the Code nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the Code. 
(i)  Right to an administrative hearing. 
(1)  Any citee may contest the violation(s), or that he or she is a responsible person, by filing a request for an administrative hearing on a city-approved form with the city clerk within 30 calendar days from the issuance date of a citation. If the city clerk does not receive the request in the required time period, the citee shall have waived a right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed confirmed and final. 
(2)  No fees shall be charged for the filing of a request for a hearing. 
(3)  Citees shall deposit the full amount of the penalty listed on the citation on or before the request for a hearing is filed. Failure to deposit the full amount of all penalties within the required time period, or the tender of a non-negotiable check, shall render a request for an administrative hearing incomplete and untimely. Penalties that are deposited with the city shall not accrue interest. Penalties deposited shall be returned to the person who deposited them in if the citation is overturned. 
(4)  A request for a hearing shall contain the following: 
a.  The citation number; 
b.  The name, address, telephone number and any facsimile numbers and e-mail addresses of each person contesting the citation; 
c.  A statement of the reason(s) why a citation is being contested; 
d.  The dates and signature of the citee(s). 
(5)  The city will notify all persons who filed a request for a hearing in writing by First Class Mail of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Service of this notice is deemed complete at time of mailing. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, City action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this Division 3. 
(6)  The hearing will be conducted within sixty (60) days of the date a timely and complete request is received by the city clerk. 
(7)  If the CEO submits an additional written report concerning the citation to the city for consideration at the hearing, the CEO shall also serve a copy of such report by first-class mail on the person requesting an administrative hearing no less than seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to receive said report shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing. City action or proceeding pursuant to this Division 3. 
(j)  Administrative hearing—Procedures. 
(1)  The hearing officer designated or appointed by the city manager or his or her designee shall hear all requests for administrative hearings of administrative fines in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(2)  Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation and responsibility therefore by a preponderance of the evidence. The citee(s) and CEO, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. A citee may bring an interpreter to the hearing provided there is no expense to the city therefore. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing. 
(3)  A citee may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the city clerk at least seven business days prior to the hearing. If the citee fails to attend or does not submit a written declaration in a timely manner, he or she shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. In such an instance, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and not render a decision. In such instances, the citation shall be deemed confirmed. 
(4)  Hearings may be continued once at the request of a citee or the officer who issued the citation. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause. 
(k)  Hearing decision—Right to appeal. 
(1)  After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or overturn the citation and shall state the reasons therefore. 
(2)  The hearing officer shall serve cite(s) by First Class Mail with a copy of the written decision. The date the decision is deposited with U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this Division 3. 
(3)  Decisions of the hearing officer may be appealed, to the City Council within thirty (30) days after the date of their service. Each decision shall contain a statement advertising the citee of this appeal right and the procedure for its exercise. A citee shall file a notice of appeal with the city within 20 calendar days after the date of service of the hearing officer's decision. 
(4)  If a hearing officer's decision is not appealed in a timely manner, the decision shall be deemed confirmed. 
(5)  The city council is the sole reviewing authority. If a responsible person prevails on appeal, the city shall reimburse his or her fine deposit within 30 calendar days of the city council's decision on appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1645, § 2, 9-21-2015)  
Chapter 42 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; solid waste and recyclables collection services, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 42-26—42-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HEALTH OFFICER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-51. - Enforcement duties. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer to enforce and observe all of the following: 
(1)  Orders and ordinances of the city council pertaining to the public health; 
(2)  Orders, quarantine regulations and rules concerning the public health prescribed by the state department of public health; and 
(3)  Statutes relating to the public health. 
(Code 1957, § 2.5)  
Sec. 42-52. - Right of entry and inspection. 
It shall be lawful for the health officer to enter and inspect any railway car, stage, vehicle, building, room, hospital, lot, auto court, trailer camp or other place in the city in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1957, § 2.6)  
Sec. 42-53. - Interfering with duties. 
No person shall refuse, resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the health officer into any railway car, stage, vehicle, building, room, hospital, lot, auto court, trailer camp or other place in the city in the performance of his duty, and no person shall refuse to obey any lawful order of the health officer made in the performance of his duties within the power conferred upon him by law. 
(Code 1957, § 2.7)  
Secs. 42-54—42-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HEALTH CODE 
 
Sec. 42-81. - Adopted by reference. 
Title 11, Health and Safety, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on May 1, 1996, is adopted by this express reference thereto as the health and safety code for the city. A copy of the health and safety code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Code 1957, § 11A.1)  
Sec. 42-82. - Interpretation. 
The following rules shall govern the interpretation of the health and safety code adopted in section 42-81: 
(1)  Whenever the term "county" or any abbreviation thereof appears in the health and safety code, it shall be interpreted and deemed to be the term "city." 
(2)  Whenever the term "Los Angeles" or any abbreviation thereof appears in the health and safety code, it shall be interpreted and deemed to mean the term "San Fernando." 
(3)  Whenever there is a conflict between any of the provisions of the health and safety code and other sections of this Code or other adopted city ordinances relating specifically to the same subject matter, the provisions of the code or ordinance imposing the more restrictive condition shall apply and shall prevail. 
(4)  The definition or regulation of any activity, condition or structure in the health and safety code shall not be interpreted or deemed to permit or allow the conduct of any such activity or the construction or maintenance of any such condition or structure as may be otherwise prohibited or restricted by any other sections of this Code or other adopted city ordinances. 
(Code 1957, § 11A.2)  
Sec. 42-83. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 42-83 which pertained to violations and penalties and derived from Code 1957, § 11A.3.  
Sec. 42-84. - Authority of county health officers to enforce regulations regarding food handler training certification and posting of letter grade cards and inspection scores in food establishments. 
Sections 8.04.165, 8.04.225, 8.04.275, 8.04.337, 8.04.405, 8.04.752, 8.04.755, 8.04.930, and 8.04.943 of title 8 and the provisions of chapter 11.11 of title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code, as enacted by and referenced in Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 97-0071, effective January 16, 1998, fully express the will and intention of the city council as to those matters relating to public health which are contained therein and are adopted and are incorporated in this article by reference. Subsections 42-82(1) and (2) and section 42-83 of this article shall not apply to the Los Angeles County Code provisions adopted by reference pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1(11A.5), 5-18-1998) 
Editor's note— The sections of the Los Angeles County Code adopted by the preceding section read as follows: §§ 8.04.752, 8.04.930, 8.04.943, 11.11.020, 11.11.50.  
Sec. 42-85. - Posting requirements; penalty for noncompliance; documents available for public review. 
The letter grade card and the inspection score card shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, as determined by the county health officer, is or are in place as set forth under this section. Removal of the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in section 42-86.  
Sec. 42-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 42-86 which pertained to violations and penalty and derived from Ord. No. 1493, § 2(8.04.930), adopted May 18, 1998.  
Sec. 42-87. - Public health permit suspension or revocation; notice of closure. 
The notice of closure shall remain posted until removed by the county health officer. Removal of the notice of closure by any person other than the county health officer or the refusal of a food establishment to close upon issuance of the written notice of suspension of the public health permit is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the food establishment's public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in section 42-86. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 2(8.04.943), 5-18-1998)  
Sec. 42-88. - Application and effect. 
Failure to have a certified food service handler on site at all times during operating hours of the food service operation and as specified in this section within one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the operation's public health permit pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code and shall be punishable as set forth in section 42-86. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 2(11.11.020), 5-18-1998)  
Sec. 42-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 42-89 which pertained to violation and derived from Ord. No. 1493, § 2(11.11.150), adopted May 18, 1998.  
ARTICLE IV. - MARIJUANA CULTIVATION 
 
Sec. 42-90. - Indoor personal marijuana cultivation permit required. 
(a)  No indoor personal cultivation, as authorized under Health and Safety Code § 11362.1(a)(3), shall be conducted in the city without a valid city-issued indoor personal marijuana cultivation permit pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 11362.2(b)(1). 
(b)  The form of the application for an indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit shall be approved by the chief planning official, chief of police, and city attorney. 
(c)  If a residence proposed to be utilized in any manner for indoor and/or outdoor cultivation is leased or rented, then an indoor personal marijuana cultivation permit may only be issued upon a written authorization from the owner of such property that explicitly allows such cultivation, with written authorization including proof of notary on form provided by the city. Such written authorization shall accompany an application for an indoor personal marijuana cultivation permit. The property owner may revoke such authorization by providing written notice of revocation to the city and to the permittee. Thirty calendar days after receipt of such notice by the city, the relevant indoor personal marijuana cultivation permit shall be null and void. 
(d)  Applications shall be filed with the city clerk and accompanied by an application (including inspection) fee and any other required site plans or documentation, as established by city council resolution. 
(e)  The chief planning official and chief of police, or designee(s), shall consider and either approve or disapprove an application for an indoor personal marijuana cultivation permit and deliver written notice of such approval or disapproval by first class mail to the applicant within 30 calendar days of the city's receipt of such complete application. 
(f)  Appeal of permit denial. A denial of an indoor personal marijuana cultivation permit may be made in accordance with the procedural protocol set forth in San Fernando Municipal Code § 106-76 et seq. for appeals of certain zoning-related determinations, which provide for aggrieved parties to appeal to the planning commission and city council, if necessary. 
(g)  Periodic inspections. Permittees who possess current and valid indoor personal marijuana cultivation permits shall be subject to quarterly city inspections to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this article IV of Chapter 42 upon at least 72 hours written notice from the city. 
(Ord. No. U-1658, § 4, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 1659, § 3, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 42-91. - Standards for indoor personal marijuana cultivation. 
(a)  Indoor personal marijuana cultivation shall be limited to the inside of a private residence or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure, pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 11362.1 and 11362.2, so long as the portion of the residence or eligible accessory structure utilized for such cultivation is not within a required walkway or common open space area and does not reduce the amount of required on-site parking spaces applicable to the relevant residence(s). 
(b)  Any and all live marijuana plants cultivated indoors by persons in the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 11362.1(a)(3) shall be kept in a locked space that is not visible by normal unaided vision from a public place, subject to any and all limitations applicable under Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.1 and 11362.2. 
(c)  All structures in which such indoor personal cannabis cultivation occurs shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, housing, and fire code requirements. 
(d)  The use of grow lights, fans, ventilation devices or any other electrical, irrigation, or mechanical equipment shall comply with all applicable building, housing, and fire code requirements and related permitting and inspection requirements. 
(e)  Indoor grow lights shall not exceed 2,000 watts total illumination, and the installation, wiring, and operation of such lighting shall comply with the applicable building, housing, and fire code requirements and related permitting and inspection protocols. 
(f)  The use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) or generators for personal indoor marijuana cultivation shall be prohibited. 
(g)  Any structure utilized for personal indoor marijuana cultivation shall have ventilation and filtration systems installed to prevent the odor of cannabis from escaping the interiors of such structure and the accumulation of mold. Such systems shall be compliant with applicable building, housing, and fire code requirements and has undergone and related necessary inspections. 
(h)  Each allowable outdoor accessory structure utilized for the indoor personal cultivation of marijuana shall be set back at a distance of three to ten feet from all property lines of the premises, subject to review and approval by the community development director to ensure compliance with Health and Safety Code § 11362.2. 
(i)  The cultivation area shall not be accessible to persons under 21 years of age. 
(j)  A portable fire extinguisher shall be kept in the same room where indoor cultivation occurs. 
(k)  There shall be no external or noxious olfactory evidence of marijuana cultivation from any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or adjacent property. 
(l)  Runoff and waste disposal by the residence where cultivation occurs must be in compliance with any applicable local, state, and federal regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. U-1658, § 4, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 1659, § 3, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 42-92. - Outdoor personal cultivation of marijuana prohibited. 
The personal cultivation of cannabis outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence shall be completely prohibited in all zones in the city, pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 11361.2(b)(3). 
(Ord. No. U-1658, § 4, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 1659, § 3, 11-21-2016)  
Sec. 42-93. - Definitions. 
Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. 
Cultivate means participation [in] any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana. 
Private residence means a house, an apartment unit, a mobilehome, or other similar dwelling. 
(Ord. No. U-1658, § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 1659, § 3, 11-21-2016)  
Chapter 46 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 106. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS 
 
Sec. 46-26. - Parking and storage of house trailers generally. 
No person shall keep a trailer coach or house trailer on any real property in the city which is not a duly licensed auto and trailer camp. However, a city resident may store his own trailer coach on his own property back of the building setback line when the coach is not in use. 
(Code 1957, § 12A.16)  
Sec. 46-27. - Parking when inhabited. 
No person shall use any trailer coach for living or sleeping quarters except in a duly licensed auto and trailer camp. 
(Code 1957, § 12A.17)  
Sec. 46-28. - Prerequisites to issuance of business license for trailer courts. 
No business license shall be issued for a trailer court in the city unless and until the following conditions are met and complied with: 
(1)  The proposed location of the trailer court contains a minimum of at least two acres. 
(2)  The trailer court shall be located only on property served by a sanitary sewer line. 
(3)  Sewer facilities for water closet use shall be available to every trailer space in the trailer court. 
(4)  All driveway areas shall be paved with a minimum of two-inch asphaltic surfacing or asphaltic concrete surfacing. 
(5)  If the proposed trailer court adjoins or abuts any R-zoned property, a six-foot masonry wall shall be erected and maintained along such line; provided, however, that the portion of the wall within any setback line shall conform to the requirements for fences from the property line to the building setback line. 
(Code 1957, § 12A.18)  
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Disposition of unclaimed property by police department. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "unclaimed property" shall mean any and all property in possession of the police department for which no claim or demand has been made and property for which the owner cannot, with reasonable diligence, be found. 
(b)  The purchasing agent for the city is authorized to sell all unclaimed property which has been in the possession of the department for a period of more than four months, in compliance with the provisions set forth under subdivision V (miscellaneous) of division 6 (purchasing) of article VI (finance) of chapter 2 (administration) of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(c)  Bicycles or toys that have been unclaimed for a period of at least 60 days may, instead of being sold at a public auction pursuant to this section, be turned over to the probation officer, the county welfare department, or any charitable or nonprofit organization that is authorized under its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or state law, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
(Code 1957, § 15.1; Ord. No. 1653, § 3, 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 50-2. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
Highway means and includes streets, alleys, bridges, culverts, curbs and sidewalks. 
Open container means any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened or a seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
Vehicle means a device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway. 
(b)  Consumption or possession of open container in vehicles and on highways. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon or remain upon any part of a public highway while he is consuming or possessing any open container of any alcoholic beverage. It, likewise, shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any vehicle while such vehicle is on part of any public highway when such person or any other occupant of such vehicle is consuming or possessing any open container of any alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  Consumption or possession of open container in public place. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage in any public place while open to the patronage of the public, except upon premises licensed under the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Act for the consumption of such alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Allowing person to consume or possess open container of alcoholic beverage. It shall be unlawful for any person, as owner, manager, employee, or otherwise, of any restaurant, place of public entertainment, store, or other such public place to allow or permit any person to consume or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage in such public place while open to the patronage of the public except upon premises licensed under the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Act for the consumption of such alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  Violations. All violations of this section are designated as infractions. 
(Code 1957, § 15.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Business and Professions Code § 23004.  
Sec. 50-3. - Charges for police services. 
(a)  Liability for cost. Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, when a party, gathering, or unruly assemblage occurs at a premises and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person in charge of the premises and the person responsible for the event, or if either of those persons is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor, shall be held jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing police personnel on a special security assignment over and above the services normally provided by the department. When police department personnel respond to a complaint involving a disturbance caused by a party, gathering, or unruly assemblage, the responding officers shall issue a written notice to the responsible party. The notice provided shall state that if police department personnel are required to return to the premises within the following 12-hour period because of further disturbances and responding officers determine there is a disruption of the public peace, tranquility, health or safety, such response shall constitute special security services. Further, the warning shall state the responsible party may be charged for the cost of providing such special security services. The warning shall be signed by the responsible party, acknowledging receipt of the warning, and a signed copy of the warning shall be left with the responsible party. If a second or any subsequent response is required, police department personnel shall have the responsible party sign a second response voucher, acknowledging the occurrence of the second response. 
(b)  Costs for second response. The police personnel utilized during a second response after the first warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the services normally provided. The cost of such special security assignment may include damages to city property and/or injuries to city personnel. A fee charged will not be in excess of $500.00 for a single incident. However, the city shall have the option to elect any other legal remedies when such costs or damages exceed $500.00. 
(c)  Collection of fee. The fee provided in this section shall be collected in the following manner: Copies of the initial warning and second response voucher shall be forwarded to the finance division where the cost of special security services shall be computed and an amount assessed, which reflects the actual costs of services rendered. The city shall bill the responsible party for the cost of special security services, including worker's compensation charges, plus an additional 30 percent of the actual costs for the purposes of administrative overhead to process, bill and collect service charges. Failure of the responsible party to pay for services, as assessed by the city, shall be deemed a violation of this Code and shall constitute a debt due solely to the city. 
(Code 1957, § 15.4)  
Sec. 50-4. - Lookouts for illegal acts. 
(a)  No person shall act as a guard or lookout for any building, premises or establishment used for any illegal act or where anything is illegally kept, sold or purchased or for any person committing any illegal act on any street or sidewalk. 
(b)  No person shall give any signal intended to or calculated to warn or give warning of the approach of any peace officer to any person in or about such building or premises or places mentioned in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1957, § 15.23)  
Sec. 50-5. - Notice to abate nuisance. 
Whenever a nuisance endangering the public health or safety shall be ascertained to exist on any premises or in any house or other place, the health officer or his duly authorized agent, in case such nuisance endangers the public health, or the fire chief or his duly authorized agent, in case such nuisance endangers the public safety, shall notify, in writing, any person owning or having control of or acting as agent for such premises, house or other place to abate or remove such nuisance within a reasonable time, not less than five days, to be stated in such notice. 
(Code 1957, § 15.24) 
State Law reference— Authority of cities to declare what constitutes a nuisance, Government Code § 38771.  
Sec. 50-6. - Abatement of nuisances by city. 
Upon the neglect or refusal of any person receiving notice under section 50-5 to comply therewith, the officer who gave such notice may abate the nuisance covered thereby, and the person so neglecting or refusing, in addition to the penalties provided by this Code, shall be liable to the city for cost of such abatement, which cost shall be recovered by the city in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. If no person can be found upon whom to serve such notice, the officer seeking to serve the notice shall proceed to abate the nuisance at the expense of the city at a cost of not to exceed $25.00 per day. 
(Code 1957, § 15.25)  
Sec. 50-7. - Failure to abate nuisances. 
Any owner, occupant, agent or other person having control of any house or other place in which a nuisance endangering the public health or safety, as provided in section 50-5 of this article, who, after having had served upon him the notice provided in section 50-5 of this article, shall fail to abate or remove such nuisance within the time, not less than five days, stated in such notice, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1957, § 15.26)  
Sec. 50-8. - Performance of labor by prisoners. 
All persons who are confined in the city jail under a judgment rendered in a criminal action in the division of the municipal court of the Los Angeles Judicial District located in the city shall be required to perform labor, under the direction of the police chief, on the public works, ways or buildings of the city to the extent of their physical abilities. 
(Code 1957, § 15.29) 
State Law reference— Authority to require, Government Code § 36904.  
Sec. 50-9. - Security of prisoners. 
The police chief shall procure and use such means as he shall deem necessary for the security of all prisoners under his charge and may prescribe and administer such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary to keep good order among the prisoners and compel them to do their work. 
(Code 1957, § 15.31)  
Sec. 50-10. - Treatment of prisoners. 
Prisoners in the city jail shall be treated with the utmost kindness compatible with the enforcement of the rules and regulations necessary to compel discipline and obedience to the officer in charge. 
(Code 1957, § 15.32)  
Sec. 50-11. - Fake sales. 
(a)  Definition. The term "fake sale," within the meaning of this section, is defined to be: 
(1)  The sale of goods, wares or merchandise at auction or otherwise to agents or other persons purchasing the goods, wares or merchandise for or on behalf of the owner or other person interested in the sale thereof. 
(2)  The sale of goods, wares or merchandise or the offering of goods, wares or merchandise for sale in limited quantities of less than the full amount of such merchandise owned or carried in stock by the person offering the goods, wares or merchandise for sale. 
(3)  The offering for sale of goods, wares or merchandise of a different quality or brand or bearing a different trademark as a substitute for merchandise previously advertised for sale. 
(4)  The sale of any goods, wares or merchandise misrepresented as to quality, quantity or otherwise. 
(5)  The sale or offering for sale of any goods, wares and merchandise transported or brought into the city or not constituting the original legitimate stock of goods, wares and merchandise of a place of business within the city, as the original and legitimate stock of goods, wares and merchandise of such place of business, at a bankrupt, insurance, mortgage, insolvency, assignee's, receiver's, trustee's, creditor's, executor's, or administrator's forced removal or closing-out sale. However, the bringing of new stock into the city or the adding of new stock to such original stock of goods, wares and merchandise and selling or offering to sell such new stock or added stock as the original stock of such goods, wares and merchandise at the place of business at any of the sales described in this subsection, is declared unlawful and to be a fake sale within the meaning of this section. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, as proprietor, agent, manager, owner or otherwise, to conduct, make or advertise any fake sale of goods, wares or merchandise within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 15.9)  
Secs. 50-12—50-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-41. - Obscene shows, exhibitions or entertainments. 
(a)  No person, either as owner, manager, producer, director, actor or agent or who acts in any other capacity, shall give, direct, present or participate in any drama, play, exhibition, show or entertainment or any scene, tableau, incident, part or portion of any drama, play, exhibition, show or entertainment, the contents of which would constitute obscenity under state law. 
(b)  No person shall exhibit or perform or participate in the presentation of any play or representation, the contents of which would constitute obscenity under state law. 
(Code 1957, § 15.20)  
Secs. 50-42—50-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GAMBLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Gambling in parks, § 54-12. 
 
Sec. 50-71. - Prohibited generally; applicability to bingo. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee or otherwise, within the city, to play at any game whatsoever for money, property or any article of value, provided that nothing shall be deemed to be included in this section that is included in or will conflict with any of the provisions of part 1, title IX, chapter X of the Penal Code (Penal Code § 330 et seq.). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, play or bet at or against any game, scheme, contrivance or device prohibited by the terms of this section and sections 50-72 and 50-73. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, this section and sections 50-72 and 50-73 shall not apply to any bingo game conducted pursuant to and in compliance with article II of chapter 10 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 15.14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Penal Code §§ 330—337h.  
Sec. 50-72. - Maintaining gambling house. 
It is declared to be unlawful for any person to permit any game, the playing of which is prohibited by section 50-71, to be played, conducted, dealt or carried on in any house or room within the city limits owned or rented by such person in whole or in part or under his control, provided that nothing shall be deemed to be included in this section that is included in or will conflict with any of the provisions of part 1, title IX, chapter X of the Penal Code (Penal Code § 330 et seq.). 
(Code 1957, § 15.15)  
Sec. 50-73. - Admittance fees or charges prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, manager, employee or otherwise, directly or indirectly, to accept, take or receive any money, ticket, thing or representative of value from any person for the privilege of participating, playing or betting at or against any game, scheme, device or contrivance prohibited by this division or for admittance to any room, apartment or place where such game, scheme, contrivance or device is set up, played, prepared or carried on. 
(Code 1957, § 15.17)  
Secs. 50-74—50-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 50-101. - Unlawful use of places. 
No person shall resort to any office building or to any room used or occupied in connection with or under the same management as any cafe, restaurant, soft drink parlor, liquor establishment or similar business or to any public park or to any of the buildings therein or to any vacant lot or to any room, roominghouse, lodginghouse, residence, apartment house, hotel, building, structure, vehicle, house trailer, street or sidewalk for the purpose of having sexual intercourse with a person to whom such person is not married or for the purpose of performing or participating in any lewd act with any such person. 
(Code 1957, § 15.13)  
Secs. 50-102—50-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 50-131. - Permit to interfere with, use or destroy stream-protection work. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, municipality or district to interfere with, destroy or use in any manner whatsoever any levee, embankment, channel, dam, reservoir, drain or stream gauge, telephone line, piling, fence or other stream-protection work constructed by or on behalf of any public agency without a written permit from the city council, which permit shall be revocable whenever in the opinion of the council the public interest and welfare requires the revocation. No permit to use any flood-control protection work or rights-of-way owned or constructed by the Los Angeles County Flood Control District shall be effective unless written permit has also been obtained from the board of supervisors of the district. 
(Code 1957, § 15.21)  
Sec. 50-132. - Impeding flow of rivers, streams or watercourses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, municipality or district to place or cause to be placed in the channel or bed of any river, stream, wash, or arroyo or upon any property over which the Los Angeles County Flood Control District has an easement for flood control purposes, duly recorded in the office of the county recorder, any wires, fence, building or other structure or any refuse, rubbish, tin cans or other matter that may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water in such river, stream, wash or arroyo or that will catch or collect debris carried by such water or that is placed where the natural flow of the stormwaters and floodwaters would carry such downstream to the damage and detriment of either private or public property adjacent to the river, stream, wash, arroyo or channel. 
(Code 1957, § 15.22)  
Sec. 50-133. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1581, §§ 2, 4, adopted Apr. 21, 2008, repealed § 50-133 in its entirety. Former § 50-133 pertained to graffiti/spray paint control and derived from Code 1957, § 15.37; and Ord. No. 1537, § 13, adopted Oct. 21, 2002.  
Sec. 50-134. - Urinating or defecating in public. 
(a)  No person shall urinate or defecate in a: 
(1)  Public place; or 
(2)  Place open to public view. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to urination or defecation in any fixture provided for such purposes in any bathroom, restroom, dressing room, or similar facility. 
(Code 1957, § 15.38; Ord. No. 1537, § 12, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 50-135—50-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 50-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Designed primarily for means a device designed primarily for such smoking or ingestion set forth in the definition of the term "drug paraphernalia" which has been fabricated, constructed, altered, adjusted, or marked especially for use in the smoking or ingestion of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, or any other controlled substance and is peculiarly adapted to such purposes by virtue of a distinctive feature or combination of features associated with drug paraphernalia, notwithstanding that it might also be possible to use such device for some other purpose. 
Drug paraphernalia means any device designed primarily for use by individuals for the smoking or ingestion of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, or any other "controlled substance," as that term is defined in the state Health and Safety Code. Items or devices included shall be as follows: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent or otherwise, heads, or punctured metal bowls. 
(2)  A device constructed so as to prevent the escape of smoke into the air and to channel smoke into a chamber where it may be accumulated to permit inhalation or ingestion of larger quantities of smoke than would otherwise be possible, whether the device is known as a bong, or otherwise. 
(3)  A smokable pipe constructed with a receptacle or container in which water or other liquid may be placed into which smoke passes and is cooled in the process of being inhaled or ingested. 
(4)  A smokable pipe which contains a heating unit, whether the device is known as an electric pipe, or otherwise. 
(5)  A device constructed so as to permit the simultaneous mixing and ingestion of smoke and nitrous oxide or other compressed gas, whether the device is known as a buzz bomb, or otherwise. 
(6)  A canister, container or other device with a tube, nozzle or other similar arrangement attached thereto so constructed as to permit the forcing of smoke accumulated therein into the user's lungs under pressure. 
(7)  A device for holding a cigarette, whether the device is known as a roach clip, or otherwise. 
(8)  A spoon for ingestion through the nose. 
(9)  A straw or tube for ingestion through the nose or mouth. 
(Code 1957, § 7B.21) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-162. - Unlawful acts by managers of business establishments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any business establishment wherein drug paraphernalia is displayed for sale, offered for sale or sold to knowingly allow or permit a minor, not accompanied by one or both of such minor's parents or by such minor's legal guardian, to enter and remain within any room of such establishment where drug paraphernalia is displayed for sale, offered for sale or sold. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of a business establishment wherein drug paraphernalia is displayed for sale, offered for sale or sold, to fail to display and maintain or to fail to cause to be displayed and maintained at least one sign stating that a minor may not enter unless accompanied by one or both of such minor's parents or by such minor's legal guardian. Any such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location near each public entrance to such business establishment wherein such drug paraphernalia is displayed for sale, offered for sale, or sold or near each public entrance to any particular room therein where such drug paraphernalia is displayed for sale, offered for sale or sold. 
(c)  If a substantial number of the public invitees or patrons of a business establishment wherein drug paraphernalia is displayed for sale, offered for sale or sold, uses a language other than English as a primary language, any sign required pursuant to this section shall be worded in both English and the language involved. 
(Code 1957, § 7B.22)  
Sec. 50-163. - Presence of minors in business establishments. 
If a sign has been posted as required by section 50-162, it shall be unlawful for a minor to enter any room of a business establishment wherein drug paraphernalia is displayed for sale, offered for sale or sold, unless the minor is accompanied by one or both of such minor's parents or by such minor's legal guardian. 
(Code 1957, § 7B.23)  
Sec. 50-164. - Nuisances; abatement. 
The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition or display in any place of business from which minors are not excluded, as set forth in section 50-162, and where devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs, including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking such, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Civil Procedure Code § 731. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty provisions applicable for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 7B.24)  
Secs. 50-165—50-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MINORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Minors prohibited in pool rooms, § 10-138. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-191. - Daytime loitering. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuing education to loiter, idle, wander or to be upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement and eating places, or vacant lots during the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. on days when school is in session. This section does not apply: 
(1)  When the minor is accompanied by such minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by such minor's parent or guardian or other adult person having care or custody of the minor; 
(3)  When the minor is going or coming directly to or from a medical appointment; or 
(4)  To a student who has permission to leave school campus for lunch or a school-related activity and has in possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, when a person under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of this section and a peace officer issues a notice to appear in superior court to that minor, the charge shall be deemed an infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Welfare and Institutions Code § 601 or 602. The amount of the fine imposed shall be set by the court. 
(Code 1957, § 15.7.1)  
Secs. 50-192—50-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 
 
Sec. 50-221. - Curfew hours for minors. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means 10:00 p.m. of any day until 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement, entertainment, or recreation. 
Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court; or 
(3)  A person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  A minor commits an offense by being present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense by knowingly permitting or by insufficient control allowing the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (b) and (c) of this section that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in a lawful employment activity or going to or returning home from a lawful employment activity without detour or stop; 
(5)  Acting in response to an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence which is immediately adjacent to the minor's residence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, cultural, religious, sports, amusement, entertainment, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning directly home from, without detour or stop, an official school, cultural, religious, sports, amusement, entertainment, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution as it pertains to minors, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly, but subject to all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations; or 
(9)  Emancipated in accordance with applicable state law. 
(e)  Before taking action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (d) of this section is present or applicable. 
(Code 1957, § 15.6)  
Secs. 50-222—50-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WEAPONS 
 
Sec. 50-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous or deadly weapon means and includes, but is not limited to, any dirk or dagger; any knife with a blade three inches or more in length; any snap-blade or spring-blade knife, regardless of the length of the blade; any icepick or similar sharp stabbing tool; any straight-edge razor or any razor blade fitted to a handle; any dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of any state law restricting the use thereof; and any cutting, stabbing or bludgeoning weapon or device capable of inflicting grievous bodily harm, whether such instrument is called by any name set forth in this definition or by any other name; and any firearm other than the following: 
(1)  One carried by a peace officer or carried pursuant to a valid permit, issued by a duly authorized governmental authority; or 
(2)  An ordinary rifle or shotgun lawfully carried for purposes of hunting or other lawful sport. 
(Code 1957, § 29.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-252. - Carrying dangerous or deadly weapon in automobile. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, in any automobile, any dangerous or deadly weapon, but this restriction shall not be deemed to prohibit the carrying of ordinary tools or equipment carried in good faith for uses of honest work, trade or business or for the purpose of legitimate sport or recreation. 
(Code 1957, § 29.2)  
Sec. 50-253. - Loitering with concealed dangerous or deadly weapon. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while carrying concealed upon his person any dangerous or deadly weapon, to loaf or loiter upon any public street, sidewalk or alley or to wander about from place to place with no lawful business thereby to perform or to hide, lurk or loiter upon or about the premises of another. 
(Code 1957, § 29.3)  
Sec. 50-254. - Loitering with concealed dangerous or deadly weapon where intoxicating liquor sold. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, who has concealed upon his person any dangerous or deadly weapon, to loiter upon any place where intoxicating liquors are sold or any other place of public resort. 
(Code 1957, § 29.4)  
Sec. 50-255. - Fighting or disorderly conduct while in possession of concealed dangerous or deadly weapon. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who has concealed upon his person or who has in his immediate physical possession any dangerous or deadly weapon to engage in any fight or to participate in any other rough or disorderly conduct upon any public place or way or upon the premises of another. 
(Code 1957, § 29.5)  
Sec. 50-256. - Permit to discharge firearms. 
(a)  Required. No person shall fire, shoot or discharge any gun, rifle, pistol or other firearm or any airgun, air rifle or air pistol or any spring gun, spring rifle or spring pistol or any carbon dioxide or other gas-operated gun, rifle or pistol without having first obtained a written permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  Issuance; expiration. Any permit issued by the chief of police under subsection (a) of this section shall state the purposes for which issued, the times for shooting and the date of expiration. No permit shall be valid for a period in excess of seven days. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a peace officer in the performance of his duty nor to any person while: 
(1)  Shooting in a municipally licensed or municipally owned or operated shooting gallery, pistol or target range; 
(2)  Shooting in any place or location approved, in writing, by the chief of police for target practice or shooting; 
(3)  Shooting in and as a part of an adult supervised training program or curriculum of any public or private school or club or association organized for instruction in the use of firearms; or 
(4)  Lawfully defending life or property. 
(Code 1957, § 29.9)  
Sec. 50-257. - Sale to minors. 
(a)  No person shall sell, exchange, give or loan to any person under 18 years of age any slingshot; any snap-blade or spring-blade knife; any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm of any description; any spring gun or airgun or other device designed or intended to discharge any pellets, BB shot or other deadly or dangerous missile; or any ammunition, cartridge, shell or other device, whether containing any explosive substance or not, designed or intended for use in any weapons enumerated in this subsection. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any person from selling, exchanging, giving or loaning to any such minor any of the weapons described in subsection 50-256(a) or the ammunition or projectile therefor, where such person receives and keeps on file written permission to do so from one of the parents or legal guardian of such minor on the form and in the manner prescribed in this subsection for the purpose of enabling the minor to engage in shooting or discharging weapons as provided in subsection 50-256(a) or for the purpose of engaging in legitimate sport or recreation outside the city. The written permission referred to in this subsection shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police, and the form shall be filled in and executed by one of the parents or the legal guardian of such minor and such minor at the police department in the presence of a police officer. 
(Code 1957, § 29.12)  
Sec. 50-258. - Possession by minors. 
(a)  No person under 18 years of age shall have in his possession, care, custody or control any article or thing mentioned in section 50-257. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to apply to a minor under the age of 18 years where such minor has in his possession the written permission therefor from one of such minor's parents or such minor's legal guardian on the form prescribed in section 50-257 when engaged in shooting or discharging weapons as provided in subsection 50-256(a) or when traveling to and from any of the places mentioned in subsections 50-256(c)(1), (2) and (3) or when engaged in legitimate sport or recreation outside the city. 
(Code 1957, § 29.13)  
Sec. 50-259. - Sale of firearm ammunition. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "firearm ammunition" shall include any ammunition for use in pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns, automatic weapons, or any other device designed to be used as a weapon from which a projectile is expelled by the force of an explosion or some other form of combustion. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, no person, including retail gun dealers, shall sell, give, lend or transfer ownership or offer for sale any firearm ammunition during the seven calendar days preceding and including July 4 and January 1 of each calendar year. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale or transfer of ownership of firearm ammunition by a wholesale gun dealer to another wholesale gun dealer or to a retail gun dealer or of ammunition requested which meets the parameters of Penal Code § 12324 relating to disarmed ammunition. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit sale to, purchase by or acquisition of firearm ammunition to any person exempted from such restrictions by state law as such persons are described in Penal Code § 12302 or 12322. 
(e)  This section shall have no application to the prohibitions on the sale of firearm ammunition established by Penal Code §§ 12301 et seq. and 12320 et seq. or any other prohibitions established by the state statutes. 
(f)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense. 
(Code 1957, § 29.15)  
Sec. 50-260. - Security requirements for firearms dealers. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "licensee" has the same meaning as used in Penal Code § 12071(a)(1), as amended. 
(b)  Any time the licensee is not open for business, the licensee shall store all firearms kept in the licensed place of business using one of the following methods as to each particular firearm: 
(1)  Store the firearm in a secure facility that is a part of or that constitutes the licensee's business premises. 
(2)  Secure the firearm with a hardened steel rod or cable of at least one-eighth inch in diameter through the trigger guard of the firearm. The steel rod or cable shall be secured with a hardened steel lock that has a shackle. The lock and shackle shall be protected or shielded from the use of a bolt cutter, and the rod or cable shall be anchored in a manner that prevents the removal of the firearm from the premises. 
(3)  Store the firearm in a locked fireproof safe or vault in the licensee's business premises. 
(c)  The chief of police or the chief's designee shall have the authority to enter, at any time of the day or night with 24-hour notification, any licensed place of business, on an annual basis or as otherwise determined to be necessary by the chief of police, to inspect the licensee's premises for compliance with the requirements set forth in this section and for compliance with all other federal and state licensing requirements. 
(Code 1957, § 29.16)  
Secs. 50-261—50-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - GRAFFITI PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL 
 
Sec. 50-301. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
(1)  Graffiti on public or private property is a condition of blight that not only depreciates the value of property which has been the target of such vandalism, but also depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties so as to create a negative impact upon the entire community. 
(2)  Graffiti has also been found to be associated with criminal activity and delinquency. It is also a means of identification and intimidation utilized by gangs and its presence may further gang-related activities. The power of graffiti to create fear within the community and blight upon the landscape, devaluing property and detracting from a sense of community enjoyed by the residents of the city goes beyond the cost of clean-up or removal. Not only is graffiti a criminal act of vandalism, but it is also a social crime upon the quality of life and freedom from intimidation that residents desire in their neighborhoods. 
(3)  Acts of graffiti are most-often committed by persons under the age of 18 years using aerosol containers of spray paint or felt-tip markers, or both. These implements of graffiti are frequently stolen from retail stores by minors, and, as such, retail stores that display or sell these implements should be required to take reasonable steps to prevent their theft. 
(4)  California Government Code § 53069.3 authorizes the city, under certain circumstances, to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed materials from private as well as public property. Unless the city causes graffiti to be removed from public and private property, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result that the entire neighborhood is affected and becomes a less desirable place in which to be. 
(5)  In the past, the city has appropriated funds for the removal of graffiti from privately owned real or personal property located within the city. While this public service benefits the entire community, it provides no incentive to private property owners to deal directly with the problem and to formulate their own ideas, solutions, and mitigation measures to avoid being victimized time and time again. The perpetual provision of free graffiti removal services is not an effective deterrent to the escalation of graffiti vandalism and is not a cost effective use of public funds. 
(6)  It is the purpose and intent of the city council of this city, through the adoption of this Article, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement. Such acts are destructive of the rights and values of private property owners as well as of the entire community. It is the further intent of the city council, through the adoption of this article, to provide notice to all of those who disregard the property rights of others, that the city will strictly enforce the law and seek vigorous prosecution against those persons engaging in the defacement of public or private properties. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-302. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Adhesive label shall mean any so called "bumper sticker", sheet of paper, fabric, or plastic, or other substance with an adhesive backing. 
Aerosol paint container shall mean any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, undercoating, spray insulation, or other substance capable of defacing property. 
City agents shall mean city employees, representatives, or contract agents. 
Enforcement officer shall mean any city official authorized to enforce the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, the city's police department, code enforcement department, and public works department, as well as any contract agent authorized by the city to abate graffiti nuisances described in this article. 
Felt-tip marker shall mean any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth of an inch and which contains an ink or other pigmented liquid. 
Graffiti shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise glued, posted, or affixed to or on any surface of any public or private real or personal property within the city to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant thereof. 
Graffiti implement shall mean an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching tool capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete, wood, or any other surface, or adhesive label. "Graffiti implement" shall also include any other device capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width upon any surface of any material. 
Minor shall mean any person under the age of 18 years. 
Paint stick or graffiti stick shall mean a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width. 
Responsible party shall mean any person who owns, possesses, occupies, or otherwise has responsibility for the repair or maintenance of personal or real property on which there exists graffiti. Responsible party shall also include any minor (or parent or guardian of a minor) or other person who causes or permits the application of graffiti or other inscribed material. 
Retrofitting shall mean and include, without limitation, the restoration, modification, or alteration of a structure with new or modified parts, devices, systems, or equipment to remove graffiti, to prevent or inhibit the recurrence of graffiti, or to return the structure to an acceptable, usable, unblemished, unblighted, or original state or condition in compliance with all applicable laws. 
Structure shall mean any structure as defined in the city's building code, and shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, walls, fences, sidewalks, curbs, poles, signs, and cargo/shipping containers. 
Vehicle shall mean a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-303. - Accessibility to graffiti implements. 
(a)  Display requirements. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or business engaged in a commercial enterprise to display for sale, trade, loan, or exchange any graffiti implement except in an area from which the public shall be securely precluded from entering without employee assistance. Two such acceptable methods for displaying graffiti implements for sale shall be by containment in (i) a completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a building or structure, and which shall, at all times except during access by authorized representatives, remain securely locked; or (ii) in an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which the public is precluded from entry. Nothing herein shall relieve such person or business entity from, at all times, complying with the requirements of the California Penal Code § 594.1(c) by posting signs as described therein. 
(1)  Any person or business engaged in the retail sale of etching cream or aerosol container of paint must display at a conspicuous location a legible sign measuring not less than 12 inches by 12 inches with letters at least one-half inch in height which states: 
"It is unlawful for any person to sell or give to any individual under the age of eighteen years, any etching cream or aerosol container of paint that is capable of defacing property, except as provided in Section 594.1 of the California Penal Code. Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both." 
(b)  Storage requirements. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or business engaged in the commercial enterprise of selling, providing, loaning, trading, or exchanging graffiti implements to store any graffiti implement except in either (i) a completely enclosed room which shall, at all times except during access or actual occupancy by the owner or authorized adult representative of the owner, remain securely locked; or (ii) in a completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a building, and which shall at all times except during access by the owner or an authorized adult representative of the owner, remain securely locked. For purpose of this section, an owner or authorized representative of the owner shall be deemed to actually occupy a room even during brief periods of absence if the room is contained within a larger building which is occupied by the owner. 
(c)  Civil responsibility for wrongful display or storage. Any person or business who displays or stores or permits the display or storage of any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this section shall be personally liable for any and all costs, including attorneys fees and court costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, the repair of any property containing graffiti, or such party's prosecution of a civil claim for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or property repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation of this section or of any provision of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-304. - Graffiti constitutes a nuisance. 
Pursuant to California Government Code § 38771, the city council hereby declares the following conditions to constitute a public nuisance: 
(1)  Graffiti visible from real property (whether privately or publicly owned), public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or other area open to the public; 
(2)  The existence of any surface of a structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk, curb, or vehicle on any privately owned parcel of land which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five times in 12 months (hereinafter, "graffiti attracting surface"). 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-305. - Graffiti removal requirement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to maintain graffiti, that is, to cause, permit, aid, abet, or suffer any graffiti which is visible from any real property (whether privately or publicly owned), public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or other area open to the public to remain on any structure, tree, shrub, or vehicle owned, possessed, or within the custody or control of such person, or located on real property owned, possessed, or within the custody or control of such person. 
(1)  Each day that graffiti is maintained constitutes a new and separate offense, and is subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Articles II and III of this Code. 
(2)  Enforcement of this section shall be stayed pending a final order upon appeal of a notice of abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-306. - Abatement of graffiti by city. 
(a)  The city council authorizes the appropriation and use of public funds for abatement of the public nuisance conditions listed in section 50-304 of this Code, that is, either the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material from publicly or privately owned real or personal property located within the city, or if the graffiti cannot be removed cost effectively, the repair or replacement of the portion of the property that was defaced, or to otherwise abate graffiti attracting surfaces, and the director of public works, or his or her designee, is authorized to immediately abate the nuisance pursuant to the following conditions: 
(1)  In abating the public nuisance from public property owned or leased by the city, the painting, repair, and/or replacement of an area more extensive than where the graffiti is located shall not be authorized, except where the director of public works, or his or her designee, determines that a more extensive area must be repainted, repaired, and/or replaced. 
(2)  Where the structure or surface is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of graffiti by city agents may be performed only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure or surface and only after such entity executes an appropriate release and right of entry form permitting such graffiti removal. In abating the public nuisance from a structure or property owned by another public entity, the painting, repair, and/or replacement of an area more extensive than where the graffiti is located shall not be authorized, except where (i) the director of public works, or his or her designee, determines that a more extensive area must be repainted, repaired, and/or replaced in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community; or (ii) the other public entity agrees in writing to pay for the costs of repainting, repairing, and/or replacing a more extensive area. 
(3)  Where the structure or surface is privately owned, the removal of graffiti by city agents may be performed only after securing the consent of the owner or possessor and only after the owner or possessor executes an appropriate written release and right of entry form permitting such graffiti removal. In abating the public nuisance from a structure or property owned by a private party, the painting, repair, and/or replacement of an area more extensive than where the graffiti is located shall not be authorized, except where (i) the director of public works, or his or her designee, determines that a more extensive area must be repainted, repaired, and/or replaced in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community; or (ii) a responsible party agrees in writing to pay for the costs of repainting, repairing, and/or replacing a more extensive area. 
(b)  As an alternative to the procedure provided in the first sentence of subsection (a)(3) of this section, Enforcement Officer(s) shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 50-307. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-307. - Abatement of graffiti by city without consent of property owner or possessor. 
If the consent of the private property owner or possessor of the property cannot be obtained, a public nuisance condition listed in section 50-304 of this Code which is located on privately owned real or personal property within the City may be abated by the city at the owner's expense as a public nuisance pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  Notice of abatement. The enforcement officer shall issue a "Notice of Graffiti Nuisance and Intent to Abate by City Agents" (hereinafter, "notice of abatement") to the owner and/or person in possession of the property on which the nuisance exists, or to any other party responsible for the nuisance, requiring the abatement of the nuisance within 72 hours of the date of service of the notice of abatement, or within some other longer reasonable time period in connection with a graffiti attracting surface. 
(2)  Contents of notice of abatement. A notice of abatement issued pursuant to this section shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition exists. 
b.  A brief description of the nuisance condition(s). 
c.  A reference to the law prohibiting or pertaining to the nuisance condition. 
d.  A brief description of the required corrective actions. 
e.  A time period and/or schedule in which to complete the nuisance abatement actions (with all required city approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable) pursuant to the time limits proscribed in subsection (a) of this section. 
f.  The period and manner in which a responsible party may contest the notice of abatement pursuant to section 50-307 of this Code. No such right shall exist when the city is not seeking to establish the right to abate a public nuisance with city agents. 
g.  A statement that if the violations are not abated within the time specified or a timely appeal is not made, such nuisance may be abated by city agents, in the manner stated in this notice and that all costs of the abatement shall be assessed against the responsible part(ies) and/or the subject property, as a lien or as a special assessment, at the city's election, in accordance with the nuisance abatement provisions of sections 1-152 through 1-154, 50-307 through 50-308, 106-1152 through 106-1154, or any applicable combination thereof. 
(3)  Service of notice of abatement. A notice of abatement issued pursuant to this section shall be served (i) by personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; (ii) by posting at a conspicuous place on the property or abutting public right-of-way; or (iii) by sending a copy of the notice by United States mail addressed to the owner or person in charge or control of the property, at the person's mailing address according to the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office, or if the owner's address is unknown, then in care of the property address. Service by mail shall be complete at the time of deposit with the U.S. Postal Service, and such service shall be made on the day the notice is dated and by affidavit, the original of which shall be filed with the city clerk. Failure of any responsible party to receive a Notice of Abatement properly addressed pursuant to this subdivision and mailed shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this Chapter. 
(4)  Deadline for owner to abate. The owner shall within 72 hours of the date of service of the notice of abatement, or within a longer time period if specified in the notice of abatement, remove the graffiti or be subject to abatement of the graffiti by the City and assessment of the costs of such abatement as a lien or special assessment against the subject property in accordance with the nuisance abatement provisions of sections 1-152 through 1-154, 50-307 through 50-308 or 106-1152 through 106-1154 of this Code, or any applicable combination thereof. The enforcement officer may extend the period of time in which to abate graffiti upon a showing of good cause. 
(5)  Method of abatement. When graffiti is being abated by the repainting of the surface on which the graffiti exists, the responsible party shall use paint that matches the color of the remaining portions of the real or personal property being painted or as otherwise approved by the director of community development, or his or her designee. As it relates to a graffiti attracting surface, a notice of abatement may require, but shall not be limited to, any of the following modifications (or combinations thereof) as methods of abatement the costs of which are to be borne by the responsible part(ies): 
a.  Retrofitting of the graffiti attracting surface; 
b.  Application or use of anti-graffiti materials, or both, to the graffiti attracting surface such as anti-etching films or anti-graffiti paints; 
c.  Installation of landscaping so as to screen or to provide a barrier to the graffiti attracting surface; and, 
d.  Installation of additional lighting. 
Each of the modifications listed in the notice of abatement shall use materials, methods, or designs approved in advance by the director of community development, or his or her designee. 
(6)  Appeal of notice of abatement. 
a.  Right of appeal from a notice of abatement. 
1.  A responsible party may contest a notice of abatement by filing a written request for an appeal with the city clerk within three business days of service of the notice of abatement. A written request for an appeal shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is appealing the notice of abatement (hereinafter, "appellant"). 
(b)  Address and description of real property upon which the city intends to enter and abate a public nuisance. 
(c)  Date of notice of abatement being appealed. 
(d)  Specific action or decision being appealed. 
(e)  Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the hearing officer to understand the nature of the controversy. 
(f)  The signature of at least one appellant. 
2.  Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a notice of abatement. In this event, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
3.  The provisions of this section only apply to instances where the city has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate public nuisances with city agents. In no event does this article limit the right of city officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations to responsible persons (as the term "responsible persons" is defined in section 1-52 of this Code), or to cause the abatement of public nuisances in a different manner, including without limitation, by court orders arising from the city's exercise of its criminal or civil remedies. In such instances, a responsible person shall receive a right to hearing and other due process rights in court. 
b.  Appeal hearing. 
1.  Any responsible party who contests a notice of abatement shall, subject to filing a timely appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing officer, which hearing officer shall be appointed pursuant to section 1-62 of this Code. The city clerk shall schedule the administrative appeal no later than 30 days, and no sooner than seven calendar days, after receipt of a timely filed request for appeal. The appellants listed on the written request for an appeal shall be notified in writing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail of the date, time, and location of the hearing. The time in which to abate the nuisance pursuant to the notice of abatement is stayed pending the outcome of the hearing. 
2.  At the place and time set forth in the notification of appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall hear the testimony of the appellant(s), the issuing enforcement officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the alleged public nuisance(s). 
3.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a nuisance exists by a preponderance of evidence. The notice of abatement and any additional reports submitted by the enforcement officer(s) shall constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents and such enforcement officer(s) are not required to participate in the appeal hearing. The appellant, and city, as well as all other interested persons, shall have the opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The appellant, or other interested persons, may represent themselves or be represented by anyone of their choice. The appellant, or other interested persons, may bring a language interpreter to the hearing at their sole expense. 
4.  If the appellant(s) fail to attend the scheduled hearing, the hearing will proceed without the appellant(s), and the appellant(s) will be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. 
c.  Notice of decision; order of abatement. 
1.  Within a reasonable time, not to exceed ten calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make any one or more of the following determinations in a written decision (hereinafter, "order of abatement"): 
(a)  A finding and description of each nuisance condition at the subject property, or the non-existence thereof. In the event of a finding of non-existence of all nuisance conditions contained in the notice of abatement, the hearing officer shall cancel the notice of abatement. 
(b)  The name of each person responsible for a nuisance condition, or conditions, at the subject property, as well as the name of any appellant who lacks responsibility therefor. 
(c)  The required corrective action and completion date for each unabated nuisance condition. 
(d)  Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant or related to the subject matter of the appeal. 
2.  The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive. The order of abatement shall also contain the following statement: "The Hearing Officer's decision is final, and judicial review of this decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 et seq." 
3.  A copy of the order of abatement shall be served on all appellants by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. In the event that a responsible party was originally served with a notice of abatement but was not an appellant, such responsible party shall also be served by first class mail to the address at which the notice of abatement was served (or, if the city has been provided a subsequent change of address for the responsible party, at the responsible party's current address). Failure of an appellant or a responsible party (or both) to receive a properly addressed and mailed order of abatement shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this article. 
4.  The failure of any appellant to comply with an order of abatement by completing each of the requisite corrective actions in the manner and time set forth in the order of abatement constitutes a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
(7)  Abatement by city agents. If no appeal is filed, or if the appeal is denied following a hearing, and if the owner fails to remove or fails to cause the graffiti to be removed by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the enforcement officer approves, then the director of public works shall cause the graffiti to be abated by city agents, and the city agents may enter upon the premises for such purposes after obtaining a warrant authorizing the entry upon the property for abatement of the graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-308. - Costs of abatement. 
The costs of abatement shall be determined pursuant to sections 106-1152 through 106-1153 of this Code; provided, however, in the event that the cost of abatement is being assessed against a graffiti perpetrator, the calculation of the costs of abatement of graffiti shall also include the related administrative costs as provided in section 50-309. The costs of abatement shall constitute a personal obligation against the responsible parties, and may be assessed in any, or a combination, of the following manners: 
(1)  Special assessment or nuisance abatement lien in accordance with the provisions of sections 1-152 through 1-154, or section 106-1154 of this Code; 
(2)  Graffiti abatement lien or special assessment against any parcel of land owned by a minor (or a parent or legal guardian of any minor) or other person creating, causing, or committing a graffiti nuisance, as authorized by section 38772 of the California Government Code and in accordance with section 50-309 of this Code; 
(3)  Any other manner provided in the city's graffiti removal program (in instances where the owner or tenant of a property where a graffiti nuisance exists consents to the removal of the nuisance by city agents); and, 
(4)  Any other manner provided or authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-309. - Abatement of graffiti by city at graffiti perpetrator's expense. 
(a)  The cost of abatement of graffiti, as well as related administrative costs, shall become a lien against any property owned by any minor or other person creating, causing, or committing the nuisance and shall be a personal obligation of such minor or other person as set forth in Government Code § 38772. The parent or guardian having custody and control of such minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor and the expense of abatement of such graffiti shall be a personal obligation and become a lien or an assessment on the property of such parent or guardian. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the term "related administrative costs" includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person who created, caused, or committed the graffiti or other inscribed material on property of another within the city. 
(b)  Graffiti nuisance abatement lien. 
(1)  The city may collect the costs of abatement of graffiti, as well as related administrative costs, by a graffiti nuisance abatement lien upon the parcel of land owned by the minor or other person who applied graffiti to the property, or upon the parcel of land owned by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. 
(2)  If the total costs of abatement of the graffiti and related administrative costs, as determined by the city council pursuant to section 106-1153, are not paid to the city in full within ten days after the date of the notice from the city, the city clerk may record, in the county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located, a graffiti nuisance abatement lien, which, from the date of recording, shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
(3)  Prior to the recordation of the lien, notice of the lien shall be personally served upon the person owning the lot or parcel of land upon which the lien is sought, whether such person may be the minor, other person, or parent of guardian of the minor, in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.2. The date upon which service is made shall be entered on or affixed to the face of the copy of the notice at the time of service. However, service of such notice without such date shall be valid and effective. 
(4)  The graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall specify the amount of the lien, that the lien is imposed on behalf of the city, the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel upon which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
(5)  The lien will continue in full force and effect until the entire amount due is paid in full. 
(6)  The graffiti nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city. The city may recover from the parcel owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the parcel owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien or as condition of releasing the lien upon payment. 
(7)  If the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge shall be recorded by the city. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
(c)  Special assessment. 
(1)  As an alternative to the procedure set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the city may make the costs of abatement of graffiti, as well as related administrative costs, a special assessment against the parcel of land owned by the minor or other person or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, as provided in Government Code § 38773.6. 
(2)  If the total costs of the abatement of the graffiti and related administrative costs, as determined by the city council pursuant to section 106-1153, are not paid to the city in full within ten days after the date of the notice from the city, the city may cause the total costs of abatement, including related administrative costs, to be charged to the owner of the subject lot or parcel on the next regular tax bill. 
(3)  The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws of the state applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement and related administrative costs relate has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement and related administrative costs shall not result in a lien against the real property but shall instead be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(4)  Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment may be recorded. 
(5)  Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding a minor or other person described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (d) of California Government Code Section 38772 is responsible for a condition that may be abated as a nuisance pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the court may order such minor or other person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-310. - Prevention of graffiti through land use entitlements. 
In approving tentative or parcel maps, subdivision maps, conditional use permits, variances, or other discretionary land use entitlements, the city shall consider imposing conditions reasonably related to the control of graffiti or the mitigation of the impacts of graffiti, or both. Such conditions may include, without limitation, any or all of the following: 
(1)  Installation and use of anti-graffiti materials (as approved by the director of community development, or his or her designee) on surfaces which are likely to be graffiti attracting surfaces; 
(2)  Installation and use of landscaping to screen or provide a barrier to surfaces prone to graffiti or are likely to be a graffiti attracting surface; 
(3)  Installation and use of additional lighting to areas that are likely to be graffiti attracting surfaces and areas adjacent thereto; 
(4)  Applicant or owner shall immediately remove any graffiti at the property; 
(5)  Right of access by city agents to remove graffiti from any surface that is open and accessible from city property, or any public right-of-way; and, 
(6)  Applicant or permittee to supply the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the abatement of graffiti by city agents. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-311. - Reward for information. 
(a)  Pursuant to California Government Code § 53069.5, the City does hereby offer a reward in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council, for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation committed within the City of California Penal Code § 594 or 594.3 (by the use of graffiti), 640, 640.5, 640.6, or section 50-303 of this article. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the Ccity in the manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction. 
(b)  Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed, in writing, with the city clerk. Each claim shall: 
(1)  Specifically identify the date, location, and kind of property damaged or destroyed, 
(2)  Identify by name the person who was convicted, and, 
(3)  Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred. 
(c)  No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the city council unless the city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. The investigation must determine that the claimant's information was relevant and directly responsible for the arrest and conviction of the suspect. 
(d)  Any person committing graffiti vandalism, and if that person is an unemancipated minor, then the parent or lawful guardian of the minor, shall be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-312. - Parental responsibility. 
Pursuant to California Civil Code § 1714.1(b), where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of civil damages resulting from the misconduct of the minor in an amount not to exceed the amount specified in California Civil Code § 1714.1(b) as it is adjusted periodically by the Judicial Council. The parent or legal guardian of the minor shall also be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to section 50-311 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 50-313. - Penalties. 
(a)  Criminal penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and subject to the penalties set forth in chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
(b)  Additional penalties. Whenever deemed appropriate, it is the city's intent to petition a sentencing court to impose the following additional penalties or conditions of any grant or probation, diversion, deferred entry of judgment, or other court supervision (including upon a determination that a minor is to be a ward of the court as a result of committing an act of vandalism or graffiti) upon conviction: 
(1)  Suspension or delay in issuance of driver's license (pursuant to California Vehicle Code § 13202.6); 
(2)  Community service and/or graffiti removal service (pursuant to California Penal Code §§ 640.6 and 1203 et seq., Welfare & Institutions Code §§ 728 and 729.8, and Vehicle Code § 42001.7); and, 
(3)  Payment of restitution for the expenses/costs of abatement pursuant to California Penal Code § 1202.4, California Government Code § 38772, or other state law. 
(c)  Cumulative remedies. The remedies provided in this Ordinance are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under provisions of other applicable city ordinances, the laws of the State of California, or the laws of the United States." 
(Ord. No. 1581, § 5, 4-21-2008)  
Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; vegetation, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Injuring property generally. 
No person shall cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property, nor shall any person pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, plant, bush or flower or mark or write upon any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure in any park or recreation center. 
(Code 1957, § 16.1)  
Sec. 54-2. - Removal of objects. 
No person shall cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel in any park or recreation center. 
(Code 1957, § 16.2)  
Sec. 54-3. - Posting of bills and advertisements. 
No person shall post, place or erect any bills, notice, paper or advertising device or matter of any kind in any park or recreation center. 
(Code 1957, § 16.3) 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6.  
Sec. 54-4. - Fires. 
No person shall make or kindle a fire in any park or recreation center, except in picnic stoves or barbecue pits provided for that purpose or after having obtained a permit. A permit may be obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services, who will forward his recommendation to the council for consideration before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.4) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 54-5. - Camping. 
No person shall camp or lodge within a park or recreation center without authorization. Such authorization can be obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services, who will forward his recommendation to the council for consideration before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.5)  
Sec. 54-6. - Riding or driving animals and vehicles generally. 
No person shall ride or drive any horse or other animal or propel any vehicle, cycle or automobile elsewhere than on the roads or drives designated for that purpose in a park or recreation center. 
(Code 1957, § 16.6) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90.  
Sec. 54-7. - Certain conduct or language prohibited. 
No person shall indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening or indecent conduct or abusive or threatening language in a park or recreation center. 
(Code 1957, § 16.7)  
Sec. 54-8. - Sale of merchandise. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale in any park or recreation center any merchandise, article or thing whatsoever, without first having obtained a permit. A permit may be obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services, who will forward his recommendation to the council for consideration before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.8)  
Sec. 54-9. - Hitching animals. 
No person shall hitch or fasten any horse or other animal in any park or recreation center, except at a place especially designated and provided for such purpose. 
(Code 1957, § 16.9) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14.  
Sec. 54-10. - Speed of vehicles. 
No person shall ride or drive at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour in any park or recreation center, except for authorized special events. The authorization can be obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services, who will forward his recommendation to the council for consideration before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.10) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicle, ch. 90.  
Sec. 54-11. - Riding or driving animal not well broken or under control. 
No person shall ride or drive any horse or animal not well broken and under perfect control of the rider or driver in any park or recreation center. 
(Code 1957, § 16.11) 
Cross reference— Animal, ch. 14.  
Sec. 54-12. - Gambling. 
No person shall play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other devices for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representatives of value or maintain or exhibit any gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming in any park or recreation center. 
(Code 1957, § 16.12) 
Cross reference— Gambling, § 50-71 et seq.  
Sec. 54-13. - Soliciting or carrying on business. 
No person shall practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession in any park or recreation center, without prior authorization. Prior authorization can be obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services, who will forward his recommendation to the council before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.14) 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 58.  
Sec. 54-14. - Operation of vehicles for commercial purposes. 
No person shall drive or have any dray, truck, wagon, cart or other traffic vehicle carrying goods or regularly used or employed in carrying goods, merchandise, lumber, machinery, oil, manure, dirt, sand, or soil or any article of trade or commerce or any offensive article or material whatsoever upon any road or drive in any park or recreation center, except such as may be especially provided or designated for such use. 
(Code 1957, § 16.15) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90.  
Sec. 54-15. - Games generally. 
No person shall play or engage in any game in any park or recreation center, except at such place as shall be especially set apart for that purpose or designated by the director of recreation and community services. 
(Code 1957, § 16.16)  
Sec. 54-16. - Lawn darts prohibited. 
No person shall play lawn darts or throw, cast, shoot or discharge any lawn dart or similar sharp-pointed device in, over, across, along, or upon any public park or recreation center. 
(Code 1957, § 16.16.1)  
Sec. 54-17. - Remaining after hours. 
No person shall remain, stay or loiter in any public park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day unless it is an approved program. The program approval is obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services who will forward his recommendation to the council before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.17)  
Sec. 54-18. - Regulation of alcoholic beverages at City Recreational Facilities. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized under the terms, conditions and restrictions set forth under a valid and unexpired alcoholic beverage permit issued by the city as referenced under subsection (b) of this section below, no person shall bring into or upon any park, playground, recreation center or any other recreational facility of the city any alcoholic beverage or consume any such alcoholic beverage in or upon any such park, playground recreation center or other recreational facility of the city. For purposes of this section, the term "alcoholic beverages" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
(b)  The city council, by resolution may establish and from time-to-time amend, written policies and procedures for the issuance of temporary city permits authorizing, subject to conditions, the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages at any one or more of the various in-door facilities referenced under subsection (a), above. The city council, by resolution, may also suspend any existing policies and procedures pending the adoption of updated and amended policies and procedures. Such city policies and procedures may include, without limitation, requirements that the permitee (i) obtain appropriate licenses from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; (ii) provide security from a duly licensed security firm pre-approved by the San Fernando Police Department at the permittee's sole cost and expense; (iii) obtain special event insurance satisfactory to the city, naming the city as an additional insured for certain anticipated liabilities and risks associated with the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property; (iv) indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city from certain liabilities and risks associated with the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property; and/or (v) provide a security deposit to the city. The foregoing requirements are not exhaustive of the requirements that the city may impose under the city council-approved policies and procedures. 
(c)  Until such time as the city council approves the written policies and procedures referenced under subsection (b) of this section, above, no alcoholic beverage permits may be issued by the city and the city shall be under no obligation to accept or process applications for alcoholic beverage permits while the approval of policies and procedures by the city council remains pending or at any such time thereafter when existing policies and procedures have been suspended by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 16.18; Ord. No. 1681, § 2, 9-17-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1681, § 2, adopted September 17, 2018, renamed § 54-18 from "intoxicating liquor prohibited" to "regulation of alcoholic beverages at city recreational facilities."  
Sec. 54-19. - Use of women's restrooms by males. 
It shall be unlawful for any male person over eight years of age to enter or use any restroom for women in any public park. 
(Code 1957, § 16.19)  
Sec. 54-20. - Unlawful assembly. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to assemble, collect or gather together in any walk, driveway, passageway or pathway in any park or any other place set apart for the travel of persons or vehicles in or through any park or to occupy any such walk, driveway, passageway, pathway or other place so that free passage or use thereof by persons or vehicles passing along such walk, driveway, passageway or pathway in any park shall be obstructed in any manner. 
(Code 1957, § 16.20)  
Sec. 54-21. - Assembly permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or address any public assemblage, meeting, or gathering or to make or deliver any public speech, lecture or discourse or to conduct or take part in any public debate or discussion in any public park, playground or recreation center without a city council permit. A permit may be obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services, who will forward his recommendation to the council for consideration before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.21)  
Sec. 54-22. - Escort required for children near lakes. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian or any person having the custody of any child under the age of eight years to cause, permit or allow such child to enter or visit any park, playground or recreation center having a lake within the boundary thereof in the city, unless such child shall be accompanied by a person not less than 16 years of age. 
(Code 1957, § 16.22)  
Sec. 54-23. - Permit required for group picnics or gatherings. 
It shall be unlawful for any company, society or organization of more than 100 persons to hold or conduct any picnic, barbecue or gathering in any park or recreation center without first having obtained a permit. A permit may be obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services, who will forward his recommendation to the council for consideration before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.23)  
Sec. 54-24. - Permit required for parades, circuses or services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, society or organization to hold or conduct any celebration, parade, circus, or service in any park, playground or recreation center without first obtaining a city council permit. A permit may be obtained by applying to the city council through the director of recreation and community services, who will forward his recommendation to the council for consideration before council approval. 
(Code 1957, § 16.24)  
Sec. 54-25. - Permit required for erection of exhibit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, society or organization to erect an exhibit in any park, playground or recreation center without first obtaining a permit from the director of recreation and community services. For purpose of this section, the term "exhibit" shall mean any display of artwork, including but not limited to paintings, sculptures, arts and crafts, and photographs; public service and educational presentations; and historical displays. 
(b)  Application for a permit to erect an exhibit shall be processed in accordance with procedures established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 16.24.1)  
Sec. 54-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 54-26 which pertained to violations and derived from Code 1957, § 16.25.  
Sec. 54-27. - Smoking prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall be in possession of a burning tobacco or tobacco-related product, including but not limited to cigars and cigarettes, in or upon any park, playground or recreation center. 
(b)  No person shall chew tobacco or tobacco-related products, in or upon any park, playground or recreation center. 
(c)  No person shall dispose of lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes, or cigar or cigarette butts, or any other tobacco-related waste in or upon any park, playground or recreation center. 
(d)  No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to obtain compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1525, § 1, 9-4-2001)  
Secs. 54-28—54-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS, WELLNESS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1586, § 4, adopted Mar. 16, 2009, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 54-56—54-66, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to recreation and community services commission and derived from Code 1957, §§ 2.65, 2.66, §§ 2.69—2.74, §§ 2.76—2.78. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees, agencies and authorities, § 2-401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-56. - Created. 
There is created and established a recreation and community services commission in and for the city, which shall be known as the "parks, wellness and recreation commission." All references in this Code to the "recreation and community services" commission shall be to the parks, wellness and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-57. - Composition and appointment of members. 
The parks, wellness and recreation commission shall consist of five members, each with full participation and voting rights. Each member shall be appointed by a different appointing councilperson, with such appointment to be ratified by the city council. Such members of the parks, wellness and recreation commission shall be registered voters and city residents. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-58. - Officers. 
The members shall organize the parks, wellness and recreation commission and shall select a chair and vice-chair. In the absence of the chair and vice-chair, any other member shall call the commission to order, whereupon a chair shall be elected from the members present to preside for that meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-59. - Compensation of members. 
The council shall fix the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the parks, wellness and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-60. - Meetings generally. 
Members of the parks, wellness and recreation commission shall meet at such time and place as may be fixed by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-61. - Quorum. 
Three members of the parks, wellness and recreation commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time for want of a quorum until a quorum can be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-62. - Absence from meetings. 
(a)  Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the parks, wellness and recreation commission by a member with or without consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and his office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city councilmember so assigned of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(b)  Absence from three regular meetings of the commission in a 12-month period by a member without consent of the commission or absence from four regular meetings of the commission within a 12-month period by a member with the consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and the office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city councilmember so assigned of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-63. - Powers and duties generally. 
The powers and duties of the parks, wellness and recreation commission shall be: 
(1)  Initiating studies, investigations and surveys and making recommendations to the city council relative to the creation, operation, maintenance, management and control of the community recreation programs of parks, playgrounds and indoor and outdoor recreational activities. 
(2)  Subject to the prior approval of the city council, adopting by resolution, rules and regulations not inconsistent with this code and city ordinances, for the maintenance, improvement, use and operation of the parks, playgrounds, bathing facilities, recreation centers and other similar facilities of the city. A complete file of such rules and regulations shall be maintained in both the city clerk's office and that of the director of recreation and community services, with resolutions in the customary form and numbered numerically. 
(3)  Participate in the development of a master plan for all parks and playgrounds owned and operated by the city and, upon approval of the plans by the city council, working consistently toward the achievement of the plan and for the improvement of the plan as originally approved. 
(4)  Initiating studies, investigations and surveys and making recommendations to the city council relative to health, wellness and fitness, including such activities and programs created and/or maintained for the same by the director of recreation and community services. 
(5)  Upon request of the city council, making other investigations, reports and recommendations upon subjects or other matters referred to it by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-64. - Powers and duties concerning city-owned historic resources. 
The following sites and improvements are declared by the city council to be historic resources. The parks, wellness, and recreation commission shall have responsibility for programming the maintenance, improvement, use and operation of these city-owned historic resources, subject to approval by the city council: 
(1)  The Lopez Adobe site including the Lopez Adobe and the Lopez-Villegas House at the southwesterly corner of the intersection of South Maclay Avenue and Pico Street. 
(2)  Such other historic resources as the council shall from time to time select and add to this section by amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-65. - Rules and regulations. 
Subject to the approval of the city council, the parks, wellness and recreation commission may make and alter such rules and regulations for its organization and procedures as are consistent with this article and other sections of this Code and city ordinances and with state laws. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-66. - Reports and records. 
The parks, wellness and recreation commission shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings and transactions and shall render annually, on a calendar basis, a full report of the commission's transactions and recommendations to the council. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-67. - Incurring financial liability. 
Neither the parks, wellness and recreation commission nor any person connected with the commission shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 4, 3-16-2009)  
Secs. 54-68—54-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DIRECTOR OF RECREATION AND COMMUNITY SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-96. - Office created. 
The office of director of recreation and community services is created. 
(Code 1957, § 2.79)  
Sec. 54-97. - Unclassified position. 
Subject to section 2-243, the director of recreation and community services is an unclassified position. 
(Code 1957, § 2.80)  
Sec. 54-98. - Powers and duties generally. 
The director of recreation and community services shall carry out the directions of the council and shall be under the supervision of the city administrative officer. The director shall exercise supervision and control over the work, operating services, and activities of the department of recreation and community services or shall have the authority to assign such responsibilities to a designee. The director shall coordinate the work of the divisions thereof into one efficient and economical operation. The director may have the management and care of park buildings, recreational facilities, future facilities and programs in the city. Such programs will include, but not be limited to, the senior citizen center, Lopez Adobe, etc. The director of recreation and community services will serve as the staff support to the historical and cultural arts commission and the recreation and community services commission. The director shall prepare and present accurate and comprehensive written and oral reports of commission meetings to facilitate communication between the city administrative officer, the city council, and the commissioners. 
(Code 1957, § 2.81)  
Sec. 54-99. - Safety. 
The director of recreation and community services and his designee shall jointly work with the chief of police to establish a safe public environment within the parks and all recreation areas. 
(Code 1957, § 2.82)  
Chapter 58 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; schedule for peddlers, § 22-150; soliciting or carrying on business in parks, § 54-13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler includes any person, whether or not a resident of the city, who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street for the purpose of selling, engaging in the business of selling, contracting or soliciting to sell, taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares, merchandise, products, commodities or articles of value or for services to be performed or furnished; who makes demonstrations for such purpose; or who, without traveling from place to place, shall engage in any of such sales activities from a temporary stand, cart, wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance. The term "peddler" includes the terms "hawker" and "huckster." 
Person means and includes any person, firm or corporation, association, club, copartnership or society, or any other organization. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-27. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any person distributing food products from house to house, on an established route, where a license has been issued under some other section of this Code. 
(2)  Any person performing services; delivering goods, wares or merchandise; or soliciting orders for such, when licensed under some other section of this Code. 
(3)  A commercial agent or salesman for a wholesale house or a person or firm selling any commodity or service to or soliciting orders from a fixed place of business when such agent or salesman is licensed under some other section of this Code. 
(4)  Any person delivering or soliciting orders for any commodities or services on behalf of any religious or nonprofit charitable, civic, fraternal or patriotic organization holding a permit issued by the city to do so. 
(5)  Blind persons, when blindness has been certified by the state's department of rehabilitation and who has filed a certificate as to such blindness with the police chief. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.8)  
Sec. 58-28. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or any person pretending to be a peddler, for the purpose of peddling or soliciting or pretending to peddle or solicit, to ring the bell or knock at or on or in any building or entrance thereto whereon there is painted, affixed or otherwise displayed to public view any visible sign containing any or all of the phrases "no peddlers permitted," "no solicitors permitted," "no agents permitted," or phrases or words which otherwise purport to prohibit or indicate objection of the occupant to peddling or soliciting on the premises or to attempt to gain admittance thereto, unless such person has been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of such premises. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.9)  
Secs. 58-29—58-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND LICENSE 
 
Sec. 58-56. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler, as defined in this article, within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a permit as specified under this division and such license as may be required by this Code or other city ordinance. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.2)  
Sec. 58-57. - Application for permit; fee. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit required under this division must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing (in duplicate), on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  The name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's address, both business and residence. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and, for products of farm or orchard, whether produced, grown or purchased by the applicant. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, and submission for inspection of credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with the license number and other means of identification. 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be at least two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  The fingerprints of applicant to be taken by the chief of police as provided in this division. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.3)  
Sec. 58-58. - Fingerprinting and investigation of permit applicant; issuance or denial of permit; contents of permit. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application for the permit provided for in section 58-56 and within 72 hours from receipt by the city clerk of the application, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause the applicant to be fingerprinted and such other investigation regarding applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for disapproval and shall return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, shall execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and shall forward the permit, along with the application, to the city clerk who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, if required, deliver to the applicant his permit and issue such license. Such permit shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee; the kind of goods to be sold thereunder; the date of issuance and the length of time the permit shall be operative; as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such peddling. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. 
(d)  The chief of police shall approve or disapprove such application within ten days from the date he receives the application, unless such time limit is extended in writing by the applicant. 
(e)  Failure of the chief of police to approve the application for a permit within ten days from the date he receives the application or within such additional period as may be extended by the applicant in writing shall be deemed a denial thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.4)  
Sec. 58-59. - Transfer of permit. 
No permit issued under this division shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.5)  
Sec. 58-60. - Display. 
A peddler is required to exhibit his permit and license at the request of any person. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.6)  
Sec. 58-61. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this division and any license issued under article II of chapter 22 of this Code may be revoked by the administrative services officer after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as peddler. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit and license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.7)  
Sec. 58-62. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of an application for a permit as provided in this division or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a permit as provided in this division and a license under article II of chapter 22 of this Code shall have the right of appeal to the council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after an automatic denial under subsection 58-58(e) or after notice of action to deny the permit or revoke the permit and license has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in this division for notice of hearing on a revocation. Such appeal shall be heard and decided by the council within 30 days from the date such appeal was filed unless such time limit is extended, with the written consent of the appellant. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.10)  
Secs. 58-63—58-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET ARTISTS, CRAFTSMEN AND STREETSIDE FOOD PURVEYORS AND FLOWER VENDORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advisory committee means the committee examining street artists and craftsmen and streetside food purveyors and flower vendors and advising the city council and city administrative services officer on matters pertaining thereto pursuant to this article. 
Craftsman means one who sells or offers for sale any craft, handicraft, art or artwork designed and handmade by the seller. 
Family unit means two or more persons jointly engaged in the creation or production of an art or craft item, no one of whom stands in an employer-employee relationship to any of the other members thereof; or two or more physically or mentally handicapped persons participating in a formal rehabilitation program, a part of which includes activities for the creation of arts and crafts by such persons. 
Person means any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character; provided, however, that whenever a right, privilege or power is conferred upon a person by this article, the term "person" means an individual natural person. 
Street artist means one who sells or offers for sale any craft, handicraft, art or artwork designed and handmade by the seller. 
Streetside flower vendor means any person offering flowers or household plants for sale from stands or carts approved by the advisory committee. 
Streetside food purveyor means any person offering items intended or suitable for human consumption from stands or carts approved by the advisory committee. Any such streetside food purveyor must secure county health department approval. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.11) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-92. - Advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners. 
(a)  There is established an advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners who shall advise the city administrative officer on matters relating to the wares produced by street artists and who shall perform such other functions as shall from time to time be deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(b)  The advisory committee shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city council. At least three of the members shall be members of the board of directors of the Downtown Merchants Association. The term of each member shall be two years. 
(c)  If a vacancy occurs during the term of office by any member, the city council shall appoint a successor for the unexpired term of the office vacated. 
(d)  The advisory committee shall elect from its members a chairman and a secretary to hold office for one year or until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the advisory committee, which shall be open to inspection by the public at all times. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.12; Ord. No. 1546, § 7, 11-17-2003) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees, agencies and authorities, § 2-401 et seq.  
Sec. 58-93. - Monitoring of license holders by advisory committee. 
The advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners shall establish procedures for monitoring and regulating license holders pursuant to section 58-126 of this article. If it finds a violation of section 58-126, it shall have the duty to notify the police department that a violation of this article is taking place and shall furnish a report concerning such violation to the city administrative services officer. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.20)  
Sec. 58-94. - Designation of sales area; limitation on number of vendors. 
The city council by resolution shall designate areas in parking and business improvement area A of the city where street artists, craftsmen, food purveyors or flower vendors, licensed under this article, may sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, or solicit offers to purchase any art or craft item of his own creation, food or flowers. In designating such areas, the city council may impose such conditions and limitations as in its discretion are necessary to prevent any undue interference with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic or any damage to surrounding property, including interference with use, view or enjoyment of public parks. The city council by resolution shall establish a reasonable number of individual spaces for license holders not to exceed 30. License holders shall be assigned to a specific space by the advisory committee, and it shall be a violation of this article for a license holder to attempt to sell his wares at any other location or place. The spaces designated by the city council shall remain fixed unless altered by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.21)  
Sec. 58-95. - Rotation of sales spaces. 
In the granting of a license required by this article, the advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners, city administrative services officer and city council shall limit the total number of licenses to 30; of such number no more than five shall be food purveyors and no more than five shall be flower vendors. If there are more approved applicants than spaces available, applicants shall be given a number based upon their original date of application, and approved applicants shall be rotated on a quarterly basis. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.22)  
Sec. 58-96. - Insurance required. 
The advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners and the city administrative services officer shall require that street artists and craftsmen, food purveyors and flower vendors indemnify the city against injuries to persons because of street artists and craftsmen, food purveyors and flower vendors occupying sidewalks. Such indemnification may be by an insurance policy naming the city as a coinsured furnished by the Downtown Merchants Association. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.23)  
Sec. 58-97. - Days of sale. 
A person issued a license pursuant to this article shall only be allowed to occupy the space assigned to him between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on those days when there has been scheduled a San Fernando Festival. It shall be a violation of this article to sell or attempt to sell or attempt to transact business at any other time or on any other day, 
(Code 1957, § 17A.24)  
Secs. 58-98—58-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 58-126. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale or solicit offers to purchase any art or craft of his own creation or any food or flowers on any public street or public place where such activities are permitted unless duly licensed as a street artist or craftsman, food purveyor or flower vendor, pursuant to this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a street artist or craftsman, food purveyor or flower vendor, pursuant to this article, to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale or solicit offers to purchase any art or craft work of his own creation, food or flowers on any public street or public place where such activities are not permitted unless such person is also duly licensed as a peddler pursuant to article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.13)  
Sec. 58-127. - Application. 
(a)  Every person desiring a license as a street artist, craftsman, streetside food purveyor or streetside flower vendor shall file an application with the advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners upon a form provided by such committee. Except as otherwise provided, the application shall specify the following: 
(1)  The name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's address, both business and residence. 
(3)  A description of the art or craft item for which the applicant seeks a license or a description of the exact type and nature of the food or flowers and plants to be sold by the applicant. 
(4)  A declaration under penalty of perjury that the art or craft item for which the applicant seeks a license is of the person's own creation or the creation of such person's family unit and that such person neither employs other persons nor is employed by other persons in the production of the art or craft item for which the license is sought. 
(5)  A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be at least two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(6)  The fingerprints of the applicant to be taken by the police department. 
(b)  A fee as established by the city council by resolution shall be charged to cover the cost of investigation. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.14)  
Sec. 58-128. - Examination and investigation of applicant. 
(a)  The chairman of the advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners shall fix a date for advisory committee consideration and action upon the application and shall notify the applicant of such date. The chairman shall refer the original application to the chief of police who shall cause the applicant to be fingerprinted and conduct such other investigation regarding the applicant's business and moral character as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and return the application to the chairman who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and forward the application to the advisory committee. 
(b)  In its review of an application, the advisory committee shall examine representative samples of the applicant's work. The purpose of this examination is to verify the information set forth in the application and to evaluate the items to determine that they are in fact designed and created by the individual artist or craftsman intending to sell such items. After such examination, for the purpose of further investigation, the advisory committee may designate one or more of its members to visit the studio or workshop of the applicant to view the applicant's facilities and to further verify that the art or craft item for which the applicant seeks a license is of such person's creation or those of his family unit. In its review of an application for a streetside food purveyor or flower vendor, the advisory committee shall examine samples proposed for sale for the purpose of determining whether the applicant has proper equipment and facilities. 
(c)  After the advisory committee has reviewed an approved application from the chief of police and has satisfied itself regarding the applicant and the suitability of his wares, the chairman shall endorse such approval on the application and deliver it to the city administrative services officer. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.15)  
Sec. 58-129. - Issuance; contents. 
Following approval of an application for a license required under this division by the chief of police and the chairman of the advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners, the application shall be delivered to the city administrative officer. If the city administrative officer endorses his approval, he shall deliver the application to the finance division. Upon payment to the finance division of the license fee specified by resolution of the city council, the license shall be issued. The finance division will cause to be imprinted upon the business license the following words: "The person named herein has been examined by the advisory committee and is entitled to engage in the display and sale of the specific art or craft, food or flower item set forth on the face of this license in the Parking and Business Improvement Area A of the City of San Fernando. The issuing officer will sign this statement. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.16; Ord. No. 1546, § 8, 11-17-2003)  
Sec. 58-130. - Fee; term. 
The fee for a business license issued pursuant to this division shall be fixed by the city council by resolution. The license shall be good for a 90-day period following its issuance. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.17)  
Sec. 58-131. - Renewal. 
Every license issued pursuant to this division shall expire automatically at the end of 90 days following its issue, unless it is renewed on or before the tenth day prior to its expiration. An application for renewal of a license shall be submitted to the advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners on forms supplied by the advisory committee who shall review the application and determine whether or not the applicant has complied with the terms and conditions of the permit and this article and this Code. The recommendation of the advisory committee concerning renewal of a license shall be submitted to the city administrative officer who shall either approve or disapprove the renewal. Upon approval by the city administrative officer, the applicant shall pay the fee specified for the renewal period. Failure to make a timely renewal shall result in forfeiture of the license. Any street artist or craftsman, food purveyor or flower vendor who has lost his license in this manner must begin the initial application procedure again, if such person wishes to obtain a new license. No priority shall be given to such person over other applicants for licenses. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.18; Ord. No. 1546, § 9, 11-17-2003)  
Sec. 58-132. - Revocation or denial; appeal. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to this division may be revoked by the city administrative officer independently or on recommendation of the advisory committee of street artists and craftsmen examiners for good cause shown. Any application for a license to be issued pursuant to this division may be denied by the city administrative officer independently or pursuant to the recommendation of the advisory committee for good cause shown. Good cause shown shall include, but not be limited to, compliance with all the laws and regulations of the state, the city and this article. The city administrative officer shall advise the license holder or the license applicant of the revocation or denial in writing, which writing shall clearly set forth the grounds for the revocation or denial. 
(b)  A street artist or craftsman aggrieved by the city administrative officer's actions shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council. An appeal may be taken within ten days of the city administrative officer's decision by filing with the city administrative services officer a written statement setting forth the full grounds for the appeal. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.19; Ord. No. 1546, § 10, 11-17-2003)  
Secs. 58-133—58-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ICE CREAM VENDORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means and includes any person, firm or corporation, association, club, copartnership or society, or any other organization. 
Purveyor means and includes any person, whether or not a city resident, who engages in the business of selling or soliciting to sell ice cream or similar products from an automotive vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.25) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-162. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any person distributing food products from house to house, on an established route, where a license has been issued under some other section of this Code. 
(2)  Commercial agents or salespersons for wholesale houses or persons of a firm selling any commodity or service to or soliciting orders from fixed places of business when any such agent or salesman is licensed under some other section of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.27)  
Sec. 58-163. - Restricted areas of operation. 
No person or vehicle licensed under this article shall stop the vehicle for purposes of selling or soliciting to sell within one block in any direction of a school, whether public or private, or in any other areas deemed unsafe by local law enforcement personnel. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.33)  
Sec. 58-164. - Violations. 
Any person who violates any section of this article shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.36)  
Secs. 58-165—58-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE AND PERMIT 
 
Sec. 58-191. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of purveying ice cream or similar frozen products from an automotive vehicle on the streets and public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining an annual permit as specified under this division and such license as may be required by article II of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.26)  
Sec. 58-192. - Application for permit; fee. 
(a)  An applicant for an original or a renewal permit required under this division must file with the city clerk, prior to the start of the operation, a sworn application in duplicate on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  The name and a description of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's address, both business and residence. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold and whether the products to be sold are produced by or purchased by the applicant. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, and credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  A description of the vehicle to be used together with the license number, a picture of the vehicle, a copy of the registration and a copy of an active automotive insurance policy covering the applicant's vehicle with the insurance company's agreement to notify the city 30 days prior to cancellation. 
(7)  A copy of the applicant's valid driver's license. 
(8)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be at least two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(9)  The fingerprints of the applicant to be taken by the police department. 
(10)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee established by resolution shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.28)  
Sec. 58-193. - Investigation; issuance or denial of permit. 
(a)  Within 72 hours of receipt by the city clerk of the application for the permit required under this division, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause the applicant to be fingerprinted and conduct such other investigation regarding the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for disapproval and shall return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the city clerk. The applicant, upon paying the prescribed license fee, shall be issued his permit and a five-inch vehicle sticker which must be affixed permanently to the applicant's vehicle. Only the vehicles listed in subsection 58-192(a)(6) may have the sticker and be used with the permit. The permit must be carried in the vehicle at all times. 
(d)  No applicant shall begin operation until the permit is issued and the sticker affixed to the vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.29)  
Sec. 58-194. - Expiration and renewal of permit. 
Permits issued pursuant to this division shall be deemed annual permits and are subject to the provisions of section 22-218 of this Code regarding expiration and renewal. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.30)  
Sec. 58-195. - Transfer of permit. 
No permit issued under this division shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.31)  
Sec. 58-196. - Display. 
A permit and license issued pursuant to this division shall be exhibited at the request of any person. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.32)  
Sec. 58-197. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this division and any license issued under article II of chapter 22 of this Code may be revoked by the city administrative services officer, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Material false statement contained in the application for the permit. 
(2)  Material false statement by the permittee in the course of carrying on his business. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit and license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.34)  
Sec. 58-198. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of an application for a permit as provided in this division or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a permit as provided in this division and a license under article II of chapter 22 of this Code shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action to deny the permit or revoke the permit and license has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in this division for notice of a hearing on a revocation. The appeal shall be heard and decided by the council within 30 days from the date such appeal was filed unless such time limit is extended with the written consent of the appellant. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.35)  
Secs. 58-199—58-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FOOD AND BEVERAGE PUSHCART VENDORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-226. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner means any person who: 
(1)  Conducts or permits or causes the operation of a pushcart vending food, beverage or product; 
(2)  Owns, operates, controls, manages, or leases a pushcart; or 
(3)  Contracts with a person to vend food, beverage or product from a pushcart. 
Owner's permit means the permit issued by the city authorizing the holder to engage in the business of vending food or beverage from a pushcart. 
Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, club, or society, or any other organization. 
Pushcart means any wagon, cart, or similar wheeled container, not a vehicle, as defined in the state Vehicle Code, from which food or beverage is offered for sale to the public. 
Pushcart operator means any person who manually propels or otherwise operates a pushcart for the purpose of vending food, beverage or product. 
Vend or vending means offering food or beverage and products of any kind for sale from a pushcart on any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or public place, including the movement or standing of a pushcart for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of products. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.38) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-227. - General prohibition. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale any food or beverage from any portable box, stand, bag, ice chest or similar container, other than a pushcart, on any street, parkway or sidewalk or in any unenclosed area held open to the general public, except as provided for in this article. 
(b)  No person shall employ, direct or otherwise cause any other person to sell or offer for sale any food or beverage in violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.39)  
Sec. 58-228. - Pushcart standards. 
(a)  Each pushcart shall have affixed to it in plain view the pushcart sticker required by this article. 
(b)  Pushcarts shall not be stationed, for purposes of offering food or beverages for sale, in any location which creates an obstruction to the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian access; within ten feet of any intersection, driveway, or building entrance; or in any space designed for vehicular parking. 
(c)  Each person who sells or offers to sell any food or beverage from a pushcart must be 18 years or older. 
(d)  The maximum dimensions of any pushcart shall be six feet in length and four feet in width. 
(e)  The only signs used in conjunction with a pushcart shall be signs affixed to or painted on the pushcart or its canopy. The owner must also have his name, address and telephone number prominently displayed on the pushcart. 
(f)  A refuse bin of at least four cubic feet capacity shall be provided in or on the pushcart. 
(g)  No loudspeakers, public address system, bells, chimes, or other sound-making device shall be affixed to or used in conjunction with a pushcart. 
(h)  No artificial lighting of any pushcart is permitted. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.46)  
Sec. 58-229. - Violations. 
(a)  All police officers and code enforcement officers are authorized to give a citation to any person who violates any of the sections of this article. 
(b)  The owner is subject to citation for any violation of any of the sections of this article, including violations of this article by the pushcart operator employed or contracted with by the owner. 
(c)  Three or more citations issued to the owner in a one-year period will be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(d)  The third and any subsequent citations issued to an individual pushcart that is owned, operated, controlled, managed or leased or caused to be operated by the owner in a six-month period will result in the impoundment of the pushcart. The owner shall receive a letter after two citations warning that any subsequent violation will result in the impoundment of that individual pushcart. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.49)  
Sec. 58-230. - Impoundment of pushcart. 
The owner shall be liable for any reasonable towing, storage charges, and costs of enforcement for any pushcart impounded pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.50)  
Sec. 58-231. - Nuisance operation of pushcart. 
Any pushcart operated contrary to this article shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this article, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps as may apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such nuisance and restrain and enjoin any person from operating a pushcart or causing the operation of a pushcart contrary to this article. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.51)  
Secs. 58-232—58-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 58-261. - County health permits and business license prerequisite to issuance. 
No person shall apply or be issued an owner's permit pursuant to this division without obtaining the applicable health permits from the county and the business license required by article II of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.40)  
Sec. 58-262. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling any food or beverage from a pushcart on the streets and public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining an annual owner's permit pursuant to this division or without any other license as may be required by the city for each and every pushcart an owner is operating or causing to be operated in the city. 
(b)  No person shall employ or retain any person to operate a pushcart for the purpose of vending unless the person has been issued an owner's permit. 
(c)  The number of pushcarts in the city are limited to 15. 
(d)  Each applicant applying for an owner's permit or renewal of an owner's permit pursuant to this division is limited to nine pushcart stickers out of the total limit allowed under subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.41)  
Sec. 58-263. - Application; fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain an owner's permit or renewal of an owner's permit under this division must file with the finance department, prior to the start of operation, a sworn application, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the finance department. Prior to submitting the application, a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the finance department to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation required by this division. Permit issuance fees required under this division shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other section of this Code. 
(b)  Each applicant for an owner's permit or renewal of an owner's permit shall furnish the following: 
(1)  The full and true name under which the business will be conducted. 
(2)  The full and true name and other name used by the applicant. 
(3)  The present residence and business address of the applicant, telephone numbers of the applicant and social security number of the applicant. 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number and social security number of each person to be employed or retained by the applicant to sell food or beverages from pushcarts. 
(5)  A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold and whether the products to be sold are produced by or purchased by the applicant. 
(6)  The number of pushcarts owned or operated by the applicant for the purpose of vending in the city, either directly or through employees or subcontractors, and the design of each pushcart, including signage. 
(7)  The character, location and routing of pushcart operations. 
(8)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be at least two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(9)  A photograph of a person to be employed or retained by the applicant as a pushcart operator, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be at least two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(10)  The fingerprints of the applicant and each person to be employed or retained by the applicant as a pushcart operator to be taken by the police department. 
(11)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(c)  If any information contained in the application for an owner's permit or renewal of any owner's permit changes, including the addition of new pushcart operators after the permit has been issued, the applicant is required to update the information contained in the application with the finance department. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.42; Ord. No. 1545, § 19, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 58-264. - Investigation of applicant; issuance. 
(a)  Within 72 hours of receipt by the administrative services department of the application for the permit required under this division, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause the applicant and each person to be employed or retained by the applicant as a pushcart operator to be fingerprinted and shall conduct such other investigation regarding the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or the chief of police finds that the operations of the applicant will not conform to the regulations set forth in section 58-228, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for disapproval and shall return the application to the finance division, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory and the chief of police finds that the operations of the applicant will conform to the regulations set forth in section 58-228, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and shall return the application to the administrative services department. The applicant, upon paying the prescribed fee, shall be issued the permit, a laminated photo identification and thumbprint with neckchain, and a permit sticker for each pushcart allowed to operate in the city. 
(d)  No applicant shall begin operation until the permit is issued and the pushcart sticker is permanently affixed to each pushcart. Only those carts listed in subsection 58-263(b)(6) may have the sticker and be used with the permit. The permit must be carried in the pushcart at all times. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.43)  
Sec. 58-265. - Expiration and renewal period. 
An owner's permit issued under this division shall be valid for one year only and is issued on a first come basis with no automatic right of renewal. Permittees are required to reapply for a new permit upon expiration in accordance with section 58-263. Permits issued pursuant to this division are subject to the provisions of section 22-218 of this Code regarding expiration and renewal procedures. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.44)  
Sec. 58-266. - Transferability. 
No permit issued under this division shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.45)  
Sec. 58-267. - Revocation of permit and license. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this division and any license issued under article II of chapter 22 of this Code may be revoked by the city administrative officer or his designee, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Material false statements contained in the application for the permit. 
(2)  Material false statements by the permittee in the course of carrying on his business. 
(3)  Failure of the permittee or any employees or subcontractors of the permittee to comply with the regulations set forth in this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(6)  Violation of any state law or any section of this Code or any city ordinance while in the course of conducting vending operations from a pushcart pursuant to the permit. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit and license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  Any permittee whose permit is revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following revocation. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.47)  
Sec. 58-268. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the finance division in the denial of an application for a permit as provided in this division or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a permit as provided in this division and a license under article II of chapter 22 of this Code shall have the right of appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within 14 days after notice of the action to deny the permit or revoke the permit and license has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in this division for notice of the hearing for revocation. The appeal shall be heard and decided by the council within 30 days from the date the appeal was filed, unless this time limit is extended with the written consent of the appellant. The decision and order of the council on the appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 17A.48)  
Secs. 58-269—58-295. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-296. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative services officer means the city administrative officer. 
Charitable means and includes the word "patriotic," "philanthropic," "social service," "welfare," "benevolent," "educational," "civic," or "fraternal," either actual or purported. 
Contribution means and includes the word "alms," "food," "clothing," "money," "subscription," "property" or "donation under the guise of a loan of money or property." 
Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other similar representative thereof. 
Promoter means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes, or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a campaign of solicitation. 
Religious and religion do not mean or include the word "charitable," as defined in this section, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. 
Solicit and solicitation mean the request directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this article. These words also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a charitable or religious purpose: 
(1)  Any oral or written request. 
(2)  The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or publication. 
(3)  The making of any announcement to or through the press or over the radio or television or by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sport event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering, which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith. 
(4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose or where the name of any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale or when or where in connection with any such sale any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose. 
(5)  Rummage sales are specifically excluded from this definition. 
A solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.1; Ord. No. 1546, § 11, 11-17-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-297. - Agents and solicitors for permit holders. 
(a)  All persons to whom permits have been issued under this article shall furnish proper credentials to their agents and solicitors for such solicitation. Such credentials shall include the name of the permit holder; the date; a statement describing the holder's charitable activity; a description of the purpose of the solicitation; the signature of the permit holder or of the holder's chief executive officer; and the name, address, age, sex and signature of the solicitor to whom such credentials are issued and the specific period of time during which such solicitor is authorized to solicit on behalf of the permit holder. A copy of such credentials must be filed with the administrative services officer at the time the application for a permit is filed and must be approved by him as conforming to the requirements of this section before such permit is issued. No person shall solicit under any permit granted under this article without the credentials required by this section and a facsimile copy of the permit in his possession. The credentials and the facsimile copy of the permit must be shown, upon request, to all persons solicited and to any police officer. 
(b)  No agent or solicitor shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose for any person in the city unless such person has been granted a permit under this article. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.9)  
Sec. 58-298. - Written receipts required. 
Any person receiving money or anything having a value of $1.00 or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a permit granted under this article shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the solicitation is conducted, the date, and the amount received. However, this section shall not apply to any contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in solicitation with the written approval of the administrative services officer, where it is impractical to determine the amount of such contributions. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.10)  
Sec. 58-299. - Books and records. 
No person shall solicit any contribution for any charitable purpose without maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations and all disbursements are entered upon the books or records of such person's treasurer or other financial officer. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.11)  
Sec. 58-300. - Report required from permit holder. 
It shall be the duty of every person issued a permit under this article to furnish to the administrative services officer, within 30 days after the solicitation has been completed, a detailed report and financial statement showing the amount raised by the solicitation; the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a detailed report of the wages, fees, commissions, and expenses paid to any person in connection with such solicitation; and the disposition of the balance of the funds collected by the solicitation. This report shall be available for public inspection at the office of the administrative services officer at any reasonable time; provided, however, that the administrative services officer may extend the time for the filing of the report required by this section for an additional period of 30 days upon proof that the filing of the report within the time specified will work unnecessary hardship on the permit holder. The permit holder shall make available to the administrative services officer or to any person designated in writing by the administrative services officer as his representative for such purpose all books, records, and papers whereby the accuracy of the report required by this section may be checked. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.12)  
Sec. 58-301. - Exemptions to religious solicitations. 
This article shall not be applicable to solicitations made solely for religious purposes except as contained in section 58-296, section 58-302, or in division 3 of this article. However, if it shall come to the attention of the administrative services officer that any solicitation has been or is being or intended to be made for religious purposes but in such manner as in the opinion of the department is calculated to give or may give the impression to the person solicited in any such solicitation or to the public that the purpose of such solicitation is either in whole or in part charitable, the department, if in its opinion the public interest will be served thereby, shall investigate the matter of such solicitation and give publicity to its findings thereon in such manner as it may deem best to advise the public of the facts of the case. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.13)  
Sec. 58-302. - Use of fictitious name; fraudulent misrepresentation and misstatements. 
No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception, or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city or in any application or report filed under this article. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.17)  
Sec. 58-303. - Signs prohibiting solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, for the purpose of and while engaging in solicitation activities as such activities are defined in this article, to ring the doorbell or knock on the door of any residence, dwelling, plant, apartment, or establishment whereon or wherein there is a visible sign containing any or all of the following words: "no solicitors" or "no solicitors permitted" or words which otherwise purport to prohibit or indicate objection of the occupant to such solicitation. No such person shall attempt to gain admittance thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.18)  
Sec. 58-304. - Right of appeal. 
(a)  Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the administrative services officer in refusing to issue any permit or certificate of registration or identification card pursuant to this article or in summarily revoking any permit or certificate of registration already issued under this article shall have the right of appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk, within ten days after notice of such action, a verified written statement in triplicate setting forth fully the grounds of appeal and accompanied by a filing fee of $10.00, payable to the city; otherwise the action of the administrative services officer shall be final. 
(b)  The council shall set a time and place for the hearing, and notice of such hearing on appeal or review shall be given at least five days prior to the date of hearing. At such hearing the appellant and his attorney may present and submit evidence. The decision and order of the city council at or after such hearing shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.20)  
Sec. 58-305. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the sections of this article, including the filing of or causing to be filed an application for a permit or certificate under this article containing false or fraudulent misstatements or in perpetrating any other misstatement, deception, or fraud in connection with any solicitation or use of the contributions made, in addition the revocation of the permit or certificate by the administrative services officer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this article. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.21)  
Sec. 58-306. - Notices. 
All notices issued or given pursuant to this article shall be in writing and mailed, postage prepaid, to the person affected or entitled thereto, to the address given or stated in the application for the permit or certificate or identification card. Deposit of such notice in the United States mail shall constitute legal service thereof on the date of such deposit. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.22)  
Secs. 58-307—58-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS PERMIT 
 
Sec. 58-336. - Required; exemptions. 
No person shall solicit for any charitable or religious purpose within the city without a permit or certificate from the administrative services officer authorizing such solicitation. However, this shall not apply to any established person organized and operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.2)  
Sec. 58-337. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a permit to solicit as provided by section 58-336 of this division shall be made to the administrative services officer upon forms provided by the city. Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the administrative services officer at least 15 days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective. However, the administrative services officer may for good cause shown allow the filing of an application less than 15 days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. The required application shall contain the following information or, in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reasons why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)  The name and address of the person or organization applying for the permit. 
(2)  Whether the applicant is affiliated with or working for any other organization other than the one for which application for solicitation is being made. 
(3)  The name and location of the national, state, and local headquarters of the applicant, if any. 
(4)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of the applicant's records. 
(5)  The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom. 
(6)  A specific statement, supported by reasons and, if available, figures, showing the need for the contributions to be solicited. 
(7)  The names and addresses of the persons by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be disbursed. 
(8)  The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation. 
(9)  An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitations. 
(10)  The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation. 
(11)  The estimated cost of the solicitation. 
(12)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses, or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations and the names and addresses of all such persons. 
(13)  The bank or place where all or any part of the funds raised by such activity will be placed on deposit or invested. 
(14)  What record of funds received will be kept and where, and where such records will be open to the public. 
(15)  Whether the uniform or identification worn or carried resembles that of any other group in this area conducting a similar type of activity. 
(16)  A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant; such statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof. 
(17)  A true statement of any agreement made with any agent, solicitor, promoter, manager, or conductor of such solicitation, together with a true copy of each agreement which is in writing. 
(18)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city. 
(19)  A statement that the actual cost of the solicitation will not exceed 25 percent of the total amount raised; provided, however, that an applicant unable to meet the requirements of this subsection may submit, in writing, to the administrative services officer a demonstration that a higher percentage of total receipts devoted to administrative costs is not unreasonable under the circumstances. 
(20)  A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any department or officer thereof. 
(21)  Such other information as the administrative services officer deems will be of assistance to the public in determining the nature and worthiness of the purpose for which the solicitation is made. 
(b)  Any of the requirements of subsections (a)(4) through (20), inclusive, of this section may be waived by the administrative services officer if the person has, within six months prior to making application to the city, obtained and filed an unrevoked permit from the County or the City of Los Angeles to solicit funds in either or both of their respective jurisdictions. 
(c)  If, while any application is pending or during the term of any permit granted, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the administrative services officer in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.3)  
Sec. 58-338. - Investigation. 
The administrative services officer shall examine all applications filed under section 58-337 of this division and shall make or cause to be made such further investigation of the application and the applicant as the administrative services officer shall deem necessary in order for him to perform his duties under this article. Upon request by the administrative services officer, the applicant shall make available for inspection by the administrative services officer or any person designated in writing by the administrative services officer as his representative for such purpose all of the applicant's books, records, and papers at any reasonable time before the application is granted, during the time a permit is in effect, or after a permit has expired. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.4)  
Sec. 58-339. - Issuance. 
The administrative services officer shall issue the permit required under this division within ten days of receipt of the information required in section 58-337. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.5)  
Sec. 58-340. - Fee. 
Before a permit required under this division is issued, there shall be paid to the city $10.00 to partially cover the cost of investigation and enforcement. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.6)  
Sec. 58-341. - Contents; term. 
A permit issued under this division shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city or by any of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose or of the person conducting the solicitation. All permits must be signed by the administrative services officer. No permit may grant the right to solicit longer than 30 days from its date, but the administrative services officer, with the approval of the city council, may extend any permit for not more than 30 additional days upon a showing that unnecessary hardship would be created by a failure to extend the original 30-day period for such additional days. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.7)  
Sec. 58-342. - Transferability; return upon expiration. 
Any permit issued under this division shall be nontransferable and, if required by the administrative services officer or city council, shall be returned to the administrative services officer within two days of its date of expiration, together with all facsimile copies thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.8)  
Secs. 58-343—58-370. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CERTIFICATE FOR RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS 
 
Sec. 58-371. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall solicit contributions for any religious purpose within the city without a certificate from the administrative services officer. Application for a certificate will be on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be sworn to or affirmed and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the person or organization applying for the certificate; 
(2)  The purpose for which the solicitation is to be made, and the use of any receipts therefrom; 
(3)  An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation; and 
(4)  The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation. 
(b)  Any of the requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be waived by the administrative services officer if the person has, within six months prior to making application to the city, obtained and held an unrevoked certificate or permit from the County or the City of Los Angeles to solicit contributions for religious purposes in either or both of their respective jurisdictions. 
(c)  If, while any application is pending or during the term of any certificate granted, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the administrative services officer in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.13.1)  
Sec. 58-372. - Issuance. 
The administrative services officer shall issue the certificate required under this division within ten days of receipt of the information required in section 58-371. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.14)  
Sec. 58-373. - Investigation. 
The administrative services officer is authorized to investigate the affairs of any person soliciting for religious purposes under a certificate issued under section 58-372 and the affairs of any person exempted from the requirements of a certificate or a permit under section 58-336 and make public his written findings in order that the public may be fully informed as to the affairs of any of such persons. Such persons shall make available to the administrative services officer or to any representative designated by the administrative services officer in writing for such specific purpose all books, records, or other information reasonably necessary to enable the administrative services officer to fully and fairly inform the public of all facts necessary to a full understanding by the public of the work and methods of operation of such persons. However, five days before the public release of any findings under this section, the administrative services officer must first serve a copy of the findings upon the person investigated, and at the time of the release of his findings he must release a copy of any written statement the person may file with the administrative services officer in explanation, denial, or confirmation of the findings. 
(Code 1957, § 22B.15)  
Chapter 62 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance rezoning specific property saved from repeal, § 1-18(5); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 106. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND PRESERVATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1586, § 1, adopted Mar. 16, 2009, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 62-26—62-35, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to planning commission and derived from Code 1957, §§ 2.28, 2.29, §§ 2.32—2.39. 
 
Sec. 62-26. - Established. 
A planning commission for the city is established pursuant to Government Code § 65101 and shall be known as the planning and preservation commission. All references in this Code to the "planning commission" or "city planning commission" shall be to the planning and preservation commission. All references in ch. 106, art. VI, div. 14, of this Code to the "commission" shall be to the planning and preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-27. - Composition and appointment of members. 
The planning and preservation commission shall be composed of five members, each with full participation and voting rights. Such members shall be registered voters and city residents. Each member shall be appointed by a different appointing councilperson, with such appointment to be ratified by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-28. - Compensation. 
The council shall fix the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the planning and preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-29. - Officers. 
The members shall organize the planning and preservation commission and shall elect a chair and vice-chair. In the absence of the chair and vice-chair, any other member shall call the commission to order, whereupon a chair shall be elected from the members present to preside for that meeting. The community development director shall serve as secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-30. - Meetings generally. 
The members of the planning and preservation commission shall meet once each month, at such time and place as may be fixed by resolution, and may hold such other meetings as from time to time may be called in the form and manner required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-31. - Absence from meetings. 
(a)  Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the planning and preservation commission by a member with or without consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and the office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city councilmember so assigned of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(b)  Absence from three regular meetings of the commission in a 12-month period by a member without consent of the commission or absence from four regular meetings of the commission within a 12-month period by a member with the consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and the office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city councilmember so assigned of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-32. - Quorum. 
Three members of the planning and preservation commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time for want of a quorum and until a quorum can be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-33. - Rules and regulations. 
The planning and preservation commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its organization and procedure consistent with state laws and this article and other city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-34. - Records and reports. 
The planning and preservation commission shall keep an accurate record of all its proceedings and transactions. The commission shall also, upon demand of the council, make other investigations and reports upon subjects within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 62-35. - Powers and duties. 
The planning and preservation commission shall have the powers and shall perform the duties prescribed by the city council and by state law for planning commissions established pursuant to Government Code § 65101. 
In addition, for purposes of ch. 106, art. VI, div. 14, of this Code, the duties of the planning and preservation commission shall include the following: 
(1)  Initiating studies, investigations and surveys and making recommendations to the city council relative to the designation, selection, establishment, maintenance, management, and control of historic resources and the preservation thereof. 
(2)  Upon request of the city council, making other investigations, reports, and recommendations upon subjects related to the implementation of the historic preservation element of the general plan and ch. 106, art. VI, div. 14, of this Code, or other matters related to the city's historic preservation program referred to it by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Secs. 62-36—62-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREAS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 62-61—62-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AREA A 
 
Sec. 62-86. - Authority for proceedings. 
The proceedings taken in this division are taken pursuant to the authority of the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1965, as added to the Streets and Highways Code by Statutes 1965, chapter 241 (Streets and Highways Code § 36000 et seq.). 
(Code 1957, § 15A.1)  
Sec. 62-87. - Resolution of intention. 
This division is adopted pursuant to that certain resolution of intention adopted by the city council, being Resolution No. 4040, adopted on October 25, 1965, and entitled "A Resolution of the Council of the City of San Fernando declaring its intention to form a parking and business improvement area to be known as Parking and Business Improvement Area A of the City of San Fernando, fixing the time and place for hearing, and giving notice thereof." The resolution of intention was adopted by the city council and proceedings thereunder taken pursuant to the authority of such Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1965. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.2)  
Sec. 62-88. - Notice and hearing. 
Resolution No. 4040 was published and mailed as provided by law, and a hearing thereon was held by the city council on November 15, 1965, at the hour of 7:30 p.m. in the council chambers of the city council, in the City Hall, 117 Macneil Street, San Fernando, California. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.3)  
Sec. 62-89. - Protests and action thereon. 
At the hearing provided for by such Resolution No. 4040, and as set forth in section 62-88, all persons desiring to be heard were heard and all protests and objections made or filed were fully heard and such have been overruled and denied by order of the city council entered on its minutes, and such hearing has been duly concluded. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.4)  
Sec. 62-90. - Protests deemed less than majority. 
The city council has determined, by order entered on its minutes, that objections or protests objecting to and protesting the formation of parking and business improvement area A have not been made by businesses in the proposed area which pay a majority of the fees within the area under article II of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.5)  
Sec. 62-91. - Definitions and classifications of businesses. 
The definitions and classifications of businesses referred to in this division shall be determined by the definitions and classifications as set forth in article II of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.6) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-92. - Name of area. 
The name of the parking and business improvement area created and established in this division is "Parking and Business Improvement Area A of the City of San Fernando," sometimes referred to as "area." 
(Code 1957, § 15A.7)  
Sec. 62-93. - Established. 
The parking and business improvement area A of the city is fully constituted and established. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.8)  
Sec. 62-94. - Description. 
A description of the exterior boundaries of the parking and business improvement area A created and established is as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Truman Street, 80 feet wide, with the northeasterly prolongation of the centerline of Mission Boulevard, 60 feet wide, as described in the final order of condemnation entered in Case No. SF C-472 Superior Court of Los Angeles County, a certified copy of such final order being recorded in book 36483, pages 416 through 418 of the official records of such county; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Truman Street to a point of intersection with the northeast prolongation of the southeast line of lot 14, block C, Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey of the City of San Fernando, as per map recorded in book 34, pages 65 and 66 of miscellaneous records in the office of the county recorder of such county; thence southwesterly along such northeasterly prolongation and along such southeast line and southwest prolongation thereof to the centerline of San Fernando Road, 80 feet wide; thence northwest along such centerline of San Fernando Road to the northeasterly prolongation of the southeast line of lot 17, block 2, Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey of the City of San Fernando, as per map recorded in book 34, pages 65 and 66 of miscellaneous records of such county; thence southwesterly along such prolongation and along the southeast line of lots 17 and 24 in such block 2, and continuing southwesterly parallel to Chatsworth Drive to the centerline of Pico Street, 60 feet wide; thence southeasterly along such centerline to the northeast prolongation of the southeast line of lots 8, 9, 10 and 11, block 22 of such Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey; thence southwesterly along such northeasterly prolongation, along such southeast line and the southwesterly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Coronel Street, 60 feet wide; thence northwesterly along such centerline to the northeast prolongation of the southeast line of lots 1, 2 and 3, tract 1803, as per map recorded in book 21, page 113 of maps, records of such county; thence southwesterly along such prolongation and such southeast line to the northeast line of lot 4 of such tract no. 1803; thence northwesterly along such northeast line, 32½ feet; thence southwesterly parallel with Chatsworth Drive to the centerline of Hollister Street, 60 feet wide; thence northwesterly along such centerline of Hollister Street to the centerline of Maclay Avenue, 60 feet wide, formerly Newmark Street, as such avenue is shown on map of Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey of the Town of San Fernando recorded in book 34, pages 65 and 66 of miscellaneous records in such office of the county recorder; thence northeast along such centerline of Maclay Avenue, 60 feet wide, to the southeasterly prolongation of the southwest line of lots 1 to 20, block 25 of such Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey; thence northwesterly along such southeasterly prolongation and such southwest line, and along the northwesterly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Mission Boulevard, 80 feet wide, as shown on map of tract 5247, recorded in book 58, page 14 of maps in such office of the county recorder; thence northeast along such centerline of Mission Boulevard to the centerline of San Fernando Road, 80 feet wide; thence southeast along such centerline of San Fernando Road to the centerline of Mission Boulevard, as described in such final order of condemnation in Case No. SF C-472; thence northeast along such centerline of Mission Boulevard to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.9)  
Sec. 62-95. - Businesses subject to additional license fee. 
All businesses within the boundaries of parking and business improvement area A, as described in this division, not exempt by law, will be subject to the provisions of the additional fee imposed by this division. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.10)  
Sec. 62-96. - Additional license fee schedule. 
The initial rate of increase or additional charge of the business license fee on all businesses conducting their activities in the parking and business improvement area A, which is in addition to the ordinary license fee imposed upon such businesses by article II of chapter 22 is fixed and established at the rates set forth by the following schedule: 
(1)  Class I businesses. The following businesses in this class shall be charged two times the ordinary business license fee or $75.00, whichever is greater, with a maximum license fee of $1,000.00: 
a.  Retail businesses. 
b.  Wholesale businesses. 
c.  Manufacturing businesses. 
d.  Manufacturing dealers. 
e.  Telephone service businesses. 
f.  Savings and loan associations. 
g.  Card rooms and social card clubs. 
(2)  Class II businesses. The following businesses in this class shall be charged 1 1/3 times the ordinary business license fee or $75.00, whichever is greater, with a maximum of $1,000.00: 
a.  Independent contractors. 
b.  Detective agencies. 
c.  Employment or booking agencies. 
d.  Freight forwarders or warehousemen. 
e.  Leasing or renting tangible personal property. 
f.  Masseurs. 
g.  Auto and appliance repair shops. 
h.  Trade and business schools. 
i.  Hotels, apartment houses, motels, roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
j.  Advertising agencies. 
k.  Undertakers. 
l.  Contractors. 
(3)  Class III businesses. The following businesses in this class shall be charged three-fourths of the ordinary business license fee, if any, or $75.00, whichever is the greater: 
a.  Laundries, self-service laundries, cleaning and dyeing businesses or agents therefor. 
b.  Nonprofit organizations selling new or used merchandise. 
c.  Music teachers. 
d.  Shoe repair shops. 
e.  Newspapers and job printing plants. 
f.  Personal loan companies. 
g.  Pawnbrokers. 
(4)  Class IV businesses. The following businesses in this class shall be charged in the amount of $200.00: 
a.  Pool and billiard rooms. 
b.  Bowling alleys. 
c.  Amusement arcades. 
d.  Theaters. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.11)  
Sec. 62-97. - Use of proceeds of additional license fee. 
The uses to which the proceeds from the additional fee revenue realized from the rate of increase or additional charge of the license fees, as provided in section 62-96, will be put are as follows: 
(1)  Pay rental for the off-street vehicle parking lots located in parking district no. 1 of the city sufficient in an amount that, after making due allowance for contingencies and error in estimates, the gross revenues from the operation of district parking places and the gross revenues from off-street meters, as such phrases are used in Resolution No. 3193, adopted July 6, 1959, will together be an amount at least sufficient to pay, when due, the financial obligations of such parking district no. 1, including obligations set forth and referred to in covenant 11 of section 20 of such Resolution No. 3103, which obligations are to pay the following: 
a.  Necessary and reasonable maintenance and operation costs of the district parking places and necessary and reasonable on-street parking meter expenses. 
b.  The interest on the bonds as such shall become due and payable. 
c.  The principal of the bonds as such shall mature and fall due. 
d.  All payments required to be made into the reserve fund as required by section 18 of Resolution No. 3193. 
e.  All payments required to meet any other obligations of the city which are charges, liens or encumbrances upon or payable from the gross revenues from on-street parking meters or gross revenues from the operation of the district parking places. 
(2)  Pay as rental for such off-street parking lots in parking district no. 1 such additional sums as may be required from time to time to meet and pay any other financial obligations of parking district no. 1 of the city, as such obligations are set forth and contained in Resolution No. 3193, adopted July 6, 1959. 
(3)  Any excess proceeds remaining after meeting the financial obligations set forth in this section shall be used for the acquisition, construction and maintenance of new or additional vehicle parking facilities within such area. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.12)  
Sec. 62-98. - Credit against additional license fee. 
Any business referred to in this division which is liable for an increase or additional charge of the license fee shall be entitled to a credit against such increase or additional charge of the license fee equal to one-half the amount of such increase or additional fee if such business: 
(1)  Provides free off-street vehicular customer parking in full conformance with the vehicle parking requirements specified under Zoning Ordinance No. 423, adopted December 26, 1945, as amended; or 
(2)  Payment for such business has been made in full into the in-lieu parking fund for vehicle parking as required by such Ordinance No. 423. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.13)  
Sec. 62-99. - Collection of additional license fee. 
The collection of the increase or additional charge to the license fee charged and imposed by this division shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as the ordinary business license fee of the city under article II of chapter 22, and such increase or additional charge of the license fee imposed under this division shall be computed in the manner provided in article II of chapter 22 for each business, but according to the schedule set forth in this division, and shall be due and payable as provided in such article II of chapter 22. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.14)  
Sec. 62-100. - New business. 
Any new business in parking and business improvement area A shall be assessed in accordance with its classification. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.16)  
Sec. 62-101. - Businesses exempt from license fee. 
Any business, person or institution located within the parking and business improvement area A, which is exempt from the payment of the city's ordinary business license fee because of the provisions of the United States or state constitutions, is not to be charged under this division, but may make a voluntary contribution to the city. Such contribution shall be used for the purposes provided in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.17)  
Secs. 62-102—62-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AREA B 
 
Sec. 62-131. - Authority for proceedings. 
The proceedings taken in this division are taken pursuant to the authority of the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1965, as added to the Streets and Highways Code by Statutes 1965, chapter 241 (Streets and Highways Code § 36000 et seq.). 
(Code 1957, § 15A.19)  
Sec. 62-132. - Resolution of intention. 
This division is adopted pursuant to that certain resolution of intention adopted by the city council, being Resolution No. 4298, adopted October 7, 1968, and entitled "A Resolution of the Council of the City of San Fernando declaring its intention to form a parking and business improvement area to be known as Parking and Business Improvement Area B of the City of San Fernando, fixing the time and place for hearing, and ordering the giving of notice thereof," which resolution of intention was adopted by the city council and proceedings thereunder taken pursuant to the authority of such Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1965. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.20)  
Sec. 62-133. - Notice and hearing. 
Resolution No. 4298 was published and mailed as provided by law, and a hearing thereon was held by the city council on October 29, 1968, at the hour of 7:30 p.m. in the council chambers of the city council in the City Hall, 117 Macneil Street, San Fernando, California. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.21)  
Sec. 62-134. - Protests and action thereon. 
At the hearing provided for by Resolution No. 4298 and, as set forth in section 62-133, all persons desiring to be heard were heard and all protests and objections made or filed were fully heard, and such have been overruled and denied by order of the city council entered on its minutes, and the hearing has been duly concluded. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.22)  
Sec. 62-135. - Protests deemed less than majority. 
The city council has determined, by order entered on its minutes, that objections or protests objecting to and protesting the formation of parking and business improvement area B have not been made by businesses in the proposed area, which pay a majority of the fees within the area under article II of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.23)  
Sec. 62-136. - Name of area. 
The name of the parking and business improvement area created and established in this division is Parking and Business Improvement Area B of the City of San Fernando, sometimes referred to as "area." 
(Code 1957, § 15A.24)  
Sec. 62-137. - Description. 
A description of the exterior boundaries of the parking and business improvement area B of the city created and established in this division is as follows: 
That portion of the City of San Fernando, County of Los Angeles, State of California, bounded as follows: beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Truman Street, 80 feet wide, and the centerline of S. Workman Street, 60 feet wide; thence southwesterly along the centerline of S. Workman Street to the centerline of Celis Street, 60 feet wide; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Celis Street to the centerline of Kalisher Street, 60 feet wide; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Kalisher Street to the centerline of Pico Street, 60 feet wide; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Pico Street to the centerline of S. Brand Boulevard, 130 feet wide; thence northeasterly along the centerline of S. Brand Boulevard to the centerline of Celis Street, 60 feet wide; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Celis Street to the centerline of Chatsworth Drive, 60 feet wide; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Chatsworth Drive to the centerline of San Fernando Road, 80 feet wide; thence northwesterly along the centerline of San Fernando Road to the centerline of Kittridge Street, 60 feet wide; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Kittridge Street to the southeasterly prolongation of the northeasterly line of lots 1 to 6 inclusive of tract no. 4687 as per map recorded in book 62, page 37, of maps, in the office of the county recorder; thence northwesterly along such southeasterly prolongation, such northeasterly line and the northwesterly prolongation thereof to the centerline of S. Brand Boulevard; thence northeasterly along the centerline of S. Brand Boulevard to the southwesterly line of the 100-foot-wide right-of-way of Southern Pacific Railroad Company; thence northwesterly along the southwesterly line to the southeasterly line of lot A in block M of Boruff Tract as per map recorded in book 16, page 171, of maps; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly line of lot A, block M, Boruff Tract, and along the southwesterly prolongation of the southeasterly line of lot A to the centerline of Truman Street, 80 feet wide; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Truman Street to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.25)  
Sec. 62-138. - Benefit zones. 
For the purposes set forth in section 62-139, separate benefit zones, based upon the degree of benefit derived from the purpose, are created and established, which benefit zones shall be known respectively as zone 1 and zone 2, and which zones are respectively described as follows: 
(1)  Zone 1. That portion of the City of San Fernando, County of Los Angeles, State of California, bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Mission Boulevard with the northwesterly prolongation of the southwest line of the northeast 24 feet of the northwest eight feet of lot 13 in tract no. 9589, as per map recorded in book 160, page 48, of maps; thence southeast along the prolongation and the southwest line to the southeast line of the northwest eight feet of lot 13, tract no. 9589; thence northeast along such southeast line 24 feet to the northeast line of lot 13; thence southeasterly along the northeast line of lots 1 to 13 in tract no. 9589, and along the northeast line of lots 28 to 32 in tract no. 3674 as per map recorded in book 47, page 42, of maps to the most easterly corner of lot 28; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly line of lot 28 six feet; thence southeasterly parallel with the northeast line of lots 28 to 32, tract no. 3674, and its southeasterly prolongation, to the centerline of Maclay Avenue, 80 feet wide; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Maclay Avenue six feet to the southeasterly prolongation; thence southeasterly along the prolongation and along the northeast line of lots 3 to 26, inclusive, of tract no. 3674 to the most easterly corner of lot 3; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly line of lot 3, 58 feet; thence southeasterly parallel with the northeast line of lots 1 and 2 in tract no. 3674 and its southeasterly prolongation to the centerline of Brand Boulevard; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Brand Boulevard to the northwesterly prolongation of the northeast line of lots 1 to 6 of tract no. 4687, as per map recorded in book 62, page 37, of maps; thence along such northwesterly prolongation, the northeast line and its southeasterly prolongation to the centerline of Kittridge Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Kittridge Street to the centerline of San Fernando Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of San Fernando Road to the centerline of Chatsworth Drive; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Chatsworth Drive to the southeasterly prolongation of the northeast line of the southwest 40 feet of lot 130 of tract no. 2824, as per map recorded in book 28, pages 36 and 37, of maps; thence northwesterly along such prolongation and the northeast line to the northwest line of the southeast 33.33 feet of lot 130; thence southwesterly along the northwest line 40 feet to the southwest line of lot 130; thence northwesterly along the southwest line and the southwest line of lot 126 in tract no. 2824, 134 feet to the southeast line of the northwest 99.17 feet of lot 126; thence northeasterly along the last-mentioned southeast line 45 feet; thence northwesterly parallel with the southwest line of lot 126 and its northwesterly prolongation to the centerline of Brand Boulevard; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Brand Boulevard to the southeasterly prolongation of the southwest line of lot 2 of tract no. 2824; thence northwesterly along the last-mentioned southeasterly prolongation, along the southwest line of said lot 2, tract no. 2824 and the northwesterly prolongation thereof to the southwesterly prolongation of the southeast line of lot 17 in block 4 of Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey of the Town of San Fernando as per map recorded in book 34, pages 65 and 66, of miscellaneous records; thence northeast along such southwesterly prolongation and the southeast line 39.5 feet; thence northwesterly parallel with the southwest line of lot 17 and the northwesterly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Maclay Avenue; thence southwesterly along the centerline 39.5 feet to the southeast prolongation of the southwest line of lots 1 to 20 inclusive in block 5 of Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey; thence northwesterly along such prolongation, the southwest line and its northwesterly prolongation to the centerline of Mission Boulevard; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Mission Boulevard to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Zone 2. That portion of the City of San Fernando, County of Los Angeles, State of California, bounded as follows: 
That portion of the City of San Fernando, County of Los Angeles, State of California, bounded as follows: beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Truman Street, 80 feet wide, and the centerline of S. Workman Street, 60 feet wide; thence southwesterly along the centerline of S. Workman Street to the centerline of Celis Street, 60 feet wide; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Celis Street to the centerline of Kalisher Street, 60 feet wide; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Kalisher Street to the centerline of Pico Street, 60 feet wide; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Pico Street to the centerline of S. Brand Boulevard, 130 feet wide; thence northeasterly along the centerline of S. Brand Boulevard to the centerline of Celis Street, 60 feet wide; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Celis Street to the centerline of Chatsworth Drive, 60 feet wide; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Chatsworth Drive to the centerline of San Fernando Road, 80 feet wide; thence northwesterly along the centerline of San Fernando Road to the centerline of Kittridge Street, 60 feet wide; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Kittridge Street to the southeasterly prolongation of the northeasterly line of lots 1 to 6 inclusive of tract no. 4687 as per map recorded in book 62, page 37, of maps, in the office of the county recorder; thence northwesterly along such southeasterly prolongation, the northeasterly line and the northwesterly prolongation thereof to the centerline of S. Brand Boulevard; thence northeasterly along the centerline of S. Brand Boulevard to the southwesterly line of the 100-foot-wide right-of-way of Southern Pacific Railroad Company; thence northwesterly along the southwestern line to the southeasterly line of lot A in block M of Boruff Tract, as per map recorded in book 16, page 171, of maps; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly line of lot A, block M, Boruff Tract, and along the southwesterly prolongation of the southeasterly line of lot A to the centerline of Truman Street, 80 feet wide; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Truman Street to the point of beginning. 
EXCEPT that portion thereof within the following described boundaries: beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Mission Boulevard with the northwesterly prolongation of the southwest line of the northeast 24 feet of the northwest eight feet of lot 13 in tract no. 9589, as per map recorded in book 160, page 48, of maps; thence southeast along such prolongation and the southwest line to the southeast line of the northwest eight feet of lot 13, tract no. 9589; thence northeast along the southeast line 24 feet to the northeast line of lot 13; thence southeasterly along the northeast line of lots 1 to 13 in tract no. 9589 and along the northeast line of lots 28 to 32 in tract no. 3674, as per map recorded in book 47, page 42, of maps, to the most easterly corner of lot 28; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly line of lot 28 six feet; thence southeasterly parallel with the northeast line of lots 28 to 32, tract 3674, and its southeasterly prolongation to the centerline of Maclay Avenue, 60 feet wide; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Maclay Avenue six feet to the southeasterly prolongation; thence southeasterly along such prolongation and along the northeast line of lots 3 to 26, inclusive, of tract no. 3674 to the most easterly corner of lot 3; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly line of lot 3, 58 feet; thence southeasterly parallel with the northeast line of lots 1 and 2 in tract no. 3674 and its southeasterly prolongation to the centerline of Brand Boulevard; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Brand Boulevard to the northwesterly prolongation of the northeast line of lots 1 to 6 of tract no. 4687, as per map recorded in book 62, page 37, of maps; thence along such northwesterly prolongation, the northeast line and its southeasterly prolongation to the centerline of Kittridge Street; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Kittridge Street to the centerline of San Fernando Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of San Fernando Road to the centerline of Chatsworth Drive; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Chatsworth Drive to the southeasterly prolongation of the northeast line of the southwest 40 feet of lot 130 of tract no. 2824, as per map recorded in book 28, pages 36 and 37 of maps; thence northwesterly along such prolongation and the northeast line to the northwest line of the southeast 33.33 feet of lot 130; thence southwesterly along the northwest line 40 feet to the southwest line of lot 130; thence northwesterly along the southwest line and the southwest line of lot 126 in tract no. 2824, 134 feet to the southeast line of the northwest 99.17 feet of lot 126; thence northeasterly along the last-mentioned southeast line 45 feet; thence northwesterly parallel with the southwest line of lot 126 and its northwesterly prolongation to the centerline of Brand Boulevard; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Brand Boulevard to the southeasterly prolongation of the southwest line of lot 2 of tract no. 2824; thence northwesterly along the last-mentioned southeasterly prolongation, along the southwest line of lot 2, tract no. 2824, and the northwesterly prolongation thereof to the southwesterly prolongation of the southeast line of lot 17 in block 4 of Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey of the Town of San Fernando, as per map recorded in book 34, pages 65 and 66 of miscellaneous records; thence northeast along such southwesterly prolongation and the southeast line 39.5 feet; thence northwesterly parallel with the southwest line of lot 17 and the northwesterly prolongation thereof to the centerline of Maclay Avenue; thence southwesterly along the centerline 39.5 feet to the southeast prolongation of the southwest line of lots 1 to 20, inclusive, in block 5 of the Porter Land & Water Co.'s Resurvey; thence northwesterly along such prolongation, the southwest line and its northwesterly prolongation to the centerline of Mission Boulevard; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Mission Boulevard to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.26)  
Sec. 62-139. - Uses of proceeds in respective zones; purposes. 
(a)  The uses to which the proceeds from the additional fee revenue realized from the rate of increase of or additional charge to the license fee, as provided in this division, will be put and in which zone of parking and business improvement area B are as follows: 
(1)  Purpose A. The general promotion of retail trade activity, including but not limited to the cleaning and maintenance of the San Fernando Road Pedestrian Mall and the San Fernando Road Pedestrian Mall Addition No. 1 (collectively sometimes referred to as "pedestrian mall"), general advertising and promotion, sales promotion activity, and special promotional literature in the following enumerated zones of the area (sometimes referred to as "purpose A"): zone 1 and zone 2. 
(2)  Purpose B. The furnishing of music in public places in the following enumerated zone in the area (sometimes referred to as "purpose B"): zone 1. 
(3)  Purpose C. The promotion of public events, including but not limited to such activities as art shows, festivals and public ceremonies, which are to take place on or in public places in the following enumerated zones in the area (sometimes referred to as "purpose C"): zone 1 and zone 2. 
(4)  Purpose D. The decoration of any public place, including but not limited to Christmas decorations and other decorations in the following enumerated zones in the area (sometimes referred to as "purpose D"): zone 1 and zone 2. 
(5)  Other purposes. After first deducting that percentage as established by resolution of the city council from all proceeds of the additional fee revenue realized from the rate of increase of or additional charge to the license fee, except for the proceeds realized from additional charges to the business license fee under subsection 62-142(1)a.5 of this division, as the cost of collection and administration, and the proceeds of the additional charge or fee derived under subsection 62-142(1)a.5 for maintenance of the pedestrian mall, the balance of all proceeds of the additional fee revenue realized from the rate of increase of or additional charge to the license fee shall be used by the city to pay contract fees to that entity with which the city has contracted to carry out and perform all other purposes enumerated in subsections (a)(1) through (4), inclusive, of this section. 
The percentage of proceeds retained by the city shall be used for the purpose of defraying the cost of administration and the cost of collection of the rate of increase or additional charge of or to the license fee and the proceeds derived under subsection 62-142(1)a.5 of this division shall be used by the city to defray the cost of cleaning and maintenance of the pedestrian mall. 
(b)  This section shall take precedence and govern over any section of this article that might be in conflict with this section. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.27)  
Sec. 62-140. - Classification of businesses and appeals. 
(a)  Classification of businesses generally. For the purpose of the rate of increase of or additional charge to the license fee, the various businesses located in parking and business improvement area B are classified in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Class I, retail businesses, includes all businesses licensed under article II of chapter 22 of this Code as retail establishments, except when they are otherwise classified in this section. 
(2)  Class II, professional businesses, includes all those businesses generally recognized and considered as professional, including but not limited to attorneys at law, doctors, dentists, optometrists and accountants, except when such businesses are otherwise classified in this section. 
(3)  Class III, service businesses, includes barbers, beauticians, beauty parlors, utilities, real estate brokers, service stations, photographers, contractors, cleaners, laundries, garages and auto repairs, and other such similar service businesses, unless otherwise specifically set forth and classified in this section. 
(4)  Class IV, miscellaneous businesses, includes financial institutions, recreation activities, hotels and motels, apartments, insurance agents, bars, manufacturers and wholesalers, and all other businesses which do not fall into classes I through III, inclusive, or which do not have business licenses under article II of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(b)  Dispute of classification. Any questions arising as to the classification of any business shall be determined by the city clerk. 
(c)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk with respect to such classification may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council within five days from the date of the decision by the city clerk. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving notice personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. At the time of the hearing the council shall determine and rule upon the appeal, and its decision shall be final. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.28)  
Sec. 62-141. - Businesses subject to additional fee. 
All businesses within the boundaries of parking and business improvement area B, described in this division, not exempt by law, shall be subject to the provisions of the fee or additional fee imposed by this division. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.29)  
Sec. 62-142. - Rate of increase or additional charge of license fee. 
The initial rate of increase of or additional charge to the business license fee for each of the purposes set forth in subsections 62-139(a)(1) through (4), inclusive, on all businesses conducting their activities and on all persons, firms, corporations, organizations, lodges and institutions maintaining offices, quarters or meeting places in each of the zones in the area, which is in addition to the ordinary business license fee imposed upon such businesses by article II of chapter 22 of this Code, and in addition to the increase or additional charge of license fees imposed by Ordinance No. 912, adopted November 22, 1965, for the purpose of parking and business improvement area A of the city, is fixed and established at the rates as set forth in the following schedule: 
(1)  For purpose A of section 62-139. 
a.  Zone 1. 
1.  Class I businesses: 0.8594 times the ordinary business license fee. 
2.  Class II businesses: 0.22 times the ordinary business license fee. 
3.  Class III businesses: 0.4538 times the ordinary business license fee. 
4.  Class IV businesses: 0.1832 times the ordinary business license fee or a sum determined by and equal to the number of feet the business fronts on the pedestrian mall, multiplied by $1.50, whichever is the greater. 
5.  In addition to the rate of increase of or additional charge to the business license fee set forth in this subsection, all businesses and all persons, firms, corporations, institutions, organizations and lodges maintaining offices, quarters or meeting places occupying a building having frontage and/or abutting on the pedestrian mall shall be charged and shall pay an additional fee according to the following schedule, which additional charge shall be applicable to all classes of business set forth in this subsection. The following fee schedule shall be established: 
i.  For fiscal year 1990-91 (to be known as the base year), the fee shall be, for ground floor locations abutting on the pedestrian mall, equal to the number of feet fronting or abutting the pedestrian mall multiplied by $10.00. For other floors than the ground floor, the fee shall be $30.00 per business, firm, person, corporation, organization, lodge or institution. 
ii.  For fiscal year 1991-92, the base year fees shall be equally adjusted by a percentage sufficient to recover 50 percent of the expenditures of the line items in the city budget directly related to pedestrian mall maintenance. 
iii.  For fiscal year 1992-93, the base year fees shall be equally adjusted by a percentage sufficient to recover 75 percent of the expenditures of the line items in the city budget directly related to pedestrian mall maintenance. 
iv.  For fiscal year 1993-94 and beyond, the base year fees shall be equally adjusted by a percentage sufficient to recover 100 percent of the expenditures of the line items in the city budget directly related to pedestrian mall maintenance. 
b.  Zone 2. 
1.  Class I businesses: 0.5625 times the ordinary business license fee. 
2.  Class II businesses: 0.985 times the ordinary business license fee. 
3.  Class III businesses: 0.1998 times the ordinary business license fee. 
4.  Class IV businesses: 0.10 times the ordinary business license fee or a sum determined by and equal to the number of feet such business fronts on a public street, multiplied by $0.75, whichever is the greater. 
(2)  For purpose B of section 62-139. 
a.  Zone 1. 
1.  Class I businesses: 0.0688 times the ordinary business license fee. 
2.  Class II businesses: 0.0688 times the ordinary business license fee. 
3.  Class III businesses: 0.083 times the ordinary business license fee. 
4.  Class IV businesses: 0.0612 times the ordinary business license fee or a sum determined by and equal to the number of feet the business fronts on the pedestrian mall, multiplied by $0.50, whichever is the greater. 
b.  Zone 2. Increase or additional charge of or to the business license fee on businesses in this zone: none. 
(3)  For purpose C of section 62-139. 
a.  Zone 1. 
1.  Class I businesses: 0.1668 times the ordinary business license fee. 
2.  Class II businesses: 0.1143 times the ordinary business license fee. 
3.  Class III businesses: 0.1182 times the ordinary business license fee. 
4.  Class IV businesses: 0.0610 times the ordinary business license fee or a sum determined by and equal to the number of feet the business fronts on the pedestrian mall, multiplied by $0.50, whichever is the greater. 
b.  Zone 2. 
1.  Class I businesses: 0.084 times the ordinary business license fee. 
2.  Class II businesses: 0.0775 times the ordinary business license fee. 
3.  Class III businesses: 0.0666 times the ordinary business license fee. 
4.  Class IV businesses: 0.05 times the ordinary business license fee or a sum determined by and equal to the number of feet the business fronts on a public street, multiplied by $0.375, whichever is the greater. 
(4)  For purpose D of section 62-139. 
a.  Zone 1. 
1.  Class I businesses: 0.28 times the ordinary business license fee. 
2.  Class II businesses: 0.1469 times the ordinary business license fee. 
3.  Class III businesses: 0.17 times the ordinary business license fee. 
4.  Class IV businesses: 0.0612 times the ordinary business license fee or a sum determined by and equal to the number of feet the business fronts on the pedestrian mall, multiplied by $0.50, whichever is the greater. 
b.  Zone 2. 
1.  Class I businesses: 0.1035 times the ordinary business license fee. 
2.  Class II businesses: 0.0775 times the ordinary business license fee. 
3.  Class III businesses: 0.0666 times the ordinary business license fee. 
4.  Class IV businesses: 0.05 times the ordinary business license fee or a sum determined by and equal to the number of feet the business fronts on a public street, multiplied by $0.375, whichever is the greater. 
(5)  Upstairs businesses. Any business conducting its activities or any person, firm, corporation, organization, lodge or institution maintaining offices, quarters or meeting places on a floor other than the ground floor of any building fronting or abutting on the pedestrian mall or fronting on any public street shall be liable for the increase or additional charge of or to the business license fee imposed by this division to the same extent as though located on the ground floor; provided, however, that as to the additional charge of or to the business license fee under subsection (1)a.5 of this section, the amount of fee shall be $5.00 per year. 
(6)  Maximum fee. 
a.  One or first place of business. If the total rate of increase of or additional charge to the business license fee imposed by this division, under any one subsection or any combination of subsections of this section, excluding, however, the additional charge of or to the business license fee under subsection (1)a.5 of this section for any one place of business, shall equal or exceed the maximum for any one of the following places of business, such business shall be only liable for and pay the maximum: 
1.  Located in zone 1, maximum of $500.00 per year. 
2.  Located in zone 2, maximum of $300.00 per year. 
b.  Additional places of business in area. If any person, firm or corporation operates more than one place of business in the area, the place of business with the greatest gross receipts shall be considered for the purpose of this subsection as the first place of business and shall be liable for the maximum prescribed in subsection (6)a of this section, but as to each additional place of business in the area it will be governed by subsection (6)a of this section; provided, however, for each such additional place of business the maximum shall be as follows: 
1.  Located in zone 1, maximum of $150.00 per year. 
2.  Located in zone 2, maximum of $90.00 per year. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.30)  
Sec. 62-143. - Area constituted and established. 
Parking and business improvement area B of the city is fully constituted and established. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.31)  
Sec. 62-144. - Definitions and classifications. 
The definitions and classifications of businesses, as set forth in this division, except as otherwise provided in this division, shall be determined by the definitions and classifications as set forth in article II of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.32) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-145. - Due date and penalty for nonpayment of additional fee. 
The increase of or additional charge to the business license fee as provided in this division shall be due and payable at the same time and in the same manner as the ordinary business license fee, all as provided in article II of chapter 22 of this Code. Upon failure to pay the charge when due, the charge shall bear the same type of penalties as prescribed by article II of chapter 22 for the nonpayment of the ordinary business license fee. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.33)  
Sec. 62-146. - Collection of additional fee. 
The collection of the increase of or additional charge to the business license fee charged and imposed by this division shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as the ordinary business license fee of the city under article II of chapter 22 of this Code, and such increase of or additional charge to the business license fee shall be computed in the manner provided in article II of chapter 22 for each business but according to the schedule set forth in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.34)  
Sec. 62-147. - New business. 
Any new business in parking and business improvement area B shall be assessed in accordance with its classification. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.35)  
Sec. 62-148. - Exemption; voluntary contribution. 
Except as otherwise provided, any business, person or institution located within parking and business improvement area B which is exempt from the payment of the ordinary business license fee of the city because of the provisions of the United States or state constitutions is not to be charged under this division, but may make a voluntary contribution to the city. There is specifically excepted from the exemption contained in this section and nothing contained in this section shall be construed to exempt any business from the increase of or additional charge to the license fee charged and assessed under subsection 62-142(1)a.5 of this division (cleaning and maintenance of pedestrian mall). Any voluntary contribution made pursuant to this section shall be used for the purposes provided in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 15A.37)  
Chapter 66 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; schedule for secondhand dealers, § 22-161 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 66-1—66-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS, JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
Sec. 66-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junk collector means a person not having a fixed place of business in this city who goes from house to house or from place to place gathering, collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal or other articles commonly known as junk. 
Junk dealer means a person having a fixed place of business in this city and engaging in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in, either at wholesale or retail, any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal or other articles commonly known as junk. 
Pawnbroker means a person engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroking, or the business of loaning money for himself or for any other person upon personal property, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or their assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. 
Pawnshop means any room, store or place in which the business of a pawnbroker is carried on or conducted. 
Secondhand dealer means a person engaging in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Code 1957, § 17.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-27. - Report of goods received. 
(a)  Generally. Persons defined in section 66-26 of this article shall secure blank report forms from the chief of police. Such reports shall be made out and delivered to the chief of police each day before 10:00 a.m. and shall contain the following data: 
(1)  A full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise or things received on deposit, pledged, purchased or received during the day preceding the filing of such report. 
(2)  The hour of the day such article was received, pledged or purchased. 
(3)  The true name and address of the party making the sale, delivery or pledge as nearly as such is known to or can be ascertained by such person together with a description of such party, which shall include his height, age, sex, complexion, style of dress, color of mustache, if any, and, if lacking, such fact shall be noted. 
(4)  The number of the pawn ticket if a pledge is involved, and the amount loaned or pledged. 
(5)  A description of each article pledged, received or purchased. If such article is engraved or contains any settings, the description thereof shall include such number, figure, word or initial engraved thereon and shall show the kind and number of settings. 
Where a junk dealer or person engaged in the business of purchasing scrap metals for the purpose of reselling, smelting or refining such metal makes purchases from a junk collector, in lieu of the description required in subsection (a)(3) of this section, the true name and city license number of such junk collector shall be sufficient. 
(b)  Contents. The blank report forms referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall bear a caption providing blank spaces in which shall be written or printed the date of such report, the name and place of business of the person making the report and the hour of the day when the report is received by the chief of police. Such forms shall be so printed and subdivided as to contain spaces with proper captions for the information required by this article. A copy of this subsection and subsection (a) of this section shall be printed upon the back of each such blank form. 
(c)  Legibility in English language. The report required by subsection (a) of this section shall be written or printed in a clear and legible manner entirely in the English language. 
(d)  Filing and inspection. The chief of police shall file in a secure place in his office all reports received pursuant to this article, and the reports shall be open to inspection only by members of the police department or upon an order of a court of competent jurisdiction made for that purpose. 
(Code 1957, §§ 17.2—17.5)  
Sec. 66-28. - Record of goods received. 
(a)  Required; contents. Persons defined in section 66-26 of this article shall keep a complete record of all goods, wares, merchandise and all things pledged to or purchased or received by them, which record shall contain all of the matters required to be shown in the reports referred to and described in subsections 66-27(a) and (b) of this article and which shall be written or printed in a clear and legible manner entirely in the English language. 
(b)  Inspection. The records referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of any member of the police department. 
(Code 1957, §§ 17.6, 17.7)  
Sec. 66-29. - Signs required. 
Persons defined in section 66-26 of this article shall maintain on the premises where the business is located a sign plainly printed in the English language of sufficient size so that the sign may be easy to read from the sidewalk in front of such place of business. Such sign shall state the business in which such person is engaged. If the business is located in an office building, the sign shall be placed on the door of the office. If the business is located in a department of any building, the sign shall be placed at the entrance to such department. 
(Code 1957, § 17.8)  
Sec. 66-30. - Minimum period for holding goods. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers. Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any article or thing within 21 days after such article or thing has been purchased or received by such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. 
(b)  Junk dealers and collectors generally. Junk dealers or junk collectors shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any article or thing within three days after such article or thing has been purchased or received by such junk dealer or junk collector. 
(c)  Persons purchasing scrap metals. Junk dealers or other persons engaged in the business of purchasing scrap metals for the purpose of reselling, smelting or refining the scrap metals shall retain and keep in a separate place on their premises the entire purchase of each day. Each day's purchase shall be kept in such place in its original condition for a period of three days after the purchase or receipt thereof and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police department. 
(Code 1957, §§ 17.9—17.11)  
Sec. 66-31. - Hours and days of business. 
No person operating, managing or carrying on any business defined in section 66-26 of this article shall accept any pledge or loan money upon personal property or purchase or receive any article or carry on or transact such business in any manner during the hours or days specified in this section, nor shall any person carry on or transact any business of whatever character or buy or sell any articles, new or used, at any place of business for which a junk dealer's permit, a pawnbroker's or pawnshop permit, or a secondhand dealer's permit is issued, during any of the following hours or days: 
(1)  Between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day from Monday to Friday, inclusive. 
(2)  Between 7:00 p.m. Saturday and 8:00 a.m. of the following Monday. However, any such place of business may be kept open between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays, provided that the only business done therein during such overtime hours is that of selling goods, wares and merchandise or other personal property. 
(3)  On any of the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas. 
However, from December 14 to December 24, inclusive, excluding Sundays, any such place of business may be kept open until 10:00 p.m., provided the only business done therein during such overtime hours is that of selling goods, wares and merchandise, or other personal property. 
(Code 1957, § 17.12)  
Sec. 66-32. - Overlapping businesses. 
If any person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on at the same time more than one of the businesses defined in section 66-26 of this article, such person shall be deemed to be engaging in, conducting, and carrying on each such business separately and apart from the other such business. Such person shall comply in all respects with the sections of this article relating to each such business, and no person shall fail, refuse or neglect otherwise to do so. 
(Code 1957, § 17.13)  
Sec. 66-33. - Claims to possession of stolen property. 
Claims to possession of stolen property shall be handled in accordance with Financial Code § 21206.8. 
(Code 1957, § 17.14)  
Sec. 66-34. - Exemptions from article. 
(a)  Subsection 66-27(a) of this article shall not apply to the receipt or sale of a secondhand article by any person who receives or purchases such article from any other person when such other person has made the required report to the chief of police and shall have held the article for the length of time required by this article. 
(b)  Subsections 66-27(a) and 66-28(a) and section 66-30 of this article shall not apply to the purchase or sale by junk dealers or junk collectors of any rags, bottles other than milk or cream bottles, secondhand sacks or bags other than cement sacks or bags, barrels, cans, shoes, lamps, stoves or household furniture, with the exception of musical instruments or scrap iron when bought and sold for scrap, or to the purchase or sale by secondhand dealers of household furniture with the exception of all musical instruments, typewriters, accounting machines, adding machines, checkwriting machines, comptometers or other similar equipment, or to the purchase or sale of sacks, bags or rags other than cement sacks or bags. 
(c)  None of the sections of this article shall apply to auto wreckers, dealers in used motor vehicles or to secondhand book dealers. 
(d)  The acceptance, sale or disposal of used automobile tires or automobile batteries taken in part payment for new tires or batteries shall not be deemed to constitute the doing of any of the businesses set forth in section 66-26 of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 17.15)  
Secs. 66-35—66-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GARAGE, PATIO AND SIMILAR SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-61. - Intent and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares that: 
(1)  The intrusion of unregulated garage sales is causing annoyance to citizens in residential areas in the city and congestion of the streets in residential areas in the city. 
(2)  The sections contained in this article are intended to prohibit the infringement of any businesses in any established residential areas by regulating the term and frequency of garage sales, so as not to disturb or disrupt the residential environment of the area. 
(3)  The sections of this article do not seek control of sales by individuals selling a few of their household or personal items. 
(4)  The provisions and prohibitions contained in this article are enacted not to prevent but to regulate garage sales for the safety and welfare of the city's citizens. 
(Code 1957, § 10.1)  
Sec. 66-62. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sale means and includes all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone, as defined by chapter 106 of this Code, for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including but not limited to all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "back yard," "patio," "flea market" or "rummage" sale. This definition does not include a situation where no more than five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold. 
Personal property means property which is owned, utilized, and maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of living or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
(Code 1957, § 10.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-63. - Property permitted to be sold. 
It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this article, property other than personal property. 
(Code 1957, § 10.3)  
Sec. 66-64. - Hours and days of operation. 
Garage sales shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of three consecutive days or two consecutive weekends (Saturday and Sunday). 
(Code 1957, § 10.8)  
Sec. 66-65. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Sale not held because of inclement weather. If a garage sale is not held on the dates for which the permit is issued or is terminated during the first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions and an affidavit by the permit holder to this effect is submitted, the city's business license department may issue another permit to the applicant for a garage sale to be conducted at the same location within 30 days from the date when the first sale was to be held. No additional permit fee is required. 
(b)  Third sale permitted. A third garage sale shall be permitted in a calendar year if satisfactory proof of a bona fide change in ownership of the real property is first presented to the finance director or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1957, § 10.9; Ord. No. 1545, § 20, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 66-66. - Display of sale property. 
Personal property offered for sale at a garage sale may be displayed within the residence, in a garage, in a carport, and/or in a rear yard, but only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in the front or side yard area of any such premises or in any public right-of-way. However, a vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within such front or side yard. 
(Code 1957, § 10.11)  
Sec. 66-67. - Advertising and signs. 
(a)  Signs permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale: 
(1)  Number permitted. Two signs of not more than four square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is being conducted. 
(2)  Directional signs. Two directional signs of not more than two square feet each are permitted, provided that the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and written permission to erect the signs is received from the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be placed. 
(b)  Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than two days prior to the day such sale is to commence. 
(c)  Removal of signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of the garage sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs. 
(Code 1957, § 10.13) 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6.  
Sec. 66-68. - Public nuisance. 
The individual to whom a garage sale permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises or permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such premises. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire department in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1957, § 10.14)  
Sec. 66-69. - Inspections. 
A police officer or any other official designated by any city ordinance to make inspections under the licensing or regulating section of this Code or city ordinance or to enforce such shall have the right of entry to any premises showing evidence of a garage sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection and may close the premises from such a sale or arrest any individual who violates this article. 
(Code 1957, § 10.15)  
Sec. 66-70. - Parking. 
All parking of vehicles at a garage sale shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the police department may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by any garage sale. 
(Code 1957, § 10.16) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90.  
Sec. 66-71. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the city or under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer, or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in other sections of this Code or city ordinances. 
(4)  Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural, or governmental institution or organization when the proceeds from the sale are used directly for the institution's or organization's charitable purposes, and goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(Code 1957, § 10.18)  
Secs. 66-72, 66-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed §§ 66-72 and 66-73 which pertained to separate violations and penalty and derived from Code 1957, §§ 10.19 and 10.20, respectively.  
Secs. 66-74—66-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 66-101. - Required. 
No garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the individuals desiring to conduct such sale shall obtain a permit from the city business license department. Members of more than one residence, but not more than five residences, located in the city may join in obtaining a permit for a garage sale to be conducted at the residence of one of them. 
(Code 1957, § 10.4)  
Sec. 66-102. - Application and statement required. 
Prior to issuance of any garage sale permit, the individuals conducting such sale shall file a written statement with the city's business license department at least five days in advance of the proposed sale (mailed applications must be postmarked at least seven days in advance of the sale), setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location at which the proposed garage sale is to be held. 
(3)  The dates upon which the sale shall be held. 
(4)  The dates of any other garage sales within the current calendar year. 
(5)  An affirmative statement that the property to be sold was owned by the applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired nor consigned for the purposes of resale. 
(Code 1957, § 10.5)  
Sec. 66-103. - Fee. 
There shall be an administrative processing fee of $5.00 for the issuance of a garage sale permit. 
(Code 1957, § 10.6)  
Sec. 66-104. - Conditions. 
The permit issued pursuant to this division shall set forth and restrict the time and location of such garage sale. No more than two such permits may be issued to one residence and/or family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one residence join in requesting a permit, such permit shall be considered as having been issued for each and all of such residences. 
(Code 1957, § 10.7)  
Sec. 66-105. - Investigation. 
Before issuing a garage sale permit, the finance director or his duly authorized representative may conduct such investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this article. 
(Code 1957, § 10.10; Ord. No. 1545, § 21, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 66-106. - Display. 
Any permit in possession of the holder of a garage sale shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place so as to be seen by the public and the finance director or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1957, § 10.12; Ord. No. 1545, § 22, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 66-107. - Revocation and denial. 
(a)  False information. Any permit issued under this division may be revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the finance director if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement. 
(b)  Conviction of violation. If any individual is convicted of an offense under this article, the finance director is instructed to cancel any existing garage sale permit held by the individual convicted and not to issue such individual another garage sale permit for a period of two years from the time of conviction. 
(Code 1957, § 10.17; Ord. No. 1545, § 23, 11-3-2003)  
Secs. 66-108—66-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SWAP MEETS 
 
Sec. 66-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Exhibitor means any person who exchanges, sells, or offers for sale or exchange any personal property at a swap meet. 
Personal property means: 
(1)  All serialized items of merchandise. 
(2)  All personal property commonly sold at swap meets which statistically is found through crime reports to the attorney general to constitute a significant class of stolen goods. A list of such personal property shall be supplied by the attorney general to all local law enforcement agencies. Such list shall be reviewed periodically by the attorney general to ensure that it addresses current problems with stolen goods. 
Swap meet means any event at which: 
(1)  Two or more persons offer personal property for sale or exchange; and 
(2)  A fee is charged for the privilege of offering or displaying personal property for sale or exchange; or 
(3)  A fee is charged to prospective buyers for admission to the area where personal property is offered or displayed for sale or exchange; 
(4)  Regardless of the number of persons offering or displaying personal property or the absence of fees, used personal property is offered or displayed for sale or exchange if such event is held more than six times in any 12-month period. 
Swap meet operator means any person, partnership, organization or corporation which controls, manages, conducts or otherwise administers a swap meet. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-137. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  An event for the exclusive benefit of any community chest, fund, foundation, association or corporation organized and operated for religious, educational, hospital or charitable purposes, provided that no part of any admission fee charged exhibitors or prospective purchasers or the gross receipts or net earnings from the sale or exchange of personal property, whether in the form of a percentage of such receipts or earnings, as salary or otherwise, inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or person participating in the organization or conduct of the event. 
(2)  An event at which all of the personal property offered or displayed is new, and all persons selling, exchanging, or offering or displaying personal property for sale or exchange are manufacturers or licensed retail or wholesale merchants. 
(3)  Any vehicle or trailer. 
(4)  Any vehicle accessory or vehicle part exclusively for a motor vehicle eligible for vehicle registration under Vehicle Code § 5004. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.2)  
Sec. 66-138. - Permit required; application; conditions. 
(a)  No person or entity shall establish, organize or conduct a swap meet in the city without first obtaining from the city council a permit to do so. 
(b)  Application for such permit shall be in writing upon such form as may be prescribed by the city and shall be accompanied by the permit fee provided for in section 22-215 of this Code. 
(c)  After the filing of the application, the facts therein stated shall be investigated and presented to the city council. The city council, after considering such application and the investigation and reports thereon, may grant or deny such application for the permit. If the council determines that such permit shall be granted, it shall grant the permit upon the condition that all of the terms and provisions of this article are complied with, that the permit fee and all applicable license fees have been paid, and upon such other conditions as it may fix and impose. Any such permit granted by the council shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation as provided in article III of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.3)  
Sec. 66-139. - Business license required; fee. 
No person or entity shall establish, organize or conduct a swap meet without first obtaining from the city council a permit as required in section 66-138 and a business license as required by article II of chapter 22 of this Code. At the time the application for a permit is filed, an application shall likewise be filed for a business license accompanied by the license fee provided in article II of chapter 22 of this Code. If a permit is not granted, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.4)  
Sec. 66-140. - Permit issuance, restrictions and conditions. 
No swap meet permit shall be issued unless and until: 
(1)  The permittee produces satisfactory evidence to the finance division that a state board of equalization resale number has been obtained so as to ensure the city that all sales occurring at the swap meet will be subject to sales tax and the collection thereof ensured. 
(2)  The applicant produces satisfactory evidence that adequate off-street vehicle parking to accommodate the vehicles of all persons in attendance at the swap meet has been provided as required by the traffic engineer and the planning commission. 
(3)  The days and hours each day when the swap meet may be conducted have been fixed and determined by the city council. 
(4)  Adequate permanent restroom facilities approved by the building department are provided. 
(5)  An adequate number of police or security officers, all at the expense of the swap meet operator, are on duty at all times while the swap meet is in operation to keep the peace and to investigate and check on merchandise which is being displayed and is for sale, barter or exchange. The number of such police or security officers and the hours of duty shall be determined by the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.5)  
Sec. 66-141. - Operating requirements. 
The operator of a swap meet shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The operator shall provide for a daily cleanup of the premises and shall maintain the premises in a good, clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(2)  The premises must be vacated by all exhibitors and all of their merchandise and personal property shall be removed at the close of each day's business. 
(3)  The sale of edible or perishable merchandise shall not be made or had without necessary permits from the health department and in full compliance with all laws relating thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.6)  
Sec. 66-142. - Prohibited sales, trades, exchanges or bartering. 
No person at any swap meet, whether he is the operator or an exhibitor or any other person or entity, shall sell, exchange, display, offer for sale or exchange or barter at any swap meet any of the following items of personal property: 
(1)  Any animal, bird or fowl unless the permit provided for in this article so specifies. 
(2)  Any handgun, rifle, shotgun or other type of firearm by whatever name, or any deadly weapon. 
(3)  Any flammable liquids, including but not limited to gasoline, kerosene, acetone, thinners and solvents; ammunition, blasting agents, liquid petroleum gases or other combustible gases; any type of fireworks, explosives, acids, caustics or oxidizing agents. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.7)  
Sec. 66-143. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the sections of this article, including the filing or causing to be filed of an application for a permit required under this article, containing false or fraudulent misstatements or in perpetrating any other misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any application, sales or exchanges to be made in connection therewith shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any section of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this section. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.8)  
Sec. 66-144. - Article supplemental to state law. 
The requirements and limitations imposed by this article shall be in addition to the requirements of state law as codified in Government Code §§ 21660—21669.1, as amended. 
(Code 1957, § 24A.9)  
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES COLLECTION SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1536, § 2, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed ch. 70 in its entirety. Section 3 of said ordinance enacted a new ch. 70 as herein set out. The former ch. 70, §§ 70-1—70-5, 70-31—70-38, 70-66—70-69, 70-126—70-128, 70-156—70-162, 70-191—70-204, 70-231—70-242, and 70-271—70-275, pertained to solid waste and derived from Code 1957, §§ 11.1—11.16, 11.18—11.39, 11.41—11.58, 11.58.1, 11.59, 11.60, 11.62, and 11.63. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, Public Resources Code § 40059. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Title. 
This chapter is known and may be cited as the "Solid Waste and Recyclables Collection Services Ordinance of the City of San Fernando". 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-2. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of the city council in adopting this chapter to set forth terms and conditions pursuant to which authorization may be granted by the city council to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services and street sweeping services, and to promote the public health, welfare and safety of the community by establishing reasonable regulations relating to the storage, accumulation, collection and processing of solid waste and recyclables, the disposal of solid waste, and street sweeping. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 1551, § 2, 7-6-2004)  
Sec. 70-3. - Defined terms and phrases. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms and phrases as defined in this section shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
Authorized collector shall mean a solid waste enterprise operating under the provisions of a collection agreement approved by the city council. 
Bin shall mean a detachable container used in connection with commercial/industrial premises with a capacity equal to or less than eight cubic yards that is serviced using a front end loading vehicle. 
Box, sometimes known as a "roll-off," "drop" box or "debris" box, means a wheeled or sledded container or compactor, generally ten to 40 cubic yards in size, that is picked up in its entirety by a dedicated truck. 
Bulky waste shall mean oversized or overweight household articles placed curbside by a residential householder, which oversized or overweight household articles have weights, volumes or dimensions which cannot be accommodated by solid waste, recyclables, or green waste containers for residential premises, such as stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, washing machines, furniture, sofas, mattresses, box springs, large rugs and landscaping debris. 
Cart shall mean an industry-standard receptacle for, solid waste, recyclables, or green waste, made of metal, hard rubber or plastic, in a range of sizes of approximately 35, 65 or 95 gallons, with wheels, a handle for case of movement and a tight-fitting, attached lid, designed to be dumped mechanically into a collection vehicle. 
City administrator shall mean the city administrator of the City of San Fernando or his or her designee. 
Collection shall mean the operation of gathering together within the city, and transporting to the point of disposal or processing, any solid waste (including green waste) and recyclables. 
Collection agreement shall mean an agreement between the city and a solid waste enterprise, entered into pursuant to article II of this chapter, for the provision of solid waste and recyclables collection services in the city. 
Collection permit shall mean a permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter, authorizing collection of that solid waste and recyclables not subject to collection by an authorized collector. 
Collector shall mean any solid waste enterprise operating under the provisions of a collection agreement or collection permit. 
Collector fee shall mean the fee paid to the city by a collector pursuant to this chapter. 
Commercial/industrial business owner shall mean any person, holding or occupying, alone or with others, commercial/industrial premises, whether or not it is the holder of the title or the owner of record of the commercial/industrial premises. 
Commercial/industrial premises shall mean all occupied real property in the city, except property occupied by state or local governmental agencies which, pursuant to state or federal law, are exempt from the requirement to utilize the city's authorized collector and except residential premises as defined herein, and shall include, without limitation, wholesale and retail establishments, restaurants and other food establishments, bars, stores, shops, offices, industrial establishments, manufacturing establishments, service stations, repair, research and development establishments, professional, services, sports or recreational facilities, construction and demolition sites, a multi-family residence that is not a residential premises, and any other commercial or industrial business facilities, structures, sites, or establishments in the city. 
Construction and demolition sites shall mean any real property in the city in, on or from which a building or structure is being fabricated, assembled, erected, remodeled or demolished, and which produces construction and demolition waste which must be removed from the property, and requires the use of a bin or box for that purpose. 
Construction and demolition waste shall mean any nonputrescible solid waste generated as the result of construction or demolition, including without limitation, discarded packaging or containers and waste construction materials, whether brought on site for fabrication or used in construction or resulting from demolition, excluding liquid waste, hazardous waste, and medical and infectious waste. 
Container shall mean any bin, box or cart used for the purpose of holding solid waste or recyclables for collection. 
Customer means any person or entity maintaining a service account with a collector for the performance of solid waste and recyclables collection services authorized under this chapter. The term customer is inclusive of persons or entities who are not the owners of the real property parcel or portion thereof to which the service account corresponds and which is receiving the benefit of the solid waste and recyclables collection services provided by the collector. 
Disposal shall mean the complete operation of treating and disposing of solid waste after the collection thereof. 
Disposal site shall have the meaning set forth in Public Resources Code § 40122. 
Green waste shall mean that solid waste consisting of leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic materials generated from landscapes or gardens, separated from other solid waste. 
Hazardous waste shall have the meaning set forth in California Code of Regulations, Title 14, § 17225.32 and Health and Safety Code § 25117, or successor laws and regulations as may be amended from time to time. 
Holiday shall mean: 
(1)  New Year's Day. 
(2)  Memorial Day. 
(3)  Independence Day. 
(4)  Labor Day. 
(5)  Thanksgiving Day. 
(6)  Christmas Day. 
"Holiday" shall also mean any other day recognized by resolution of the city council, or designated in the applicable collection agreement. 
Household hazardous waste shall have the meaning set forth in California Code of Regulations, Title 14 § 18502, or successor laws and regulations as may be amended from time to time. 
Landscaping debris shall mean green waste that does not fit into a standard residential green waste container, and includes stumps or branches exceeding three inches in diameter or three feet in length. 
Manure shall mean the waste droppings from any animal. 
Medical and infectious waste shall mean biomedical waste generated at hospitals, public or private medical clinics, dental offices, research laboratories, pharmaceutical industries, blood banks, mortuaries, veterinary facilities and other similar establishments. 
Mobile home shall have the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code § 18200. 
Mobile home parks means a site at which mobile home spaces are rented for residential use. 
Multi-family residence shall mean any building or structure, including but not limited to mobile home parks, or portion thereof, used for residential purposes having greater than four distinct living units. 
Owner shall mean the person or other legal entity listed on the last equalized assessment roll for the County of Los Angeles as the owner of a lot or parcel of real property within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
Processing shall mean the reduction, separation, recovery and conversion of solid waste. 
Public agency shall mean any governmental agency or department thereof, whether federal, state, or local. 
Recyclables shall mean those materials that are suitable for recycling, as determined by resolution of the city council, or as set forth in a collection agreement. 
Recyclables container shall mean a container which is provided to residential premises for use in collecting and moving recyclables to curbside for collection by the collector, or a container which is provided to commercial/industrial premises for use by the collector in collecting and moving recyclables. 
Recycling shall mean the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. "Recycling" does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code § 40201. 
Residential householder shall mean any person or persons holding or occupying residential premises in the city, whether or not the owner of the residential premises. 
Residential owner shall mean the owner of any residential premises within the city. 
Residential premises shall mean: (i) any building or structure, or portion thereof, that is used for residential housing purposes and has four or fewer distinct living units; and (ii) any multiple unit residential complex which, with the prior written approval of the city administrator, receives standard residential collection service. 
Resource recovery shall mean any use of solid waste collected pursuant to this chapter, except for disposal or transfer for disposal. "Resource recovery" shall include, but is not limited to, transformation, composting, and multi-material recycling. 
Solid waste shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes; discarded home appliances; dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not a hazardous waste; manure, green waste, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes; special wastes; and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. "Solid waste" does not include hazardous waste or medical and infectious waste. 
Solid waste and recyclables collection services shall mean the collection, storage, or transfer of solid waste and recyclables. 
Solid waste container shall mean any container permitted to be used for the purpose of holding solid waste for collection. 
Solid waste enterprise shall mean any individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste and recyclables collection services. 
Special items shall mean any bulky or heavy objects that require bin service and are not bulky waste, including, but not limited to, dirt, sod, brick, manure, waste from any poultry yard or stable, and construction and demolition waste. 
Special wastes include flammable waste; waste transported in a bulk tanker; liquid waste; sewage sludge; pollution control process waste; residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill or release of chemical substances or any other special wastes; contaminated soil, waste, residue, debris and articles from the cleanup of a site or facility formerly used for the generation, storage, treatment, recycling, reclamation, or disposal of any other special wastes; dead animals; waste water; explosive substances; radioactive substances; industrial appliances; and abandoned vehicles and parts thereof. 
Standard commercial/industrial solid waste container shall mean a state-of-the-art bin used in connection with commercial/industrial premises, designed for mechanical pick-up by collection vehicles and equipped with a lid, or where appropriate for the commercial/industrial premises being served, a state-of-the-art box, and shall include other types of containers suitable for the storage and collection of commercial/industrial solid waste if approved in writing by the city administrator. 
Standard residential collection service includes the collection from residential premises units of the following: a single cart of solid waste, up to two carts of recyclables, up to two carts of green waste, used motor oil, universal waste, and up to two bulky item pickups per calendar year. 
Standard residential green waste container shall mean a standardized cart designated for the collection of green waste, having the capacity designated in the applicable collection agreement, and of a design, color and durability as approved by the city administrator. 
Standard residential recycling container shall mean a standardized cart designated for the collection of recyclables, having the capacity designated in the applicable collection agreement, and of a design, color and durability as approved by the city administrator. 
Standard residential solid waste container shall mean a standardized cart designated for the collection of solid waste, having the capacity designated in the applicable collection agreement, and of a design, color and durability as approved by the city administrator. 
Transfer station shall have the meaning set forth in Public Resources Code § 40200. 
Universal waste includes batteries, thermostats, lamps, and cathode ray tubes. "Universal waste" shall have the meaning set forth in California Code of Regulations, Title 22 § 66273.9, or successor laws and regulations as may be amended from time to time. 
Used motor oil means motor oil that has been drained from noncommercial vehicles by residential householders. 
Vacant property shall mean real property that is not occupied by any person for a period of 30 days or more. 
Wheel out service shall mean the act of retrieving the solid waste, recyclables, and green waste carts from the side of residential premises, moving them to the curb for collection, and returning them to their original location. 
Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude the city and any collector from incorporating into any collection agreement definitions relating to their respective contractual rights and obligations, which may differ from or augment those set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 1655, §§ 2, 3, 5-16-2016)  
Secs. 70-4—70-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AGREEMENTS; COLLECTION PERMITS 
 
Sec. 70-11. - Authorization of collection agreement by city council. 
(a)  The city council may authorize, by contract, one or more solid waste enterprises to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services for residential and commercial/industrial users or customers. In the sole discretion of the city council, the solid waste and recyclables collection services may be authorized on an exclusive or nonexclusive basis, and with or without competitive bidding, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste within all or any part of the territory of the city. 
(b)  No person shall collect or dispose of solid waste or recyclables in the city unless that person has entered into a collection agreement with the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, and irrespective of any permit issued by any other governmental agency authorizing collection of solid waste or recyclables. Any such collection agreement shall be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by this Code. Collectors operating in the city on the effective date of this chapter under a permit or a nonexclusive collection agreement may continue to operate only until the rights thereunder are terminated or revoked, or until such rights expire pursuant to the provisions of Public Resources Code § 49520. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-12. - Contents. 
The terms and provisions of any collection agreement for solid waste and recyclables collection services may relate to or include, without limitation, the following subject matters: 
(1)  The nature, scope and duration of the agreement. 
(2)  The collection schedule, including the frequency, days and hours of collection. 
(3)  The applicable collector fee, including the amount, method of computation, and time for payment. 
(4)  The applicable rates, fees and charges for regular, special and emergency collection services, including the method of setting and adjusting same, and the responsibility for billing and collecting same. 
(5)  Collection vehicles, including the permissible size and color, and any required identification, safety equipment, maintenance, inspection, and operational requirements. 
(6)  The receipt, processing and reporting of customer inquiries and complaints. 
(7)  The collection of solid waste from publicly-owned property and facilities. 
(8)  Performance standards for the collector's personnel and equipment. 
(9)  Standards for solid waste, recyclables, and green waste containers, including size, repair or replacement, handling, placement, obligations of the collector to provide, and permissible charges therefor. 
(10)  Standards and procedures for periodic performance reviews by the city. 
(11)  Noise attenuation policies and procedures. 
(12)  The maintenance by the collector of an office for the conduct of business. 
(13)  Policies and procedures relating to the noncollection of solid waste, the collection of recyclables, the composting of green waste and resource recovery. 
(14)  Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance and workers' compensation insurance. 
(15)  Requirements relating to the dissemination of information to the public concerning regular and special solid waste and recyclables collection services, including green waste services. 
(16)  Actions or omissions constituting breaches or defaults, and the imposition of applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies, including suspension, revocation or termination. 
(17)  Requirements relating to performance bonds and to indemnification. 
(18)  Requirements relating to record keeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of records. 
(19)  Requirements relating to the assignment, transfer and renewal of the agreement. 
(20)  Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules or regulations pertaining to solid waste and recyclables collection services, and to the implementation of state-mandated programs, including, without limitation, the city's "source reduction and recycling element" and the city's "household hazardous waste element." 
(21)  Such additional requirements, conditions, policies and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the collection agreement and which will, in the judgment and discretion of the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-13. - Collector fee. 
Each collector with a collection agreement or collection permit shall pay a collector fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council or, in the case of an authorized collector, in the amount set forth in the applicable collection agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-14. - Resolution of conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of a collection agreement that is authorized and approved by the city council and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the collection agreement shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-15. - Collection permit. 
Notwithstanding section 70-11, the city may issue a collection permit to one or more solid waste enterprises, authorizing collection of such solid waste and recyclables as are not limited to collection by an authorized collector, including but not limited to special wastes. Any such collection permit shall be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-16. - Permits and licenses. 
Every collector shall obtain and maintain at all times during the collector's operations a business license issued by the city, and all applicable permits and licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-17. - Transfer of permit or collection agreement. 
No permit or collection agreement which is authorized by, subject to, or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred, delegated, sublet, subcontracted to or assigned to another person without the prior approval of the city council, except as otherwise expressly set forth in a collection agreement. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership or the majority of the ownership or control in the collector, and the transfer of 30 percent or more of stock in a collector to another person. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-18. - Revocation of permit or collection agreement. 
After a hearing as provided in this chapter, the city administrator may revoke or suspend any collection permit or collection agreement for violation of a provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation of any public agency or for breach of a collection agreement as defined in any such agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-19. - Suspension of permit or collection agreement. 
The city administrator, without a hearing, may suspend a collection agreement or a collection permit for not more than 60 days, if the city administrator finds that continued operation by the collector will constitute a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or in the case of an authorized collector, is in violation of the collection agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-20. - Notice of hearing; revocation. 
The city clerk shall give written notice of a hearing before the city administrator to consider revocation of a collection permit or collection agreement to the collector, including the reasons therefor, not less than 15 days prior to such hearing. If the collection agreement or collection permit is revoked, the city clerk shall notify the collector in writing of the reasons therefor, within five days after the revocation. Notification may be delivered in person or by mail. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-21. - Appeals. 
Within seven calendar days after written notice by the city of revocation of a collection permit or collection agreement has been sent to the collector, the collector may file with the city clerk an appeal of such decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-22. - Council action. 
The city council may either affirm the action of the city administrator, send the matter back to the city administrator for further consideration, or set the matter for hearing by the city council. If the city council sets the matter for hearing, it shall base its action upon the standards delineated in this article. The city clerk shall send notice of such hearing to the collector not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. Notification may be delivered in person or by mail. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 70-23—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RATES 
 
Sec. 70-31. - Rates, fees, and charges. 
The city council may, by resolution or an approved collection agreement, place a limit on the rates, fees, and charges (collectively, "fees") collectors may charge to residential owners and to commercial/industrial business owners for the collection of solid waste and recyclables. No collector shall charge any fee that is greater than the maximum permitted by the city council, unless otherwise authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-32. - Billing and collection of fees. 
The billing and collection of the fees imposed by the collectors for solid waste and recyclables collection services shall be the responsibility of the collector, and the city shall have no liability or responsibility therefor. Every commercial/industrial business owner and residential owner shall pay the collector the applicable fees for collection services rendered pursuant to this chapter. The foregoing notwithstanding, the city council, in its sole and absolute discretion, reserves the right, but does not assume the obligation, to avail the city of the provisions and procedures of Health and Safety Code Sections 5473 and 5473a relating to the collection of delinquent solid waste service charges on the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 1655, § 4, 5-16-2016)  
Sec. 70-33. - Rates, billing, and collection of fees for standard residential collection service. 
(a)  Rate for standard residential collection service. Notwithstanding sections 70-31 and 70-32, the rate for standard residential collection service shall be $16.45 per month. A "lifeline" rate of $13.98, being a 15 percent reduction in the standard monthly residential charge, shall be available for any dwelling unit receiving standard residential collection service in which the household combined adjusted gross income (as used for purposes of the state personal income tax law) of all members of the household, for the prior calendar year, complies with the income limits as published by the state department of housing and community development in Title 25, Sec. 6932, California Code of Regulations, Los Angeles County, for very low income. The city administrator shall establish procedures for implementing the lifeline rate. 
(b)  Annual rate adjustment. On July 1, 2004 and on July 1 of each year thereafter, the rates imposed under subsection (a) of this section 70-33 shall automatically increase by the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside (1982-84 equals 100) as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (Index), rounded to the nearest cent. The increases shall be cumulative. In determining the percentage increase, the index for the month of May immediately preceding the adjustment date shall be compared with the index for the like month of the previous year. In no event, however, shall the rates imposed be adjusted downward to reflect a percentage decrease in the index. 
(c)  Collection of delinquent charges. 
(1)  Pursuant to, and to the extent authorized by, Health and Safety Code Sections 5473 and 5473a, the city may collect delinquent fees or charges for solid waste and recyclables collection services incurred by a customer on the tax roll for collection by the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. 
(2)  The owner of any real property parcel or portion thereof located within the city and a customer whose service account provides for the performance of solid waste and recyclables collection services at the subject real property parcel are jointly and severally liable for the payment of all fees and charges imposed by the collector for the performance of such services. Owners and customers shall also be liable for compliance with all provisions of this chapter as relates to the subject real property parcel or portion thereof receiving solid waste and recyclables collection services. 
(3)  A solid waste and recyclables collection services bill lawfully issued by a collector to a customer shall be considered past due if not paid by a customer within 30 calendar days from the date payment is due or such longer grace period as may be authorized by written agreement between the customer and the collector. If such a bill becomes past due, the collector shall be required to issue notice to the customer that the bill is delinquent. If the bill is not paid in full within 30 calendar days from the date the service bill is deemed past due, the collector shall issue a second notice of delinquency to the customer and shall also send a copy of the second notice of delinquency to the owner, if different from the customer. Each delinquency notice shall include the following information at a minimum: 
a.  A statement advising the customer that the service bill is past due; 
b.  Information as to the service period to which the past due sums relate; and 
c.  Information as to where the customer may remit any and all past due sums; 
d.  Information as to the proper procedures for disputing any sums set forth in a service bill; and 
e.  Notice in bold print and capital letters that the matter will be submitted to the city for collection pursuant to the tax lien procedures established under this section, if the bill is not paid within 30 calendar days from the date a second notice of delinquency is dated. 
No later than the close of business on May 1 of each calendar year, a Collector may submit to the city a schedule of all unpaid delinquent billings from May 1 of the preceding year to May 1 of the present year accompanied by the corresponding parcel number for the real property parcel or portion thereof in question, as established or otherwise utilized by the Los Angeles County Assessor. The schedule shall also state the amount due for each delinquent customer account for inclusion of said amount upon the property tax roll for collection by the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. No delinquent billing shall be eligible for submission to the city on or before the 30th calendar day following the issuance of the collector's second past due billing notice. No delinquent billing shall remain eligible for submission to the city after one year from the date the delinquent billing first becomes eligible for submission to the city. 
(4)  In addition to any other requirements set forth under Health and Safety Code Sections 5473 and 5473a, the city shall adhere to the following procedures before submitting delinquent fees and charges to the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office for placement on the tax roll: 
a.  The city will fix a time, date and place for a public hearing regarding the report of delinquencies submitted by the collector and any objections and protests to the report. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the owner of every real property parcel listed on the report not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, city shall hear any objections or protests of owners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees or charges. The city may make revisions or corrections to the report as it deems appropriate, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
b.  The delinquent fees and charges set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the real property parcels listed in the report and are a lien on said real property for the amount of the delinquent fees and charges. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective real property parcel as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the Los Angeles County Recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary ad valorem property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for those taxes. 
c.  City shall remit to the collector amounts collected pursuant to this process within 30 days of receipt from the Los Angeles County Assessor, less any outstanding sums owed by the collector to the city. In order to reimburse the city for any and all administrative costs associated with placing delinquent fees and charges on the tax roll and except as otherwise provided in any collection agreement between the city and a collector, the city may deduct from the sums remitted by the Los Angeles County Assessor for a given tax year an amount equal to the lesser of the following: (a) the city's actual costs incurred to undertake the placement delinquent fees and charges on the tax roll, including but not limited to any and all fees or charges imposed by the Los Angeles County Assessor associated with the placement of the delinquent fees or charges on the tax roll as well as costs associated with all publication and noticing efforts; or (b) five percent of the total delinquent sums placed on the tax roll on behalf of an individual collector. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 1655, § 5, 5-16-2016)  
Sec. 70-34. - NPDES/street sweeping fee. 
A monthly NPDES/street sweeping fee is levied upon every commercial/industrial business owner and residential householder in the city for street sweeping services. The NPDES/street sweeping fee shall be apportioned among and collected from solid waste customers in an amount and manner determined by the city council by resolution. This fee shall be in addition to any fees paid by customers under sections 70-32 and 70-33 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1551, § 3, 7-6-2004)  
Secs. 70-35—70-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 70-41. - Generally. 
No person may operate any vehicle for the collection of solid waste or recyclables other than a collector who has a valid business license and a collection agreement or collection permit and who has paid all required license, collection agreement, permit or other city charges. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-42. - Vehicle standards. 
Any vehicle utilized for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste or recyclables shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Each vehicle shall be constructed and used so that no solid waste, recyclables, oil, grease, or other substance will blow, fall or leak out of the vehicle. 
(2)  A broom and shovel shall be carried on each vehicle at all times. 
(3)  Each vehicle shall comply with all applicable statutes, laws, or ordinances of any public agency. 
(4)  Each vehicle must be under seven years of age unless specifically authorized in writing by the city. 
(5)  Routine bi-annual inspections by the California Highway Patrol shall be conducted and certificates for the inspection shall be filed with the city. 
(6)  All vehicles shall at all times be kept clean and sanitary, in good repair and well and uniformly painted to the satisfaction of the city. 
(7)  Each vehicle shall be equipped with watertight bodies fitted with close-fitting metal covers. 
(8)  The collector's name or firm name and telephone number shall be printed or painted in legible letters not less than five inches in height in plain sight on both sides of all of collector's vehicles used in the city. 
(9)  High intensity fog lamps shall be maintained on any vehicle 80 inches or wider, which shall consist of two red tail lamps in addition to the standard tail lamps. All equipment shall be maintained at all times in a manner to prevent unnecessary noise during its operation. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-43. - Operation of equipment. 
All persons operating equipment for the collection or transportation of solid waste or recyclables shall do so in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and ordinances. Such vehicles shall not be operated in a manner which results in undue interference with normal traffic flows. No such vehicle shall be parked or left unattended on the public streets. No such vehicle shall be parked overnight on a public street or thoroughfare in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-44. - Compliance with vehicle standards. 
Any vehicle used in the collection or transportation of solid waste or recyclables in the city shall, at all times, be maintained in accordance with all the standards set forth in this chapter unless expressly waived or altered by the city administrator (in writing), or if the collection agreement so provides. The use of a vehicle which fails to comply with each of the standards set forth in this chapter is prohibited. A collector shall immediately remove any vehicle from collection service which fails, at any time, to conform to any of the standards recited in this chapter and shall not use that vehicle until it is repaired. Should the city give notification at any time to a collector that any of the collector's vehicles are not in compliance with the standards of this chapter, the collector shall immediately remove the vehicle from service. The vehicle shall not again be utilized in the city until it has been inspected and approved by the city. The collector shall maintain its regular collection schedule regardless of the repair of any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 70-45—70-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EXCLUSIONS 
 
Sec. 70-51. - Residential householder exclusion. 
No provision of this chapter shall prevent residential householders from collecting and disposing of occasional loads of solid waste generated in or on their residential premises, or from composting green waste, or from selling or disposing of recyclables generated in or on their residential premises. No residential householder, however, shall employ or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than the authorized collector, to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-52. - Gardener's exclusion. 
No provisions of this chapter shall prevent a gardener, tree trimmer or person engaged in a similar trade from collecting and disposing of grass cuttings, prunings, and similar material not containing other solid waste when incidental to providing such gardening, tree trimming, or similar services. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-53. - Commercial/industrial exclusions. 
(a)  Source separated recyclables. 
(1)  No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from selling to a buyer (whether such buyer is a recycler, junk dealer, or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce, for a monetary or other valuable consideration), or from donating to a charitable organization, any source separated recyclables, including without limitation, any saleable scrap, discard, reject, by-product, ferrous or non-ferrous metal, worn-out or defective part, junk, pallet, packaging material, paper or other similar item generated in, on or by a commercial/industrial premises or business, and no longer useful to such commercial/industrial business. source separated recyclables within the meaning of this section shall mean recyclables separated on the commercial/industrial premises from solid waste for the purpose of sale, not mixed with or containing more than incidental or minimal solid waste, and having a market value. No such materials may be transported for disposition to a disposal site or transfer station. 
(2)  No provision of this chapter shall prevent a recycler, junk dealer or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce, and which is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste or providing solid waste collection services for a fee or other charge or consideration, from buying any materials referenced in this subsection (a) for a monetary or other valuable consideration, and removing and transporting such materials to a destination for marketing (but not for disposition in a disposal site or transfer station. No such buyer shall buy or transport such materials without prior authorization from the city, as required by this Code, whether in the form of a business license, a business permit, or a collection permit. 
(b)  In-house recycling programs. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business which has its own recycling or resource recovery program for recyclables generated by such business and not utilizing a solid waste enterprise which provides collection services for a fee, service charge, or other consideration, from continuing such recycling or resource recovery program, and the recyclables included in such program are excepted from any collection agreement entered into by the city. 
(c)  Renovation, rebuilding, repairs. No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from arranging for any worn, spent, or defective equipment, or part thereof, used in such commercial/industrial business and requiring renovation, rebuilding, recharging, regeneration or repair, to be picked up, renovated, rebuilt, recharged, regenerated or otherwise restored and repaired and returned to such commercial/industrial business owner. Nor shall any provision of this chapter prevent any person engaged in the business of renovating, rebuilding, recharging, regenerating, or otherwise restoring or repairing such equipment or part thereof, from transporting the same from or returning it to the commercial/industrial business, or from removing, transporting or disposing of any such equipment, or part thereof, replaced in connection with an equipment repair or service contract. 
(d)  Occasional loads of solid waste. No provision of this chapter shall prevent commercial/industrial business owners from collecting and disposing of occasional loads of solid waste generated in or on their commercial/industrial premises. No commercial/industrial business owner, however, shall employ or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than the authorized collector, to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or disposal site. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-54. - Contractors' exclusions. 
No provision of this chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor having a contract for the demolition or reconstruction of a building, structure, pavement, or concrete installation from marketing any saleable items salvaged from such demolition or reconstruction, or from causing such salvageable items or construction and demolition waste to be removed and transported from the premises on which such waste is generated, pursuant to the provisions of the demolition or construction contract. If a subcontractor is to be engaged to remove such construction and demolition waste, the subcontractor must be a collector. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-55. - Document destruction service. 
No provision of this chapter shall prevent any person engaged in the business of destroying or disposing of secret, confidential, or sensitive documents from transporting or disposing of such documents by shredding, lumping, incinerating, or other means, as a part of such document destruction or disposal service. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-56. - Self-haul exclusion. 
In addition to the authority granted by sections 70-51 and 70-53(d), nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner or residential householder from, on a regular basis, collecting and disposing of solid waste generated in or on their premises, in lieu of availing themselves of the services of the authorized collector. No residential householder or commercial/industrial business owner shall employ or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than an authorized collector, to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or disposal site. any residential householder or commercial/industrial business owner who, pursuant to this section seeks to on a regular basis collect and dispose of solid waste generated in or on their premises, must first obtain a self-haul permit from the city, and must comply with procedures for self-hauling to be adopted by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-57. - General requirements applicable to exclusions. 
In all cases where the right to an exclusion pursuant to sections 70-51 through 70-56 of this chapter is exercised, disposal (to the extent permitted by the applicable exclusion) shall be made at a disposal or processing facility, which meets all applicable regulatory requirements. Disposal by a person exempted under this chapter shall not relieve such person from any obligation or liability imposed by this chapter or any other city ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation for the payment of the minimum solid waste and recyclables collection fees, if any, except as set forth in the next sentence. notwithstanding the foregoing, the following shall be exempt from the payment of the rate for standard residential collection service: (a) any person with a valid self-haul permit obtained pursuant to section 70-56 who does not use the solid waste and recyclables collection services offered by the authorized collector; and (b) any owner of vacant property who does not use the solid waste and recyclables collection services offered by the authorized collector, for the period of time the property is vacant. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 70-58—70-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 70-71. - Mandatory service. 
(a)  All solid waste and recyclables collected from residential or commercial/industrial premises for a fee, service charge or other consideration, shall be collected by an authorized collector, subject to the exclusions set forth in article V of this chapter, and the limited rights granted collectors with collection permits pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  No person, other than an authorized collector, shall negotiate or contract for, undertake to receive, collect or transport solid waste or recyclables from within the city for a fee, service charge or other consideration therefor, except as expressly provided herein. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each residential householder and commercial/industrial business owner shall utilize the services of the authorized collector for the collection of solid waste and recyclables from the residential or commercial/industrial premises held or occupied by such householder or owner and shall pay for such services the fees set by the collector and authorized by the city council or, as applicable, the fees set forth in section 70-33. No residential householder or commercial/industrial business owner shall enter into an agreement for solid waste and recyclables collection services with any person other than the authorized collector, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-72. - Litter. 
(a)  Any person who deposits or causes to be deposited any solid waste or recyclables on any public property, including the public right-of-way, or on private property within public view, except in a container provided therefor as herein specified, shall immediately clean up, contain, collect and remove same. 
(b)  To facilitate proper disposal of litter by pedestrians and motorists, publicly patronized establishments and institutions shall provide, empty and maintain adequate containers for public deposit of solid waste and recyclables generated by the public as a result of the patronization of such establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-73. - Transporting loose solid waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any loose solid waste by motor vehicle unless the cargo is covered and/or secured in such a manner as to prevent depositing of solid waste on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-74. - Transfer of loads on public streets. 
No person shall transfer solid waste or recyclables from one collection vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is essential to the method of operation and is approved by the city, or is necessary owing to mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-75. - Unauthorized removal from (anti-scavenging), or disposal in, containers. 
(a)  No person other than the authorized collector shall tamper with or remove any solid waste or recyclables from a container, other than the owner or occupant of the property served by such container, or an authorized employee of the city. 
(b)  Subject to any exclusions set forth in article V of this chapter, no person shall deposit solid waste from a residential or commercial/industrial premises in any place other than in an approved container located on the premises which generated the solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-76. - Hours of collection. 
No collection or delivery/removal of containers shall be made between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday. The city administrator may waive the requirements of this section when necessitated by conditions beyond the control of the collector. The city administrator may require a collector to change hours of operation if disruption occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-77. - Resource recovery. 
Every collector shall, at all times, comply with city policies and programs with regard to solid waste recovery, reduction of solid waste, and recycling. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-78. - Ownership. 
At such time as the solid waste or recyclables are placed for collection at the usual place of collection, the solid waste and recyclables become the property of the authorized collector. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-79. - No burning, burial, or dumping of solid waste or recyclables. 
It shall be unlawful at any time for any person, including collectors, to burn, bury, dump or otherwise dispose of any solid waste or recyclables within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-80. - Trespass. 
No person authorized to collect or transport solid waste or recyclables shall enter on private property beyond the extent necessary to collect the solid waste or recyclables properly placed for collection, or beyond the extent necessary to provide any agreed upon special collection service. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-81. - Required monthly reports. 
Each collector shall provide the city with monthly reports, to the extent required by the applicable collection agreement or collection permit, or otherwise required by resolution of the city council. An officer of the collector shall sign each report. Each collector shall maintain, but is not required to submit monthly: copies of waste disposal and recycling facility weight tickets/invoices which indicate the net amount of all waste disposed, transferred and/or recycled during each month that collection services are provided; and an updated revised collection service identification list. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-82. - Annual report. 
Every collector shall furnish an annual report to the city detailing the quantity and nature of all solid waste or recyclables removed from the city. Reports shall be delivered to the city on or before January 31 of each year, for the immediately preceding calendar year. This report shall also include permitted waste disposal or processing facilities where the collector has disposed and/or transferred all solid waste removed from the city. This report is to also include a compilation of monthly tonnage reports and/or copies of tipping receipts. The report shall include a customer service identification list which identifies the name and address of each customer receiving collection service from the collector. The timely filing of a complete annual report is a condition of any collection permit or collection agreement awarded by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-83. - Workers' compensation insurance. 
Each collector shall at all times provide, at its own expense, workers' compensation insurance coverage for all employees. Each collector shall file and maintain certificates with the city administrator showing the insurance to be in full force and effect at all times the collector has a collection permit. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-84. - Collector's liability insurance. 
Each collector shall furnish the city a policy or certificate of comprehensive general and automobile liability insurance insuring the collector against bodily injury, property damage and automobile liability in amounts approved by the city council. The insurance shall provide that the coverage is primary and that any insurance maintained by the city shall be excess insurance, shall be procured from an insurer authorized to do business in the State of California, shall name the city and its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds and shall not be canceled or modified without first giving to city 30 days prior written notice. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-85. - City to be free from liability. 
Any collector or person who collects, transports, or disposes of solid waste or recyclables within the city shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees, and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, obligations, liabilities, damages, recoveries, and deficiencies, including interest, penalties and reasonable attorneys fees, that the city shall incur or suffer, which arise, result from or relate to the collection, transportation, or disposal of solid waste or recyclables by that person. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-86. - Building contractors to maintain area. 
All owners, contractors, builders and demolition contractors shall, at all times, maintain the construction or demolition site and any nearby premises utilized in the construction or demolition in a clean, safe and aesthetic manner and free of any solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-87. - Accumulation of solid waste prohibited; declared nuisance. 
The accumulation of solid waste by any person beyond the period of one week or in any manner other than as specified in this chapter is prohibited, and is hereby declared to be a nuisance pursuant to Government Code § 38771. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-88. - Unauthorized receptacles. 
Except to the limited extent set forth in section 70-102, no cardboard box or paper or plastic bag may be used as a receptacle for solid waste or recyclables. Except as expressly authorized by this chapter, no person other than an authorized collector may place a container or other receptacle for the collection of solid waste or recyclables within the city. Any container or other receptacle placed in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and is subject to abatement pursuant to applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-89. - Interference with collection. 
No person shall, in any manner, interfere with the collection and disposal of solid waste or recyclables by any person authorized by the city to perform collection or disposal of such solid waste or recyclables. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 70-90—70-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE, RECYCLING, AND GREEN WASTE COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 70-100. - Disposal. 
All solid waste collected by a collector shall be disposed of by the collector in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and the controlling collection permit or collection agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-101. - Frequency. 
Unless otherwise approved by the city council, collection of solid waste and recyclables shall take place no less than once each calendar week, on the same day of the week. The authorized collector shall collect all solid waste and recyclables placed for collection in compliance with this chapter from each residential premises in accordance with a schedule that has been approved by the city. The schedule shall identify the routes and days of pick up for each collection district established within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-102. - Containers. 
Subject to the prior approval of the city, and to the terms and conditions of the collection agreement, the authorized collector shall provide standard residential solid waste, recyclables, and green waste containers to each residential householder. No cardboard box, paper or plastic bag, or other similarly fragile container may be used as a container for solid waste, recyclables, or green waste. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, upon the commencement of automated or semi-automated collection in the city only containers provided by the authorized collector may be used for residential solid waste, recyclables, or green waste. Notwithstanding the forgoing, if the containers provided by the authorized collector are full to capacity, the residential householder with standard residential collection service may also set out additional amounts of solid waste, green waste or recyclables if they are: (a) placed adjacent to the containers; (b) securely contained in bags or in a bundle; and (c) do not collectively exceed 60 pounds in weight. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-103. - Placement and removal of containers. 
Every residential householder shall place each solid waste, recyclables, and green waste container for collection at the curb in front of the premises, or at the curb at the side of the premises where the premises are adjacent to more than one street. No person shall place any such container for collection earlier than sunset of the day preceding the day designated for collection, and all containers and receptacles shall be removed from the place of collection prior to 10:00 p.m. of the day the containers have been emptied. Such containers shall be removed to a storage location, which is not visible from any public right-of-way, excluding alleys. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-104. - Care of containers. 
Upon collection, all solid waste, recyclables, and green waste containers shall be replaced in an upright position, at the location where found by the collector. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-105. - Special collection services. 
The authorized collector shall provide, upon request from a residential householder, special collection of solid waste and collection of special items at such rates as may be established by the authorized collector and authorized by the city and at such times as may be agreed upon by the authorized collector and the person requesting the service. If no agreement is reached, such special collections shall be provided as determined by the city. Such special collection may include any service beyond that required by this chapter or the applicable collection agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-106. - Collection of special items. 
Any residential householder receiving temporary service for collection of special items shall obtain an encroachment permit from the city prior to having any container for special items placed in a public right-of-way. Proof of such encroachment permit shall be provided to any collector prior to receipt of the special items container. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Secs. 70-107—70-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 70-120. - Disposal and status of solid waste. 
The authorized collector shall collect and dispose of all solid waste generated and presented for collection at each commercial/industrial premises in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any such collection and disposal shall be in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations and any controlling collection permit or collection agreement between the collector and the city. All solid waste collected by a collector shall be the exclusive property of the collector. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-121. - Frequency of collection. 
The authorized collector shall collect solid waste from commercial/industrial premises not less than once per week. in no event shall such collection schedule permit the accumulation of solid waste in quantities detrimental to public health or safety. Frequency of collection and size or number of containers may be adjusted by the city if necessary to maintain public health. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-122. - Containers. 
(a)  Every commercial/industrial business served by an authorized collector shall use the standard commercial/industrial solid waste and recyclables container or containers or, with the prior written approval of the city administrator, standard residential containers, both as provided by the authorized collector. 
(b)  Every collector which provides any container or other equipment used for the storage of commercial/industrial solid waste shall: 
(1)  Place and maintain on the outside of such container, bin or other equipment, in legible letters and numerals not less than one inch in height, the collector's business name and telephone number, in a color contrasting with the background color of the container; and 
(2)  Provide containers on wheels or skids or with hasps and locks upon request by the commercial/industrial business owner. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-123. - Maintenance and placement of containers. 
Solid waste and recyclables containers provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition by the collector. Containers which are not provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition by the commercial/industrial business owner. Every commercial/industrial business owner shall provide a solid waste container location on the commercial/industrial premises and shall keep the area in good repair, clean and free of solid waste outside of the container. Every collector shall remove any solid waste or litter that is spilled or deposited on the ground as a result of the collector's emptying of the container or other activities of the collector. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-124. - Care of containers. 
Upon collection of solid waste and recyclables by the collector, all containers shall be replaced, upright, where found, with the lids closed. No person, other than the owner thereof, shall in any manner, break, damage, roughly handle or destroy containers placed on the premises of a commercial/industrial business owner. Any container which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting the contents thereof, or the public generally, shall be replaced promptly by the commercial/industrial business owner or, if provided by a collector, by the collector. Failure to replace any such container within five days of written notification from the city shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-125. - Special circumstances. 
If particular commercial/industrial premises require collections at times, frequencies or in a manner such that the collector is unable to perform the collection in the normal course of business, or where unusual quantities of solid waste or special types of material are to be collected and disposed of, or where special methods of handling are required, or where the quantity of solid waste requires the use of multiple (more than three) containers, the collector and the commercial/industrial business owner may make arrangements for such collection on mutually agreeable terms. If the business owner and the collector do not agree as to the methods for the service provided for in this section, the city shall determine the method of service. If the collector is unable or unwilling to provide such service, the city may authorize the business owner to use another solid waste enterprise for such special service until the collector can provide such service in its normal course of business. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Sec. 70-126. - New commercial/industrial buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued for construction of any commercial/industrial building, including but not limited to multi-family residences, until the adequacy, location and accessibility of solid waste containers has been approved by the city. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the premises until the planning department has approved these facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1536, § 3, 10-21-2002)  
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening or closing streets or establishing the grades thereof saved from repeal, § 1-18(8); deposit of handbills on public property, § 6-32; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; schedule for carnivals, § 22-116; schedule for peddlers, § 22-150; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 54; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 58; peddlers, § 58-26 et seq.; street artists, craftsmen and streetside food purveyors and flower vendors, § 58-91 et seq.; planning, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 78; telecommunications, ch. 86; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90; driving on sidewalk, § 90-161; parking on narrow streets, § 90-203; on-street parking, § 90-421; off-street parking in city facilities, § 90-422; parking in private off-street parking facilities, § 90-423; pedestrians, § 90-526 et seq.; operation of bicycles upon sidewalks, § 90-777; schedules for one-way streets, § 90-943; schedules for through streets, § 90-945; streets to be used by commercial vehicles, § 90-953; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98; trees, shrubs and plants on public property, § 98-26 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 102; zoning, ch. 106. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 74-1 which pertained to violations and derived from Code 1957, § 23.123.  
Sec. 74-2. - Travel on street where street work is in progress; barricades, signs or red lights. 
It shall be unlawful to ride or drive or to cause to be ridden or driven any animal or to ride, drive or propel or to cause to be ridden, driven or propelled any vehicle or to walk or go upon or across any portion of any public street or sidewalk where street work is in progress and where there is a barrier or barricade to prevent traveling upon such portion of such public street or sidewalk or at or near which there is a sign stating that the street is closed or where red lights are maintained to indicate that such street is closed. 
(Code 1957, § 23.4)  
Sec. 74-3. - Travel on new pavement, sidewalks or concrete with barricades, signs or red lights. 
It shall be unlawful to ride or drive or to cause to be ridden or driven any animal or to ride, drive or propel or to cause to be ridden, driven or propelled any vehicle or to walk or go upon, over or across any newly made pavement or newly made sidewalk or newly made concrete or cement work in any public street, alley or place where there is a barrier or barricade to prevent traveling upon such portion of such public street or pavement or upon such sidewalk or upon such concrete or cement work or at or near which there is a sign stating that such street is closed or where red lights are maintained to indicate that such street is closed. 
(Code 1957, § 23.5)  
Sec. 74-4. - Unlawful removal or destruction of barricades or red lights. 
It shall be unlawful to injure, destroy or remove any such barriers, barricades or red lights as are mentioned in sections 74-2 and 74-3, except under orders of the persons having such street work in charge. 
(Code 1957, § 23.6)  
Sec. 74-5. - Unlawful deposits generally. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit or to cause or permit to be deposited or to throw or place in or upon any public street or other public place in the city any filthy water; any sweepings from any store or house; any dead animal or part thereof; any offal, manure, or rubbish; or any decaying or putrid matter or substance of any kind. 
(Code 1957, § 23.7)  
Sec. 74-6. - Deposit of petroleum products. 
It shall be unlawful to pour, spill or permit to drop or to cause or permit to be deposited, placed or discharged upon any asphalt or bituminous pavement laid upon any public street, alley or place in the city any gasoline, distillate, petroleum, oil, naphtha, or any petroleum products of any kind or any other injurious substances likely to injure or cause the disintegration of any such asphalt or bituminous pavement. 
(Code 1957, § 23.8)  
Sec. 74-7. - Material falling from vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person while removing or hauling dirt, crushed rock, sand, gravel or other similar substances or any garbage or rubbish of any kind not to replace immediately in such vehicle any such material that may have fallen therefrom in or upon any public street, avenue, alley or public place in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 23.9)  
Sec. 74-8. - Windborne matter. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful to place, throw or deposit or to cause or direct to be placed, thrown or deposited any loose paper or rubbish of any kind upon or adjacent to any public street, alley or public place in the city in such manner that it is afterwards blown into or upon any such public street, alley or public place of the city or into or upon any premises or vacant lot therein other than that of the premises upon which it was so placed or in such manner that it becomes scattered about any such public street, alley or public place. 
(b)  Printed matter. It shall be unlawful for any conductor or motorman or other person to throw, leave or deposit any newspapers or packages of newspapers or printed matter of any kind upon any right-of-way or premises of any railway company or other place, without delivering it into the immediate custody of some person, so that it afterwards becomes loose or scattered or blown about any public street, alley or public place in the city or becomes loose or scattered or blown about any premises or vacant lots other than that of the premises upon which it was placed. 
(Code 1957, §§ 23.10, 23.11)  
Sec. 74-9. - Depth of underground installations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or to cause or permit to be installed any service pipe or main pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure, except manholes, culverts and catchbasins, in any public street, alley or other public place at a distance of less than two feet below the established grade of the gutter of such public street or alley or less than two feet below the surface of such other public place. 
(Code 1957, § 23.12)  
Sec. 74-10. - Maps of underground installations. 
(a)  Required. It is made the duty of every person using, controlling or having an interest in pipes, poles, conduits, ducts or tunnels under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, for supplying or conveying gas, electricity, water, steam, ammonia or oil in, to or from the city or to or from its inhabitants, or for any other purpose, within 30 days after January 1 of each and every year, to file in the office of the city engineer a corrected map or set of maps. Each map shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 200 feet to one inch and shall show in detail the exact location, size, description and date of installation, if known, of all mains, laterals, services and service pipes and of all valves, pressure regulators, drips, manholes, handholes, transformers, chambers or other appliances installed beneath the surface of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places in the city belonging to, used by or under control of such person, in which such person has any interest, including all installations made during the previous year to and including the last day of such year. Each map shall be accompanied by an affidavit endorsed thereon, subscribed and sworn to by such person or by a member of such firm or by the president or secretary if a corporation to the effect that the map correctly exhibits the details required by this section. 
(b)  Abandoned installations. Each map or set of maps filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall show in detail the location of all such pipes, conduits, ducts, tunnels or other structures abandoned subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps. 
(Code 1957, §§ 23.13, 23.14)  
Sec. 74-11. - Statements as to abandoned underground installations. 
Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located under the surface of any public street, alley or other public place or the use thereof is abandoned, the person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file in the office of the city engineer a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure so abandoned. 
(Code 1957, § 23.15)  
Secs. 74-12—74-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS AND SIMILAR PASSAGES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-41. - Work specifications. 
All work done under this article shall conform to the specifications adopted by the council, copies of which specifications are on file in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 23.21)  
Sec. 74-42. - Notice to complete work generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person destroying or removing or causing to be destroyed or removed any curb, gutter or sidewalk to fail, refuse or neglect, for a period of 30 days after written notice from the department of public works to do so, to construct or cause to be constructed in place thereof either an entrance to a driveway or other proper entrance in accordance with the specifications therefor mentioned in section 74-41 or a curb, gutter or sidewalk of the same quality and appearance as the one removed or destroyed. 
(Code 1957, § 23.22)  
Sec. 74-43. - Completion of work by city. 
If a project of construction or reconstruction permitted under this article is not completed within 30 days after the service of the notice prescribed in section 74-42, the department of public works shall perform such work. 
(Code 1957, § 23.23)  
Sec. 74-44. - Work done at request of permittee. 
If, within ten days from the receipt of the notice referred to in section 74-42 of this division, the permittee so notified files with the department of public works a request that the work contemplated by such notice be done by the city, the department of public works shall cause such work to be done. 
(Code 1957, § 23.24)  
Sec. 74-45. - Use and return of deposits; construction cost deficits. 
(a)  If the person holding the permit for the construction or reconstruction permitted under this article completes such construction or reconstruction to the satisfaction of the department of public works, the deposit required by section 74-74 of this article shall be returned. 
(b)  Whenever work permitted under this article is performed by the department of public works pursuant to either section 74-43 or 74-44, the department of public works shall deduct the cost therefor from such deposit. If there shall be a balance remaining on deposit after deducting such cost, it shall be returned to the person making the deposit. If the cost of such work shall exceed the amount of the deposit, the person who obtained the permit shall pay to the city the amount of the difference, which shall be recoverable in civil action brought in the name of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 23.25)  
Secs. 74-46—74-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 74-71. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful to remove or destroy or cause to be removed or destroyed any portion of any curb, gutter or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of constructing entrances to driveways or for any other purpose without first securing a permit. 
(Code 1957, § 23.16)  
Sec. 74-72. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit to destroy or remove any portion of any curb, gutter or sidewalk for the purpose of constructing any entrance to abutting land or for other proper and lawful purpose shall file with the department of public works an application therefor. 
(Code 1957, § 23.17)  
Sec. 74-73. - Contents of application. 
The application required by section 74-72 shall state in lineal feet the amount of curb, gutter or sidewalk to be removed or destroyed and the purpose for which it is to be removed or destroyed. 
(Code 1957, § 23.18)  
Sec. 74-74. - Fees and deposits. 
(a)  Inspection fees. Before issuing a permit required by section 74-71 of this division, the department of public works shall collect inspection fees at such rates as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Deposits for removal or destruction of improvements. Deposits for any removal or destruction of existing public improvements which have to be replaced shall be at such rates as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 23.19)  
Sec. 74-75. - Issuance; contents. 
Upon the filing of the application, the making of such deposit and the payment of such fees as are required by this division for each permit, the department of public works shall issue a written permit to remove or destroy, at a location to be specified therein, the amount of curb, gutter or sidewalk necessary to be removed or destroyed to accomplish the proper and lawful purpose for which the permit is issued. 
(Code 1957, § 23.20)  
Secs. 74-76—74-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-101. - Location. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or to cause or permit to be made any excavation or to install or maintain or to cause or permit to be installed or maintained any pole, tank, pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place at any location other than that described in the application of such person for an excavation permit and shown on the plats filed by such person as required by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 23.79)  
Sec. 74-102. - Vehicular and pedestrian crossings. 
It shall be the duty of every person making any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place to maintain safe crossings over the excavation for vehicular traffic at all street intersections and safe crossings over the excavation for pedestrians at intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any such excavation is made across any public street or alley, at least one safe crossing over the excavation shall be maintained at all times for vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Code 1957, § 23.82) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90.  
Sec. 74-103. - Storage of materials excavated. 
All materials excavated pursuant to this article shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the person by whom the excavation is made shall erect a tight board fence upon and along such sidewalk and shall keep a passageway at least five feet in width open upon and along such sidewalk. 
(Code 1957, § 23.83)  
Sec. 74-104. - Access to fire hydrants and water gates. 
Free access over an excavation shall be provided to all fire hydrants and water gates. 
(Code 1957, § 23.84) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 74-105. - Maintenance of gutters. 
All gutters in any public way in which excavation shall be made pursuant to this article shall be maintained free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. Wherever a gutter crosses an intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. 
(Code 1957, § 23.85)  
Sec. 74-106. - Barriers and lights. 
It shall be the duty of every person making any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place to place and maintain barriers at each end of such excavation and at such places as may be necessary along the excavation to prevent accident and, also, to place and maintain lights at each end of such excavation and at distances of not more than 50 feet along the line thereof from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any requirement contained in this section. 
(Code 1957, § 23.86)  
Sec. 74-107. - Notice to complete work. 
After any excavation is commenced, the work of making and refilling the excavation shall be prosecuted with due diligence so as not to obstruct the street or other public place of travel more than is actually necessary therefor. If the work is not so prosecuted or if the work of refilling does not, in the judgment of the department of public works, comply with the terms of this article, the department of public works shall notify the person named in the permit therefor that the work is not being prosecuted with due diligence or that the refilling of such excavation has not been properly done and shall require such person, within three days after the service of such notice, to proceed with the diligent prosecution of such work or properly to complete the work, as the case may be. Such notice shall be written or printed and shall be served personally or by leaving the notice at the residence or place of business of the person to whom it is directed. If such person cannot be found and such place of business or residence is unknown or is outside of the city, such notice may be served by depositing the notice in the post office in a sealed envelope, postage fully prepaid, addressed to such person at such place of business or residence, if known, or if unknown at the city. If such notice is not complied with, the department of public works shall do such work as may be necessary to refill such excavation and to restore the street or other public place or part thereof excavated to as good a condition as the street or public place was in before such excavation was made. 
(Code 1957, § 23.87)  
Sec. 74-108. - Compliance with refilling regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any regulations of the department of public works governing the refilling of excavations. 
(Code 1957, § 23.89)  
Sec. 74-109. - Replacement of street surface. 
The street surface excavated or damaged pursuant to a permit issued under section 74-154 of this article shall be replaced by the department of public works, for which deductions shall be made from the deposit required under section 74-151 of the person making the excavation. 
(Code 1957, § 23.90)  
Sec. 74-110. - Applicability to work done under state law or city contract. 
None of the sections of this article shall apply to any work done or to be done in, along or upon any public street, alley, or other public place pursuant to any state law providing for the improvement thereof or to any work done or to be done in, along or upon any such street, alley or other public place pursuant to any contract for the improvement authorized by the city council. However, sections 74-102 to 74-106 of this division shall apply to all such work and to all excavations to be made in, along or upon any public street, alley or other public place, and section 74-108 of this division shall apply to all such work and to all such excavations made or to be made in, along or upon any public street, alley or other public place whenever the specifications for such work so provide. 
(Code 1957, § 23.91)  
Sec. 74-111. - Applicability to city personnel. 
This article shall not apply to excavations made by any employee or official of the public works department or water department for the purpose of repairing or maintaining streets or sewers. 
(Code 1957, § 23.92)  
Sec. 74-112. - Statement of amount due city. 
The department of public works shall cause a statement, showing the amount due the city from every person for any work performed by the city pursuant to this article, to be mailed to every such person or his agent in the city at such times as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The amount due the city as shown by any such statement shall be paid by every such person to the department of public works at such times as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. If there is a special deposit, the balance shall be returned within 30 days after the street surface has been replaced by the department of public works. The city shall deduct the cost of any work done or repairs made by the department of public works for any person from any and all deposits then on hand belonging to or that may at any time be made by such person under this article. 
(Code 1957, § 23.93)  
Sec. 74-113. - Decision on final costs. 
The decision of the department of public works as to the cost of any work done or repairs made by it or under its direction, pursuant to sections 74-107 and 74-109 of this division, shall be final and conclusive as to the cost thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 23.94)  
Sec. 74-114. - Refund of moneys. 
All moneys refunded pursuant to this article shall be paid upon demand, audited and paid in the same manner as other demands against the city are audited and paid. 
(Code 1957, § 23.95)  
Sec. 74-115. - Special fund for receipts. 
All moneys received by the department of public works pursuant to this article shall be deposited in a special fund designated as the "street repair deposit fund." 
(Code 1957, § 23.96)  
Sec. 74-116. - Transfers of inactive deposits from special fund; payment of claims for inactive deposits. 
All deposits made in the street repair deposit fund that have remained unclaimed and inactive for a period of three years or more shall, on motion of the city council, be transferred to the general fund, and any person having a valid claim for return of any such deposit or any portion thereof so transferred to the general fund shall, upon approval of such claim, be paid from the general fund. 
(Code 1957, § 23.97)  
Sec. 74-117. - Limitation on claims for refunds from special fund. 
All claims for refund for all sums of money deposited in the street repair deposit fund must be filed with the city within three years from the last date of activity of such deposit account as shown on the city's books of account; otherwise the sum of money so deposited shall be forfeited to the city. The sum so forfeited shall be transferred to the general fund upon motion of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 23.98)  
Sec. 74-118. - Emergency excavations. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe or conduits in any public street, alley or other public place by virtue of any section of this Code or other laws, ordinances or permits from making such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the city offices are closed. However, the person making such excavation shall obtain a permit therefor within four hours after the city offices are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. 
(Code 1957, § 23.99)  
Secs. 74-119—74-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 74-146. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful to make or to cause or to permit to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any pole, tank, pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the department of public works a written permit to make such excavations. 
(Code 1957, § 23.69)  
Sec. 74-147. - Application generally. 
A written application for the permit required by section 74-146 shall be made and filed with the department of public works. Such application shall set forth the name and residence or business address of the person making such application, shall state in detail the location and area of each excavation intended to be made and shall state the purpose for which the excavation is to be made and used. 
(Code 1957, § 23.70)  
Sec. 74-148. - Plat. 
With the application mentioned in section 74-147, there shall be submitted a plat in duplicate showing the location of each proposed excavation, the dimensions thereof and such other details as the department of public works may require. However, the filing of plats shall not be required when excavations are made for the location of trouble or leaks in conduits or pipes or for the making of repairs thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 23.71)  
Sec. 74-149. - Approval and filing of application and plat. 
When the application for a permit to excavate required by section 74-147 of this division and the details shown upon the accompanying duplicate plats, when such plats are required, comply with the terms of this article, the application and duplicate plat shall be approved by the city engineer. Such application, together with any required duplicate plat, shall be filed with the department of public works. 
(Code 1957, § 23.72)  
Sec. 74-150. - Deposit to cover city expense required. 
Every person desiring a permit required by section 74-146 shall make a deposit as outlined in section 74-151 to cover the cost of inspection and of restoring such public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place to its original condition, together with the incidental expenses in connection therewith, as provided by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 23.73)  
Sec. 74-151. - Special deposit. 
At the time of filing data with the department of public works as provided by section 74-149 of this division, the applicant for the permit required by this division shall make a special deposit with the department of public works in such amount as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 23.74)  
Sec. 74-152. - General deposit. 
Any person intending to make any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place may make and maintain with the department of public works a deposit in such amount as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such general deposit shall be used for the same purpose as the special deposit described in section 74-151. As long as such general deposit is maintained, the depositor shall not be required to make the special deposit, but shall be required to file duplicate plats showing the location thereof, as provided in section 74-148 of this division, and to comply with all other sections of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 23.75)  
Sec. 74-153. - Legal authority of applicants. 
Each applicant for a permit required by section 74-146 of this division shall, before the department of public works may issue such permit, show to the satisfaction of the department that the applicant has legal authority to occupy and use, for the purpose mentioned in the application, the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places covered by the application. 
(Code 1957, § 23.76)  
Sec. 74-154. - Issuance or denial. 
Upon receiving a written application, as provided in section 74-146, and one of the duplicate plats, when such plats are required, each bearing the approval of the city engineer, and the general or special deposit required by sections 74-150 and 74-151, the department of public works shall issue a written permit to make such excavation and shall open and keep an account thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 23.77)  
Sec. 74-155. - Contents; transferability. 
Each permit issued pursuant to section 75-154 shall state whether the work to be done is covered by a general or a special deposit, and if a special deposit shall state the amount thereof and shall be a receipt therefor. It shall also specify the person to whom the permit is issued; the street, alley or other public place and the particular portion thereof to be excavated; and the extent of such excavation. No permit issued under section 74-154 of this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1957, § 23.78)  
Sec. 74-156. - Cancellation. 
(a)  If the work of excavation is not commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance of a permit therefor issued under section 74-154 of this division or is not diligently prosecuted, such permit shall be cancelled and the city shall retain a fee as follows: 
(1)  For a permit fee up to $100.00: $25.00. 
(2)  For a permit fee over $100.00: 25 percent of permit fee. 
(b)  Such retention shall be made from the general or special deposit made by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Code 1957, § 23.80)  
Sec. 74-157. - Preservation of rights. 
Every permit for an excavation in or under the surface of any public street, alley or other public place shall be granted subject to the right of the city or of any other person entitled thereto to use that part of such street, alley or other public place for any purpose for which such street, alley or other public place may lawfully be used. 
(Code 1957, § 23.81)  
Secs. 74-158—74-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-186. - Trees or brush interfering with passage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge or control of any lot or premises, either as owner, lessee, tenant or otherwise, to allow any limb, twig or leaf of any brush or tree growing in or upon the sidewalk or any public street or alley in front of such lot or premises or upon any premises abutting upon such sidewalk to interfere with or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles along such sidewalk, street or alley. 
(Code 1957, § 23.100) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 98.  
Sec. 74-187. - Trimming of trees and brush. 
Whenever any brush or tree growing in or upon any premises in such manner that any portion thereof shall overhang any sidewalk of any public street or alley or growing in or upon any such sidewalk is greater than 15 feet in height, the lower limbs, twigs and leaves of such tree or brush shall be kept removed at all times so that at no time shall any portion of any twig, limb, or leaf hang nearer than nine feet above the sidewalk, street or alley. Whenever such bush or tree is less than 15 feet in height, the lower limbs, twigs or leaves of such bush or tree shall be so kept at all times that they will not interfere with or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles along such sidewalk, street or alley. 
(Code 1957, § 23.101) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 98.  
Sec. 74-188. - Vegetation obstructing sidewalk travel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge or control of any lot or premises, either as owner, lessee, tenant or otherwise, to allow any vegetation to grow or exist upon the sidewalk of the public street or alley in front of such lot or premises or upon such premises in such manner as to interfere with and obstruct the free passage of pedestrians along such sidewalk. 
(Code 1957, § 23.102) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 98.  
Sec. 74-189. - Waste material obstructing traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge or control of any lot or premises, either as owner, lessee, tenant or otherwise, to allow any soil, rubbish, trash, garden refuse, tree trimmings, ashes, tin cans or other waste material or refuse to remain upon any public street or alley so as to interfere with or obstruct the passage of pedestrians or vehicles along any sidewalk or street. 
(Code 1957, § 23.103)  
Sec. 74-190. - Placing articles for sale and for sale signs on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, as proprietor, agent, manager, owner or otherwise, to place for sale or inspection on any sidewalk within the city any goods, wares, merchandise or any other article of any kind or description whatsoever or any sign relating thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 23.104)  
Sec. 74-191. - Placing containers on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, as proprietor, agent, manager, owner or otherwise, to place or maintain any sign, barrel, rack, box or other receptacle wherein goods, wares, merchandise or any other article of any nature whatsoever has been packed or delivered on any sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 23.105)  
Sec. 74-192. - Ornamental trees and shrubs. 
Ornamental trees, shrubs, and flowers, when placed in containers, may be placed by any private party on any sidewalk adjacent to the curb when approved by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 23.113)  
Sec. 74-193. - Poles, hydrants, signs. 
Poles; fire and police boxes; lampposts; parking, street, directional or warning signs; parking meters; drinking fountains; hydrants; flagpoles or standards; decorations for public events; mail collection boxes; sidewalk clocks; armed forces recruiting signs; refuse cans; bicycle racks; benches; barriers; and any other similar installations may be placed on any sidewalk or roadway. However, any such installation not owned and maintained by the city shall be subject to the prior approval of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 23.114) 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 94.  
Sec. 74-194. - Public telephones. 
(a)  Permit required. The city council is authorized to issue permits from time to time to any person or agency furnishing telephone service to the general public within the city for the installation and maintenance of public telephones and the standards and appurtenances therefor on public highways and places within the city when it finds that public policy and purpose are served thereby. The council shall approve the number and location of such public telephones and shall impose such other conditions as the council finds proper so as to best serve the public interest. 
(b)  Permit conditions. Permits issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include the following: 
(1)  The permittee shall maintain the public telephones and any associated booths and standards and appurtenances therefor in good repair and in a safe and sightly condition at the permittee's expense and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(2)  The permittee shall hold harmless and defend the city and its officers, employees, and agents from any and all losses, claims, or judgments for damages to any person or property arising from the installation, maintenance, or presence of the public telephones. 
(3)  The permit shall be revocable on 30 days' prior written notice to the permittee from the city council, in which event the permittee shall at his own expense remove the public telephone installed pursuant to the permit and shall restore the public way or place as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such installation. 
(4)  The permit shall be a grant or permission only and shall not obligate the permittee to maintain a public telephone at any particular location. The permittee may at any time remove any public telephone installed pursuant to this permit. Upon such removal, the permittee shall restore the public way or place as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such installation. 
(Code 1957, §§ 23.115, 23.116)  
Sec. 74-195. - Tables for registration of voters. 
Tables for the registration of voters may be placed on any sidewalk at locations approved by and under such conditions as may be imposed by the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 23.118)  
Sec. 74-196. - Temporary use of sidewalk or roadway. 
The city council or the administrative officer or the administrative officer's designee is authorized to grant the temporary use of any sidewalk or roadway for any purpose at such locations and under such conditions as it deems appropriate. 
(Code 1957, § 23.119)  
Sec. 74-197. - Permit terms. 
Any permit granted by the city council for any encroachment under any of the sections of this division may be upon such terms and conditions as the council may fix and determine. The violation of any such terms or conditions shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such permit. 
(Code 1957, § 23.120)  
Sec. 74-198. - Painting or marking sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, mark, deface, or draw upon any sidewalk or roadway without first having obtained a permit from the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 23.121)  
Sec. 74-199. - Obstruction of public way declared nuisance. 
Anything placed or permitted to remain upon any sidewalk or roadway, in violation of this division, is declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to other remedies provided by law, the city engineer is authorized and empowered to abate the nuisance by removing such obstruction. 
(Code 1957, § 23.122)  
Secs. 74-200—74-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLICATION VENDING MACHINES 
 
Sec. 74-226. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Custodian means any person who owns or has the responsibility of placing, servicing or maintaining a publication vending machine by depositing or removing material from the machine or by collecting moneys from the machine. 
Explicit sexual acts means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of such conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person's genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. 
Parkway means that area between the edge of the roadway and the adjacent property line excluding that area occupied by the sidewalks. The term "parkway" also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. 
Publication vending machine means any self-service or coin-operated newsrack, box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for display and sale of any written or printed material, including but not limited to newspapers, news periodicals or other news publications. 
Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
Sidewalk means any surface provided for the exclusive use by pedestrians. 
Street means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes but is not limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Code 1957, § 23.124) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-227. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to promote the public peace, morals, health and safety by regulating the placement, appearance, servicing and insuring of publication vending machines so as to protect against: 
(1)  The dangers of impairing the vision of motorists and pedestrians, particularly small children. 
(2)  The hazards of unreasonably interfering with or impeding the flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic including ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles. 
(3)  Unduly restricting access to the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or locations used for public transportation purposes. 
(4)  Neglectful servicing of publication vending machines resulting in a visual blight in the city's parkways, sidewalks, and detracting from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements. 
(5)  Reduction in values of surrounding property. 
(6)  Unnecessary exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage suits. 
(Code 1957, § 23.125)  
Sec. 74-228. - Prohibitions generally. 
(a)  No custodian shall install, use or maintain any publication vending machine which projects onto, into or over or which rests wholly or in part upon any part of the roadway of any public street. 
(b)  No custodian shall install, use or maintain any publication vending machine on public property in the city without following the procedures set forth in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 23.126)  
Sec. 74-229. - Permit required; application. 
(a)  No custodian shall install, use or maintain any publication vending machine which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any parkway, sidewalk or other public property unless such machine is placed upon a facility installed or approved by the city and unless a permit has been obtained therefor from the city engineer in accordance with this division. The custodian shall submit an application for a permit on a form approved by the city engineer and shall provide the required processing fee, which fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  The city engineer shall install or permit to be installed facilities for publication vending machines in locations that: 
(1)  Will not obstruct or interfere with pedestrian or vehicle traffic; 
(2)  Will not obstruct car door opening onto the sidewalk area adjacent to on-street parking; 
(3)  Are set back from the curb face a minimum of 24 inches; 
(4)  Shall not be located in the curb return area of the sidewalk or within four feet of wheelchair access ramps; 
(5)  Are located so as not to obstruct access to businesses or residences; 
(6)  Are located so as not to obstruct view of business storefront displays; and 
(7)  Will not interfere with the public's use and enjoyment of any publicly owned property or facility. 
(c)  Where multiple publication vending machines exist, they shall be placed on an unimount-type framework with all racks being of uniform size and color. 
(d)  No publication vending machine shall be used for advertising or publicity purposes other than dealing with the display of the publication contained therein. 
(e)  Publication vending machines shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Three and one-half feet in height, 30 inches in width or two feet in depth; and 
(2)  A total of eight machines on the same side of the street within a space of 200 feet in any direction. 
(f)  Any publication vending machines legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives may be continued at the same location for six months. If within this time an application for a permit is filed, the publication vending machine may remain in the same location pending final action on the permit by the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 23.127)  
Sec. 74-230. - Display of certain matter prohibited. 
Publications offered for sale from a publication vending machine placed or maintained on or projecting over the street shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from the street any of the following: 
(1)  Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. 
(2)  Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. 
(3)  Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. 
(Code 1957, § 23.128)  
Sec. 74-231. - Identification of machine required. 
Every custodian who places or maintains a publication vending machine in the city shall have his name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. If the custodian is a corporation, the name, address, and telephone number of the distributor must be affixed in a place where such information can be easily seen. 
(Code 1957, § 23.129)  
Sec. 74-232. - Indemnification of city. 
Every custodian who places or maintains a publication vending machine in the city in conjunction with his permit application shall file a written statement with the city clerk satisfactory to the city attorney, whereby he agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, directors or employees from any loss or liability or damages, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the location, installation, use, maintenance, removal or storage of such a machine within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 23.130)  
Sec. 74-233. - Maintenance and repair. 
(a)  Each publication vending machine shall be maintained by its custodian so as not to become mechanically inoperable, to become marred by graffiti or to have cracked or broken coverings or casings. Each machine shall be painted or covered with a protective coating to keep it free from rust. Each machine shall be serviced and/or repaired periodically and within 24 hours of a request to repair by the city. 
(b)  All sidewalks damaged by installation or removal of publication vending machines shall be repaired at the sole expense of the custodian in compliance with city standards for sidewalk repair. 
(c)  If the custodian fails to maintain the publication vending machine, the city engineer shall set and collect a fee which reflects the city's costs for the cleaning and/or repair of the newsrack. 
(Code 1957, § 23.131)  
Sec. 74-234. - Effect of noncompliance. 
Except as provided in section 74-235, whenever any publication vending machine is found to be in violation of this division, the city engineer shall cause a tag to be attached to the machine specifying the date and nature of the violation. Within three working days, a written notice of the violation shall be sent by the city engineer to the custodian whose name appears on the publication vending machine as provided in section 74-231. The custodian shall, within ten working days from the date on which the tag was attached, either cause the violation to be corrected or request a hearing pursuant to section 74-238. 
(Code 1957, § 23.132)  
Sec. 74-235. - Impoundment of machines generally. 
The city engineer shall cause any publication vending machine to be impounded: 
(1)  Where its installation, use or maintenance immediately endangers the safety of persons or property, and it is impractical to move such machine to another legally permitted location; 
(2)  Where its installation, use or maintenance unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and it is impractical to move such machine to another legally permitted location; 
(3)  Where its installation, use or maintenance unreasonably interferes with the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects legally permitted, and it is impractical to move such machine to another legally permitted location; 
(4)  Where its installation, use or maintenance unreasonably obstructs, interferes with or impedes access to or use of abutting property, including but not limited to residences, places of business, or legally parked or stopped vehicles, and it is impractical to move such machine to another legally permitted location; 
(5)  Where its installation, use or maintenance unreasonably interferes with the public's use and enjoyment of any publicly owned property or facility; 
(6)  When such machine has been abandoned. For purposes of this section, a machine shall be deemed abandoned when no new publication has been placed in such newsrack for a period of 60 days; 
(7)  When such machine does not have a name, address and telephone number affixed in a place where such information may be easily seen, and the custodian of such newsrack cannot be otherwise identified; 
(8)  When a tag has been attached to such machine pursuant to section 74-234, and the custodian has neither caused the violation specified on the tag to be corrected nor requested a hearing pursuant to section 74-238 within the time permitted; 
(9)  When a hearing and appeal, if filed, have resulted in a final determination that the violation specified on the tag attached to such machine has in fact occurred, and the custodian has failed to correct such violation within ten working days from the date of the determination; or 
(10)  When a request for a hearing or appeal has been withdrawn. Such request shall be deemed withdrawn either by actual withdrawal or by failure of the custodian to fully comply with section 74-238 or 74-239 of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 23.133)  
Sec. 74-236. - Notice of impoundment. 
Whenever any publication vending machine is impounded pursuant to section 74-235, a written notice of the action shall be sent to the custodian, if identified, within three working days of such impoundment. The custodian may, within 60 days thereafter, request a hearing as provided in section 74-238. 
(Code 1957, § 23.134)  
Sec. 74-237. - Return of impounded machines. 
(a)  Any publication vending machine, together with its contents, which has been impounded pursuant to section 74-235, shall be returned to the custodian upon the following: 
(1)  Receipt of an impound fee of $100.00; 
(2)  A determination, after hearing by the city engineer pursuant to section 74-238 of this division, that the newsrack should not have been impounded and should be returned to the custodian; or 
(3)  A decision by the city council on appeal, pursuant to section 74-239 of this division, that the newsrack should not have been impounded. 
(b)  If a hearing has not been requested pursuant to section 74-238 within the time permitted following impoundment of any machine, an impound fee of $100.00 shall be imposed upon the custodian. 
(Code 1957, § 23.135)  
Sec. 74-238. - Hearings generally. 
(a)  Request for hearing. Any custodian may file a written request with the city engineer for a hearing for the purpose of demonstrating that a publication vending machine should not have been impounded or that a violation as specified on the tag attached to a machine pursuant to section 74-234 of this division has not, in fact, occurred. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. Within five working days from the date on which the request for the hearing is received, the city engineer shall set a hearing date and shall notify the custodian, by first class mail, of the date, time and place of the hearing. Unless agreed to otherwise, the hearing shall occur not less than five and not more than ten working days from the date of mailing the notice. 
(c)  Conduct of hearing. At the time set for such hearing or at the date to which such hearing is continued, the city engineer shall receive all evidence relevant to the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the specified violation, the compliance or noncompliance with any of the sections of this division, and any other relevant information. Such hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(d)  Decision after hearing. Within ten working days after the conclusion of the hearing, the city engineer shall find and determine, from the facts adduced at the hearing, whether the publication vending machine should have been tagged and/or impounded and whether the machine shall be returned except upon receipt of fees as specified in section 74-237. The decision of the city engineer shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the amount of the fee, if any, to be imposed. 
(Code 1957, § 23.136)  
Sec. 74-239. - Appeal after hearing. 
(a)  Right to appeal. Any custodian may, within ten working days of the mailing date of the copy of the city engineer's decision and order made pursuant to section 74-238, appeal such decision to the city council by filing a notice of appeal and an appeal with the city engineer. 
(b)  Contents of appeal. An appeal shall set forth in writing specifically the grounds of the appeal and wherein the appellant believes the city engineer was in error or abused his discretion. The city engineer shall, within ten working days, transmit the appeal, together with a copy of the file, decision and order and response to the appeal, if any, to the city clerk, who shall forward it to the council or appropriate committee thereof. 
(c)  Action by council. The city council shall, upon receipt of the material from the city engineer or upon recommendation of any council committee which has considered the appeal: 
(1)  Approve the decision and order of the city engineer; 
(2)  Reverse or modify the decision and order, and refer the matter back to the city engineer; 
(3)  Set the matter for public hearing by so notifying the appellant. Such public hearing shall be held de novo as if no hearing had previously been held; or 
(4)  Approve the decision and order by taking no action within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal. 
(Code 1957, § 23.137)  
Sec. 74-240. - Authority of city engineer to promulgate rules and regulations. 
The city engineer may promulgate rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this division, which he deems necessary to properly exercise his jurisdiction under this division. All such rules and regulations shall be kept in the office of the city engineer, and a copy thereof shall be furnished to any applicant upon request. 
(Code 1957, § 23.138)  
Sec. 74-241. - Delegation of city engineer's duties. 
The city engineer may authorize any person or department in the city's employ to assist or take over any of the duties or responsibilities assigned to the city engineer by this division. 
(Code 1957, § 23.139)  
Sec. 74-242. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 74-242 which pertained to criminal liability and derived from Code 1957, § 23.140.  
Secs. 74-243—74-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NUMBERING BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 74-271. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block means that portion of any street between the cross streets or between a cross street and an abutting street or between two abutting streets. For abutting streets the prolonged further line of the abutting street shall be the dividing line of the blocks. All blocks exceeding 600 feet in length shall be considered as two blocks. 
(Code 1957, § 23.106) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-272. - System. 
The following shall be the system of numbering all buildings and premises in the city fronting on streets laid out or to be laid out or extended: 
(1)  From north to south the dividing line shall be the centerline of the right-of-way of the Southern Pacific Railway as it is more particularly described in county book 57, page 282, of deeds. 
a.  Running northerly from such centerline and also to the prolongation of the southerly line of First Street east and west to the east and west boundaries of the city, the numbers shall increase from 1 to 99, both inclusive. 
b.  Running northerly from First Street, the numbers shall increase from 100 according to the number of blocks to be numbered. 
c.  Running southerly from such centerline to the northerly line of Porter Avenue, the numbers shall increase from 200 according to the blocks to be numbered. 
(2)  From east to west the numbers from Maclay Avenue shall be allotted and used as follows: 
a.  From the easterly line of Maclay Avenue the numbers shall decrease from 1099 to 1, according to the number of blocks to be numbered. 
b.  Running westerly from Maclay Avenue the numbers shall increase from 1100 according to the number of blocks to be numbered. 
(Code 1957, § 23.107)  
Sec. 74-273. - Numbering of entrances to buildings from public streets generally. 
(a)  All entrances from the public streets of the city to buildings or premises shall be numbered as provided in this article. 
(b)  The number of each front entrance shall be placed upon or immediately above the door or gate closing such entrance. 
(c)  Each figure of such number shall be at least three inches in height in residential zones and at least four inches in height in commercial and manufacturing zones and shall be of corresponding widths. 
(Code 1957, § 23.108)  
Sec. 74-274. - Duty to number buildings and remove improper numbers on notice. 
The appropriate number of any entrance to any building or premises shall be placed thereon within five days after the receipt by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of such building of a notice from the city engineer of the number designated for such building or premises. All numbers, other than the numbers provided for in this article for the respective entrances, shall be removed from every building or premises by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant thereof within five days from the service of notice designating the appropriate numbers to be placed thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 23.109)  
Sec. 74-275. - Designation of numbers and numbering system map. 
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to designate the respective numbers for buildings or premises fronting on streets laid out or to be laid out or extended, and he shall provide and have on file in his office for the use of the general public a map or plan showing the numbering system of the city in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 23.110)  
Sec. 74-276. - Odd and even numbers. 
The building numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of streets shall be odd numbers, and the numbers on the southerly and easterly sides shall be even numbers. 
(Code 1957, § 23.111)  
Sec. 74-277. - Allotment of numbers to block; feet to be allowed for each number. 
One hundred numbers, or as many thereof as shall be necessary, shall be allowed to each block, and 20 feet of frontage shall be allowed for each number. 
(Code 1957, § 23.112)  
ARTICLE VI. - STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 74-278. - Adoption by reference. 
Except as may otherwise be provided herein, the provisions of the 2012 edition of the "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction" (popularly known as the "Greenbook"), written and promulgated by Public Works Standards, Inc., a mutual benefit corporation, together with such changes as may be published in pamphlet form as amendments to the 2012 edition in each of the two years between publication of a new edition of the Greenbook, are adopted and applicable to all public works construction undertaken after the effective date of this ordinance. One copy of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction has been and is now filed with the office of the city clerk, and said Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out at length in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1632, § 2, 4-21-2014)  
Sec. 74-279. - Imposition of stricter standards. 
Whenever any provision of such Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction hereby adopted conflicts with any other provision or requirement of the Code, such other provision or requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1632, § 2, 4-21-2014)  
Chapter 78 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Subdivisions generally, Business and Professions Code § 11000 et seq.; control of design and improvement of cities, Government Code §§ 66411, 66499.37. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of San Fernando." 
(Code 1957, § 24.2)  
Sec. 78-2. - Compliance of title transfers with Subdivision Map Act. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, as a principal, agent or otherwise, to sell, lease, finance, or transfer title to any portion of any subdivision or parcel of land in the city or to offer to do so, for which a tentative, final or parcel map or waiver certificate is required pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., or this chapter, unless a parcel, final tract map or waiver certificate in full compliance with such act and this chapter has been filed for record by the recorder of the county in which any portion of the subdivision is located. 
(Code 1957, § 24.3)  
Sec. 78-3. - Purpose; supplement to Subdivision Map Act. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the design and improvement of subdivisions, to coordinate subdivision planning with the city's general and specific plans and to ensure that areas within subdivisions dedicated for public and community purposes will not become an undue tax burden in the future. 
(b)  This chapter is adopted to supplement the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., and imposes requirements in addition to those set forth in the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq. The provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., and the definitions set forth therein shall govern the processing of subdivision applications except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Any reference in this chapter to the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., or a specific section thereof shall refer to such act as most currently amended. If a cited section has been renumbered or combined with another section, the reference shall be to the most recent equivalent of the cited section. 
(Code 1957, § 24.1)  
Sec. 78-4. - Processing fee. 
Under this chapter, every person submitting a tentative or final tract or parcel map, application for a certificate of waiver, application for a certificate of compliance, application for a lot line adjustment or petition for reversion to acreage shall pay a processing fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 24.5)  
Sec. 78-5. - Conformity of proposed subdivision with general plan. 
A report by the planning commission or the city council as to conformity to the general plan required pursuant to Government Code § 65402 as a result of a proposed division of land may be included as part of the resolution of the planning commission or the city council on the action taken on such division of land. 
(Code 1957, § 24.6)  
Sec. 78-6. - Merger of parcels. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever two or more contiguous lots, parcels or units of land are held by the same owner, such lots, parcels, or units may be merged where any one of the contiguous lots, parcels, or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size under the city zoning ordinance in chapter 106 of this Code and if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction or is developed only with an accessory structure or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous lot, parcel or unit; and 
(2)  With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  The parcel comprises less than 5,000 square feet in an area at the time of the determination of merger. 
b.  The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation. 
c.  The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply. 
d.  The parcel does not meet slope stability standards. 
e.  The parcel has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability. 
f.  Its development would create health or safety hazards. 
g.  The parcel is inconsistent with the city's general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. 
(3)  The owner of the affected parcels has been notified of the merger proposal pursuant to Government Code § 66451.13 and is afforded the opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Government Code § 66451.14. 
(b)  Extent of merger. Merger shall occur even though it does not create a lot conforming to the current standards for minimum lot area and dimensions, but does create a lot which more closely conforms to current standards; if the lots, parcels, or units are developed with a structure, merger shall occur only to those lots, parcels, or units which are developed as a single unit. 
(c)  Treatment of lots after merger. After merger has occurred with respect to any contiguous lots, parcels, or units of land under this section, such lots, parcels, or units of land shall be treated as a single lot under this Code. 
(d)  Contiguity. Property shall be considered as contiguous lots, parcels or units of land only if such lots, parcels or units of land are adjoining, but not if such lots, parcels or units of land are separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. 
(e)  Notice to affected property owners. Whenever the director of planning determines that real property should be merged pursuant to this section, he shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder, and on the same date mailed by certified mail to the then-current record owner of the property, a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected lots, parcels, or units may be merged pursuant to this section and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing before the planning commission on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. 
(f)  Review by planning commission. Whenever a property owner objects to the recording of a notice of intention to determine status within 30 days of the recording thereof and requests a hearing before the planning commission, the planning commission shall hold a hearing thereon and allow the property owner to state his objection and present any evidence upon which he relies. The property owner shall be advised in writing of the time, date and place of the hearing. The hearing shall occur not more than 60 days from the receipt of the request therefor, unless postponed or continued by mutual consent of both the city and the property owner. If the planning commission determines that the conditions constituting merger have not occurred, it shall instruct the director of planning not to file a notice of merger, and release of the notice of intention to determine status shall be recorded and a clearance letter mailed to the then-current owner of record. Otherwise, the director shall file the notice of merger unless the decision of the planning commission is appealed within ten days to the city council. 
(g)  Recordation of notice of merger. The merger of parcels as provided in this section shall be effective upon the city's filing for record with the county recorder a notice of merger. The notice of merger shall be filed within 30 days after the conclusion of a hearing held pursuant to subsections (e) and (f) of this section or within 30 days of the date a final decision is made by the city council if the decision of the planning commission, rendered pursuant to subsections (e) and (f) of this section, is appealed. If no hearing is timely requested as provided in subsections (e) and (f) of this section, the notice of merger shall be filed for recording no later than 90 days following the mailing of notice of intention to determine status as provided in subsection (e) of this section. In no case shall a notice of merger be filed sooner than the expiration of 30 days from the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(h)  Ownership determined. For purposes of this section, when determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded. 
(Code 1957, § 24.53) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 66451.11.  
Sec. 78-7. - Owner-initiated merger of parcels. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 66499.20 ¾ of the Subdivision Map Act, the merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership may be merged without reverting to acreage upon application by the owner of record. The application shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by data and documents as required by the community development director, including, without limitation evidence of title to all parcels to be affected. An appropriate instrument approved by the city shall be recorded evidencing the merger. 
(b)  The applicant shall pay the processing fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  The applicant for a merger shall comply with the requirements set forth in of subsection 78-37(3) of this chapter relating to lot line adjustments. 
(d)  The lot to be created by the merger shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in article III of this chapter and to the applicable minimum requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance in chapter 106 of this Code. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the map, the community development director shall examine it to see whether it complies with the requirements of this section. If the map complies, the community development director shall approve the lot merger. The community development director may impose conditions on merger approval in order to ensure compliance with this section, to retain, relocate or establish easements, and to protect the health, safety and welfare. 
(f)  If an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the community development director, the decision may be appealed to the planning and preservation commission. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be received by the community development department within 15 days after the date of the community development director's action. 
(g)  Upon approval, the map shall be filed in the office of the county recorder by the applicant at the applicant's expense. The map shall be recorded concurrently with any deed of easement regarding the relocation or elimination of applicable easements. No building permit to construct any improvements upon the lot indicated on such map shall be issued until the applicant has submitted proof of such filing to the building and safety supervisor, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1602, § 1, 12-6-2010)  
Secs. 78-8—78-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAPS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-36. - Approval. 
No subdivision map shall be approved unless it complies with the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., this chapter and all conditions or requirements imposed pursuant to the requirements thereof. However, when the failure of a map to so comply is the result of a technical or inadvertent error which, in the determination of the planning commission, does not materially affect the validity of the map, the provision may be waived. 
(Code 1957, § 24.4)  
Sec. 78-37. - Additional requirements. 
In addition to the tentative, final and parcel maps required pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  A parcel map shall be required for any subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., except when such act specifically provides that a parcel map shall not be required for a particular type of project or the requirement of a parcel map has been waived pursuant to division 3 of this article. 
(2)  A tentative parcel map shall be required for all subdivisions described by Government Code § 66426(a)—(e) and for subdivisions creating four or fewer parcels. 
(3)  No parcel maps shall be required for lot line adjustments. The applications for lot line adjustments shall be submitted to the planning department on such forms and with such attachments as may reasonably be required by that department. The planning director shall approve lot line adjustments. If an applicant is dissatisfied by any action taken by the planning director, the decision of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission within 15 days of the date of mailing a notice of the action taken by the planning director to the applicant. 
(4)  A tentative and final map shall be required for a condominium project and community apartment project and any conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative. 
(Code 1957, § 24.7)  
Sec. 78-38. - Grading and erosion control. 
All maps required under this article shall specifically provide for proper grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property. 
(Code 1957, § 24.8)  
Secs. 78-39—78-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FILING AND REVIEW PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 78-66. - Supplemental information and materials to accompany tentative map. 
A subdivision tentative map shall not be considered as filed until all requirements and supplemental information and materials have been submitted to the planning department and engineering department. 
(Code 1957, § 24.9)  
Sec. 78-67. - Tentative map filing, review and report. 
The subdivider shall file a tentative map and all accompanying materials with the planning department. The planning director and city engineer shall review the map and the accompanying materials and shall cause a report regarding the map and materials to be forwarded to the subdivider and the planning commission. 
(Code 1957, § 24.10)  
Sec. 78-68. - Planning commission review of tentative map. 
(a)  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the subdivision tentative map. Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Government Code § 66451.3, and ten days' mailed notice of the hearing shall be given to the subdivider and to all property owners within 300 feet of the subdivision, except that newspaper publication of the notice may be used if the number of property owners exceeds 1,000. 
(b)  The planning commission shall adopt a resolution recommending approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the tentative map within the time limits provided by law, unless a definite extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the planning commission and the subdivider. The planning commission shall forward the resolution to the city council. If the planning commission resolution recommends approval of a tentative map, it must make affirmative findings supporting such approval. 
(Code 1957, § 24.11)  
Sec. 78-69. - City council review of tentative map. 
(a)  The city council shall hold a public hearing on the subdivision tentative map. Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Government Code § 66451.3, and ten days' mailed notice of the hearing shall be given to the subdivider and to all property owners within 300 feet of the subdivision, except that newspaper publication of the notice may be used if the number of property owners exceeds 1,000. 
(b)  The city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative tract map within the time limits provided by law, unless a definite extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the council and the subdivider. If the city council approves a tentative map, it must make affirmative findings supporting such approval. 
(Code 1957, § 24.12)  
Sec. 78-70. - Required content and form. 
(a)  Generally. The content and form of subdivision tentative and final maps shall be governed by the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., and this chapter. 
(b)  Required materials for tentative tract/parcel map. The following required materials for a tentative tract/parcel map shall be submitted: 
(1)  Fifteen copies of the tentative tract map, size 18 inches by 26 inches. All maps must be folded to 8½ inches by 11 inches in size. See subsection (b)(3) of this section for specific content requirements. 
(2)  Radius map, 300-foot, showing land use, related case numbers and zoning. Submit in triplicate, including the original. 
(3)  A list of owners of property lying within a 300-foot radius of the subdivision. Submit three copies, including one set composed of gummed labels. 
(4)  Two copies of environmental information and checklist. (Forms may be obtained from the building department.) 
(c)  Form, contents of tentative map. Tentative maps filed with the city planning department shall be prepared by or under the direction of a licensed surveyor or registered civil engineer. Such maps, folded to 8½ inches by 11 inches, shall be drawn to an engineer's scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, on an 18-inch by 26-inch map, and shall clearly show the following information: 
(1)  The tract number obtained from the county engineer. Sufficient legal description of the property to define its boundaries. 
(2)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owner, subdivider and person preparing the map, including registration number or license number of the engineer or surveyor. 
(3)  North point, engineering scale, date and net and gross (blue border) area of the subdivision. 
(4)  Locations, widths and approximate grades of existing and proposed highways, streets, alleys or ways, whether public or private, within and adjacent to the property involved. Include existing street names and designations or names for all proposed streets or highways. The widths and approximate locations of all existing and proposed easements or rights-of-way within and adjacent to the property involved. 
(5)  Closest intersecting public streets and distances to intersections. Approximate radii of all centerline curves for streets, highways, alleys or ways. 
(6)  The boundaries of the tentative tract map with the lot layout, approximate dimensions of each lot and number of each lot. 
(7)  The locations of all potentially dangerous areas, including geologically hazardous areas and areas subject to inundation or flood hazards; the location, width and directions of flow of all watercourses and flood control channels within and adjacent to the property involved; the proposed method of providing flood and erosion control. 
(8)  The existing contour of the land at intervals of not more than five feet, and of not more than two-foot intervals if the slope of land is less than five percent. Include preliminary grading design with proposed building pads, top and toe of cut and fill slopes. 
(9)  The location of all buildings or structures on the property involved with dimensions given relative to lot lines, notations concerning all buildings which are to be removed, and approximate locations of all existing wells. 
(10)  The approximate location and general description of any specimen-sized and/or historically significant trees by common name, and an indication as to the retention or destruction of such trees. 
(11)  If any streets shown on the tentative map are proposed to be private streets, they shall be clearly indicated. 
(12)  The proposed method of providing sewage disposal and drainage for the property. 
(13)  Tracts in multiple residential zones shall include the address of the property and the number of proposed dwelling units and parking spaces. 
(14)  All contiguous land under control of the subdivider must be included as part of the subdivision. Also show on the tentative map abutting parcels described by metes and bounds, ownership cut lines, etc., and labeled with the owner's last name. 
(d)  Proposed development to conform to existing land use. Proposed residential, commercial, or industrial development shall conform to the existing residential, commercial or industrial land use on the general plan. Otherwise, the proposed tract/parcel map will be held until the general plan is amended. 
(Code 1957, § 24.13)  
Sec. 78-71. - Expiration dates of tentative map. 
Approved or conditionally approved subdivision tentative maps shall expire within 24 months, unless an extension within that 24-month period is granted by the city council. The extension shall not exceed 36 months. 
(Code 1957, § 24.14)  
Sec. 78-72. - Final parcel maps. 
(a)  A subdivision final parcel map shall be consistent with all the conditions, restrictions and corrections upon which the tentative map was approved. Where possible, all conditions and restrictions shall be clearly and graphically denoted on the final parcel map. Where such conditions and/or restrictions cannot be graphically denoted, they shall be clearly and conspicuously written on the final parcel map. When a tentative parcel map is approved without conditions or corrections, the tentative parcel map may serve as the final parcel map. 
(b)  The city engineer shall review the final parcel map within 20 working days of its submittal. When found to be consistent with the conditions, restrictions and corrections of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map, the planning director shall cause such to be sent to the subdivider and the county recorder; provided, however, that any offer of dedication must first be accepted by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 24.15) 
State Law reference— Review of final map, Government Code § 66442.  
Sec. 78-73. - Final tract map filing and review. 
(a)  A subdivision final tract map prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor, along with all necessary certificates and acknowledgements, must be submitted to the engineering department before the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative tract map. 
(b)  If required improvements and dedications are not completed, improvement and dedication agreements must be obtained before the final tract map can be filed. 
(c)  The city engineer shall review the final tract map and cause a report to be transmitted to the city council regarding the review. At the time the city council approves the final tract map it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication pursuant to Government Code § 66477.1. 
(Code 1957, § 24.16)  
Secs. 78-74—78-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide waiver procedure, Government Code § 66428. 
 
Sec. 78-101. - Filing of map prerequisite to request for waiver. 
A subdivision tentative parcel map must be filed with the planning department prior to initiating a request for a waiver of the parcel map requirement. 
(Code 1957, § 24.17)  
Sec. 78-102. - Form, contents of request. 
A request for a waiver made under this division shall be made in writing and shall be signed by all the owners of record of the proposed subdivision. The request shall describe the subdivision and each proposed parcel and shall identify the tentative parcel map of the subdivision which has already been filed with the planning department and engineering department. The subdivider shall supply additional information when deemed necessary by the planning director or city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 24.18)  
Sec. 78-103. - Subdivider's compliance with conditions of approval. 
A waiver request shall not be approved pursuant to this division unless the subdivider completes or agrees to comply with any conditions of approval as if a parcel map were to be filed. 
(Code 1957, § 24.19)  
Sec. 78-104. - Approval procedure. 
A waiver request made pursuant to this division shall not be approved unless: 
(1)  The planning director and city engineer approve or conditionally approve the tentative parcel map. 
(2)  The planning director and city engineer find that the description of the subdivision in the waiver request conforms to the approved tentative parcel map. 
(3)  The planning director and city engineer find that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., and this chapter as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability and environmental protection. 
(Code 1957, § 24.20)  
Sec. 78-105. - Time limit for decision. 
The request for a waiver made pursuant to this division shall be granted or denied by the planning director and city engineer within 40 days of its filing, and the subdivider shall be notified of the action in writing. However, this time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the planning director and the subdivider. 
(Code 1957, § 24.21)  
Sec. 78-106. - Certificate of waiver. 
When a waiver is granted pursuant to this division, the planning director shall cause a certificate of waiver to be filed, within 15 working days after granting the waiver, with the recorder of the county in which any portion of the subdivision is located. The certificate shall state that the requirement of a parcel map has been waived and that the parcels comprising the subdivision may be sold, leased, financed or transferred in full compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., and this chapter. Certificates and acknowledgments relating to dedications and improvements shall appear on the certificate of waiver whenever such certificates and acknowledgments would be required for a parcel map pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., or this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 24.22)  
Secs. 78-107—78-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
 
Sec. 78-136. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of Government Code § 66498.1 et seq. 
(Code 1957, § 24.42)  
Sec. 78-137. - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan of the city or not permitted by the zoning ordinance in chapter 106 or other applicable sections of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 24.43)  
Sec. 78-138. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Vesting tentative map means a tentative map for a residential subdivision, as defined in Government Code § 66424.5(a), that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed in accordance with section 78-140, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(b)  All other definitions set forth in this chapter are applicable to this division. 
(Code 1957, § 24.44) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-139. - Application of division. 
(a)  This division shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., as implemented and supplemented by this chapter, requires the filing of a tentative map or a tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with this division. 
(b)  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by this division, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Code 1957, § 24.45)  
Sec. 78-140. - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and shall have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this chapter for a tentative map, except that it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map." 
(Code 1957, § 24.46)  
Sec. 78-141. - Processing information. 
The vesting tentative map application shall include the following information: elevations of all buildings and structures including location, size, height, walls, fences and landscaping, off-street parking, lighting, landscaping, drainage and grading plan, utility locations, and any other information which the planning commission feels is necessary for reviewing the application. 
(Code 1957, § 24.47)  
Sec. 78-142. - Fees. 
The advisory agency shall not accept any vesting tentative map for filing unless it is accompanied by a fee, to be set pursuant to the formula set forth in section 78-4. 
(Code 1957, § 24.48)  
Sec. 78-143. - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period and shall be subject to the same extensions established by this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map. 
(Code 1957, § 24.49)  
Sec. 78-144. - Vesting on approval. 
(a)  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code § 66474.2. If Government Code § 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
(1)  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community or both in a condition dangerous to their health or safety or both. 
(2)  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law. 
(c)  The rights referred to in this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in section 78-143. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
(1)  An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
(2)  The initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time expended for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed. 
(3)  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within 15 days of receipt of such denial. 
(4)  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsection (c)(1) through (3) of this section, the rights referred to in this section shall continue until the expiration of that permit or any extension of that permit. 
(Code 1957, § 24.50)  
Sec. 78-145. - Development inconsistent with zoning; conditional approval. 
(a)  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in chapter 106 of this Code, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider or the subdivider's designee obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding subsection 78-144(a), confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
(b)  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time period set forth in subsection 78-144(c). 
(Code 1957, § 24.51)  
Sec. 78-146. - Application inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any section of this division, a property owner or the property owner's designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in section 78-143 and subsection 78-144(a), and local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Code 1957, § 24.52)  
Secs. 78-147—78-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FINAL TRACT MAP 
 
Sec. 78-176. - Soils report. 
(a)  A preliminary soils report, prepared by a civil engineer registered in the state and based upon adequate test borings, shall be required for every subdivision for which a final tract or final parcel map is required. The preliminary soils report may be waived if the city engineer and building director find that sufficient knowledge exists as to the soils qualities of the soils of the subdivision. 
(b)  If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot or parcel in the subdivision shall be required and must be performed by a civil engineer registered in the state, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problem exists. 
(c)  The subdivision or any portion thereof where such soils problems exist may be approved if it is determined that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed and that the issuance of any building permit shall be conditioned to include this recommended action within the construction of each structure involved. 
(d)  If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of rocks or liquids containing deleterious chemicals which, if not corrected, could cause construction materials such as concrete, steel, and ductile or cast iron to corrode or deteriorate, a soils investigation of each potentially affected lot in the subdivision may be required. 
(Code 1957, § 24.34) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code §§ 66490, 66491.  
Sec. 78-177. - Monuments. 
At the time of making the survey for all subdivision final maps, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards of the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., and any requirements established by the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 24.35)  
Secs. 78-178—78-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEDICATIONS, IMPROVEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 78-206. - Applicability. 
The standards and requirements of this article shall apply to all subdivision final tract and parcel maps. Additional requirements may be added by either the planning director, city council, planning commission or the city engineer. Exemption from these requirements may be granted by the planning commission. 
(Code 1957, § 24.23)  
Sec. 78-207. - Public streets, highways, alleys and easements. 
(a)  All streets, highways, alleys, ways, easements, rights-of-way, and parcels of land shown on the subdivision final tract map or parcel map and intended for public use shall be offered for dedication for public use by appropriate certificate on the title page. All irrevocable offers of dedication shall also be shown by appropriate certificate on the title page. 
(b)  When vehicular access rights from any lot or parcel to any highway or street are restricted, such rights shall be offered for dedication to the city by the appropriate certificate on the title sheet, and a note stating "Vehicular Access Rights Dedicated to the City of San Fernando" shall be lettered along the highway or street adjacent to the lots or parcels affected on the final map. 
(c)  All streets, highways, alleys, ways, easements, and rights-of-way offered for dedication shall be developed and improved to the city's standards. 
(Code 1957, § 24.24)  
Sec. 78-208. - Private streets, alleys or ways. 
(a)  Private streets, alleys or ways will be permitted in a subdivision only when the welfare of the occupants of the subdivision will be better served and the public's welfare will not be impaired through the use thereof or the kinds of improvements thereon. Such private street, alley or way shall not be offered for dedication and shall be shown on the final tract or parcel map as parcels lettered alphabetically. 
(b)  All such accessways shall be governed by maintenance agreements. The agreements shall be approved by the city and made a part of the property deeds. 
(Code 1957, § 24.25)  
Sec. 78-209. - Utility easements. 
Any public or private utility easements required by the various utilities or the city shall be shown on the subdivision final tract map or parcel map and dedicated to the appropriate agency by separate document. 
(Code 1957, § 24.26)  
Sec. 78-210. - Drainage easements. 
(a)  When storm drains are necessary for the general use of lot or parcel owners in the subdivision and such storm drains are not to be installed in the streets, alleys or ways of such subdivision, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate upon the final tract or parcel map thereof the necessary rights-of-way for such facility. 
(b)  When the property being subdivided or any portion thereof is so situated as to be in the path of the natural drainage from adjoining unsubdivided property and no street, alley or way within the subdivision is planned to provide for the drainage of such adjoining property, the subdivider shall dedicate drainage rights-of-way adequate to provide in the future for the ultimate drainage of the adjoining property. 
(Code 1957, § 24.27)  
Sec. 78-211. - School sites. 
The city may require any subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions in the city to dedicate, pursuant to Government Code § 66478, to the school district such land as the city shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon such elementary schools as are necessary to ensure residents of the subdivision adequate school service. 
(Code 1957, § 24.28)  
Sec. 78-212. - Public facilities. 
The city may require that areas of real property within the subdivision be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses subject to the provisions of Government Code § 66479. 
(Code 1957, § 24.29)  
Sec. 78-213. - Supplemental size of improvements. 
The city may require that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvement be dedicated to the public pursuant to Government Code §§ 66485 and 66486. Supplemental length may include minimum sized off-site sewer lines necessary to reach a sewer outlet in existence at that time. 
(Code 1957, § 24.30)  
Sec. 78-214. - Off-site improvements. 
Under this chapter, the city may require the dedication of improvements such as rights-of-way, easements, and construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 66411.1. 
(Code 1957, § 24.31)  
Sec. 78-215. - Park and recreation dedications and fees. 
(a)  Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Government Code § 66477. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any subdivisions exempted from dedication requirements by Government Code § 66477. 
(b)  Requirements. Requirements for dedication of land or payment of a fee for park and recreation purposes shall be as follows: 
(1)  As a condition of approval of a final tract map or parcel map for a residential subdivision, a subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, at the option of the city, as determined at the time of approval of the tentative map. The land dedication or fee in lieu thereof shall be used for park and recreational purposes. The amount of land to be dedicated shall be three acres per 1,000 residents or a fee in lieu thereof based on the fair market value of three acres of land per 1,000 residents, as determined by appraisal. Such appraisal shall be paid for by the subdivider who shall deposit with the city an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the appraisal. The city shall select an MAI appraiser. The appraisal shall be completed prior to approval of the tentative map by the city. 
(2)  If the subdivider is not satisfied with the values established by the first appraisal, the subdivider may request and shall pay for the preparation of a second appraisal. The subdivider shall deposit with the city an amount sufficient to cover the cost of preparing the second appraisal. The city shall then select a second MAI appraiser to conduct the appraisal. If a second appraisal is conducted, the values established by the two appraisals shall be averaged, and that amount shall be the value used for determining the in-lieu fee. 
(c)  Standards. Standards for dedication of land or payment of a fee for park and recreation purposes shall be as follows: 
(1)  The number of people estimated to reside in a residential subdivision shall be calculated based on 3.5 persons per single-family residence; 1.8 persons per multiple-family unit; or two persons per mobile home. 
(2)  Based on subsection (c)(1) of this section, 457 square feet of land shall be dedicated for each single-family residence; 235 square feet shall be dedicated for each multiple-family unit; and 262 square feet of land shall be dedicated for each mobile home. If a fee in lieu of dedication is required, the fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land prescribed for each unit. 
(3)  Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed 50 percent, may be given against the requirements of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and provided that the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successors. 
(Code 1957, § 24.32)  
Sec. 78-216. - Improvement standards. 
Standards for design and improvement of subdivisions shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of the zoning ordinance in chapter 106 of this Code, the general plan, any specific plans adopted by the city and the requirements established by the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 24.33)  
Secs. 78-217—78-245. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BONDING AND IMPROVEMENT SECURITY 
 
Sec. 78-246. - Improvement agreement. 
Prior to the approval by the city council of the subdivision final map, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the city. The agreement shall specify the period within which he shall complete all improvement work to the satisfaction of the city engineer and shall provide that, if he shall fail to complete such work within such period, the city may complete the work and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. This agreement shall also provide for inspection of all improvements by the city engineer and reimbursement of the city for the cost of such inspection by the subdivider. Such agreement may also provide for the following: 
(1)  The construction of the improvements in units; 
(2)  An extension of time under conditions therein specified; 
(3)  The termination of the agreement upon the completion of proceedings under an assessment district act for the construction of improvements deemed by the city engineer to be at least the equivalent of the improvements specified in such agreement and required to be constructed by the subdivider; and 
(4)  Progress payments to the subdivider, or his order, from any deposit money which the subdivider may have made in lieu of providing a surety bond, provided that no such progress payment shall be made for more than 90 percent of the value of any installment of work and provided, further, that each such installment of work shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 24.36)  
Sec. 78-247. - Improvement bonds. 
To guarantee the performance of any action or agreement with regard to the proposed subdivision, security shall be furnished in the following amounts: 
(1)  An amount determined by the city engineer to be not less than 100 percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or of the act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement; 
(2)  An additional amount determined by the city engineer, not less than 50 percent of the total cost of the improvement; and 
(3)  An amount determined by the city engineer necessary for the guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished. 
(Code 1957, § 24.37)  
Sec. 78-248. - Faithful performance bond for monuments. 
The monumentation agreements for a subdivision shall be accompanied by a faithful performance bond in a sum equal to the cost of setting such monuments, guaranteeing the faithful performance of all such work of setting monuments and furnishing notes. 
(Code 1957, § 24.38)  
Sec. 78-249. - Surety company requirements. 
All bonds referred to in this article shall be furnished by a surety company rated A and AA and authorized to write the bonds in the state and shall be subject to the approval of and acceptance by the city attorney and city council. 
(Code 1957, § 24.39)  
Sec. 78-250. - Cash deposits and negotiable bonds. 
In lieu of any security bond required by this article, the subdivider may deposit with the city a sum of money or negotiable bonds equal to the required amount of such bond or security for the faithful performance thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 24.40)  
Sec. 78-251. - Release of improvement security. 
The improvement security required under this article shall be released in the following manner: 
(1)  Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work subject to subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  The city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer, may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or work, as it progresses, upon application therefor by the subdivider. However, no such release shall be for an amount more than 75 percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance of the act or work until final completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the city council authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., or the improvement agreement. 
(Code 1957, § 24.41)  
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city save from repeal, § 1-18(2); any ordinance levying or relating to taxes not inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal, § 1-18(6); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Taxation generally, Revenue and Taxation Code § 1 et seq.; transfer of city tax functions to county, Government Code §§ 51500—51520; sales and use taxes generally, Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001—7176. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Transfer of city tax functions to county. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city that the city, acting through its city council, elects to avail itself of the provisions of the act of the state legislature entitled "An act to provide for the levying and election of taxes by and for the use of municipal corporations and cities incorporated under the laws of the state, except municipal corporations of the first class, and to provide for the consolidation and abolition of certain municipal officers, and to provide that their duties may be performed by certain officers of the county and fixing the compensation to be allowed for such county officers for their services so rendered to such municipal corporations," as set forth in Government Code §§ 51500—51519. 
(Code 1957, § 25.1)  
Secs. 82-2—82-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State law as to sales and use taxes generally, Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001—7176. 
 
Sec. 82-31. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 25.2)  
Sec. 82-32. - Purpose. 
The city council declares that this article is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the sections of this article be interpreted in order to accomplish the purposes to adopt sales and use tax regulations which: 
(1)  Comply with the requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226. 
(2)  Incorporate provisions identical to those of the state sales and use tax law insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226. 
(3)  Impose a one-percent tax and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes. 
(4)  Can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, be consistent with Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under this article. 
(Code 1957, § 25.3)  
Sec. 82-33. - Contract with state prerequisite to effectiveness of article. 
This article shall become operative on April 1, 1956, and prior thereto this city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this article, provided that if this city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization, as set forth in this section, prior to April 1, 1956, this article shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the state board of equalization and provided, further, that this article shall not become operative prior to the operative date of the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the county. 
(Code 1957, § 25.4)  
Sec. 82-34. - Sales tax generally. 
(a)  For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the board of equalization. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226, all of the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001—7176, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this section. 
(c)  Wherever and to the extent that, in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001—7176, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, or the name of the state treasury or of the constitution of the state. Furthermore, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article. Neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001—7176 nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828. 
(d)  If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Revenue and Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required because of this section. 
(e)  There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured the following: 
(1)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  Receipts from sales to operators of common carrier and waterborne vessels of property to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside of this city. 
(f)  There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured the following: 
(1)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
(3)  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Code 1957, § 25.5)  
Sec. 82-35. - Use tax generally. 
(a)  An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226, all of the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001—7176, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this section. 
(c)  Wherever and to the extent that, in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001—7176, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, or the name of the state treasury or of the constitution of the state, nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article. Neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001—7176, nor to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828, as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203. 
(d)  There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section the following: 
(1)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226 by any city and county, county, or city in this state. 
(3)  The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the state public utilities commission. 
(4)  The use or consumption of property purchased by the operators of common carrier and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside the city. 
(d)  There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section the following: 
(1)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226 by any city and county, county, or city in this state. 
(3)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
(4)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Code 1957, § 25.6)  
Sec. 82-36. - Adoption of amendments to state law. 
All amendments of the state Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226 shall automatically become a part of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 25.7)  
Sec. 82-37. - Application to exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  Subsections 82-34(b), (e) and 82-35(b), (d) shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in which the state board of equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, at which time subsections 82-34(b), (c) and 82-35(b), (c) shall become inoperative. 
(b)  If subsections 82-34(b), (e) and 82-35(b), (d) become operative and the state board of equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, subsections 82-34(b), (c) and 82-35(b), (c) shall become operative on the first day of the month following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time subsections 82-34(b), (e) and 82-35(b), (d) shall become inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Revenue and Taxation Code § 401, at which time subsections 82-34(b), (e) and 82-35(b), (d) shall again become operative and subsections 82-34(b), (c) and 82-35(b), (c) shall become inoperative. 
(Code 1957, § 25.7.1)  
Sec. 82-38. - Process against collection. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city or against any officer of the state or this city to prevent or enjoin the collection of any tax or any amount of tax under this article or Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7200—7226. 
(Code 1957, § 25.8)  
Sec. 82-39. - Suspension of sections 25.10 to 25.51 of the 1957 Code. 
At the time this article goes into operation, the provisions of sections 25.10 to 25.51 of the 1957 Code shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the state board of equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax imposed by this article. However, if for any reason it is determined that the city is without power to adopt this article or that the state board of equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this article, the provisions of sections 25.10 to 25.51 of the 1957 Code shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of one percent continuously from and after April 1, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the state board of equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operations of the taxes imposed by this article, the provisions of sections 25.10 to 25.51 of the 1957 Code shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of one percent. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the city any sales or use tax accrued and owing because of the provisions of sections 25.10 to 25.51 of the 1957 Code in force and effect prior to and including March 31, 1956. 
(Code 1957, § 25.9)  
Secs. 82-40—82-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
 
Sec. 82-66. - Short title; authority. 
This article shall be known as the Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of San Fernando. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 11901—11934. 
(Code 1957, § 25.52)  
Sec. 82-67. - Operative date of article. 
This article shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 11901—11934 or upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, whichever is the later. 
(Code 1957, § 25.53)  
Sec. 82-68. - Administration of article. 
The county recorder shall administer this article in conformity with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 11901—11934 and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1957, § 25.54) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 82-69. - Imposition; amount. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or any other person, by his direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale, exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 25.55)  
Sec. 82-70. - Person responsible for payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to section 82-69 of this article shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit the document or instrument is made, signed, or issued. 
(Code 1957, § 25.56)  
Sec. 82-71. - Instruments to which governmental agencies are parties. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof or any state or territory or political subdivision thereof is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this article when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Code 1957, § 25.57)  
Sec. 82-72. - Exemption for written instrument securing debt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Code 1957, § 25.58)  
Sec. 82-73. - Exemption for conveyance making effective a plan of reorganization or adjustment. 
(a)  Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
(1)  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
(2)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
(3)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of section 506 of title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
(4)  Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected. 
(b)  Subsections (a)(1) through (4) of this section, inclusive, shall only apply if the making, delivering, or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change. 
(Code 1957, § 25.59)  
Sec. 82-74. - Exemption for conveyances making effective orders of Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
(1)  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of section 79k of title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935. 
(2)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed. 
(3)  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Code 1957, § 25.60)  
Sec. 82-75. - Exemption for partnership conveyances. 
(a)  For any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this article because of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
(1)  Such partnership or another partnership is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
(2)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
(b)  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this article, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon, all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(c)  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article because of a termination described in subsection (b) of this section and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Code 1957, § 25.61)  
Sec. 82-76. - Exemption for deed instrument or writing to beneficiary or mortgagee taken in lieu of foreclosure. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure, provided that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of the grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11926.  
Sec. 82-77. - Exemption for deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate property assets between spouses under judgment of dissolution of marriage, separation or agreement in contemplation of judgment or order. 
(a)  Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasicommunity, or quasimarital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasicommunity, or quasimarital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to the Family Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders. 
(b)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsection (a) of this section, the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11927.  
Sec. 82-78. - Exemption for deed, instrument or other writing for conveyance of realty by state or political subdivision or agency with agreement for purchaser to reconvey. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the state, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11928.  
Sec. 82-79. - Exemption for deed, instrument, or other writing for conveyance by state, political subdivision or agency of realty financed by obligations issued by nonprofit corporation. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which the state, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof conveys to a nonprofit corporation, realty, the acquisition, construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a governmental unit, within the meaning of 26 CFR 1.103-1(b). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11929.  
Sec. 82-80. - Claims for refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this article shall be governed by the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 5096—5180. 
(Code 1957, § 25.62)  
Secs. 82-81—82-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMISSIONS TAX 
 
Sec. 82-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Admission means and includes every act of entry by a person or patron to any portion of the premises. 
Admission charge or price means any charge for the right or privilege to enter any place and includes, in addition to or in lieu of money, any valuable consideration paid, given or received in exchange for the right or privilege of admittance to any premises or attending any event and any additional consideration paid, given or received, after admission to any premises, in exchange for the right or privilege of admission to or use of any portion of such premises or any accommodations or facilities located or provided therein. It includes a charge made for season tickets or subscriptions, a minimum service charge, a cover charge or a charge made for use of seats, tables, booths; etc., reserved or otherwise. 
Attend means to see, view, witness, enjoy, watch, be present at and participate in. 
Event means and includes any live attraction, concert, dance, demonstration, exhibition, feature, lecture, meeting, performance, race, recreational activity, sale, swap meet or any other transaction for which a separate or additional charge or admission price is paid for the right or privilege of attending or participating in such. 
Operator means any person owning, operating, conducting, directing, managing or controlling, alone or in conjunction with others, in whole or in part, as principal, agent, officer, employee or independent contractor, any business, admission to any event or portion of which is subject to any tax imposed by any section of this article. 
Patron means any person who pays or on account of whom is paid any charge or admission price for the right or privilege of being admitted to any premises for the purpose of attending any event thereat. 
Person means and includes an individual, firm, corporation, company, partnership, association, any unincorporated association, and any person acting in a fiduciary capacity. 
Place means and includes, but is not restricted to, circuses, dancehalls, auditoriums, stadiums, athletic pavilions, exhibition halls, swimming pools, amusement parks, golf courses and golf ranges, bowling alleys, nightclubs, cabarets, lecture halls, archery and shooting ranges, swap meets, movie theaters and all places where any form of diversion, recreation, sport or pastime is offered or provided. 
(Code 1957, § 25.70) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-107. - Imposition and levy. 
(a)  There is imposed and levied upon every person who pays an admission charge to any place located within the city limits a tax of $0.22 on each admission charge. The tax shall also be levied upon every person who, for promotional or other purposes, is admitted free or at reduced rates. 
(b)  On July 1, 1993, the tax rate established under this section shall automatically increase to $0.25 on each admission charge. On July 1, 1994, the tax rate established under this section shall automatically increase to $0.28 on each admission charge. 
(c)  On July 1 of each year thereafter the then-existing tax rate imposed under this section shall automatically increase by ten percent of the previous year's tax, plus the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside (1982-84 equals 100) as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics ("index"), rounded to the nearest cent. The increases shall be cumulative. In determining the percentage increase, the index for the month of May immediately preceding the adjustment date shall be compared with the index for the like month of the previous year. In no event, however, shall the tax imposed be adjusted downward to reflect a percentage increase in the index. 
(d)  Commencing March 1, 1999, the automatic ten percent increase in the tax rate imposed under subsection (c) shall be suspended; however, the admissions tax shall continue to increase annually based on the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside (1982 —1984 equals 100). The city council may terminate the suspension by an ordinance adopted by a majority vote. The city council may subsequently ordain by a majority vote to again suspend the automatic increase, which suspension may be terminated as described in this subsection. If the city council ordains to resume the automatic increase in the admissions tax, the first increase following the resumption shall be by ten percent of the tax rate existing at the time the suspension to be terminated was imposed, rather than by ten percent of the level the admissions tax would have reached had the automatic increase not been suspended. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the city council may suspend the collection of an admissions tax imposed upon a patron pursuant to this article for up to 30 calendar days per calendar year upon application by and a written agreement with an operator. 
(Code 1957, § 25.71; Ord. No. 1501, § 1, 3-1-1999; Ord. No. U-1594, § 2, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 82-108. - Waiver for religious, charitable, educational or eleemosynary organizations. 
The tax levied by this article is not applicable to admission charges to be used entirely for religious, charitable, educational or eleemosynary purposes and from which no individual person, other than bona fide employees and help necessarily contracted for, receives any gain, remuneration or profit. 
(Code 1957, § 25.72)  
Sec. 82-109. - Exceptions for certain persons. 
The tax imposed by this article will not apply to persons under 12 years of age who do not pay an admissions fee or to admissions gained by passes issued to the following: 
(1)  Bona fide employees of the management. 
(2)  Municipal officers on official business. 
(3)  Members of the press performing their duties. 
(4)  Other persons whose admission to the place is required for performing some work for the operator. 
(Code 1957, § 25.73)  
Sec. 82-110. - Duty to collect and report collections to city. 
(a)  The tax levied and assessed under this article is imposed upon the patron and will be paid in addition to and in conjunction with the admission charge. The tax will be collected by the operator. 
(b)  All admission tickets or cards sold or otherwise distributed by an operator shall be conspicuously and indelibly printed, written or stamped with a number on the face or back of that part of the ticket which is taken up by the management of the place to which admission is granted, so as to provide documentation of the number of patrons admitted thereto. 
(c)  On or before the 15th day of each calendar month, the operator will give an accounting to the city of all taxable admissions collected during the preceding calendar month. This accounting will be filed with the finance director. In conjunction with this filing, the operator will pay to the finance director all taxes collected as shown in the accounting; provided, however, that the operator shall be entitled to retain one percent of all admissions taxes collected to defray the costs of collections and remittance. The finance director will provide a simple, one-page form to be used for the accounting. The city will keep the contents of the accounting confidential. 
(Code 1957, § 25.74; Ord. No. 1545, § 24, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 82-111. - Temporary or transient places charging admissions; permit and bond required. 
(a)  Every person paying an admission charge to a temporary or transient place as defined in section 82-106 shall also be subject to the tax levied by this article, and every person operating or conducting such a temporary or transient place shall collect and remit such tax as provided in this section. 
(b)  Prior to conducting such a temporary or transient place, a permit shall first be obtained from the finance director. Every person conducting such temporary or transient place shall file a statement and remittance covering the taxes collected on the day following the conclusion of operations or at such reasonable time as the finance director shall determine. However, before a permit shall be issued under this section, the applicant for the permit shall deposit with the finance director a sum of money or bond in lieu thereof, conditioned upon the faithful compliance with this section, in an amount equal to the amount of the maximum tax payable by the patrons, multiplied by the total selling capacity of the premises, multiplied by the number of events scheduled there. In computing the cash bond, no more than the total number of events within any one month will be used. 
(c)  If an operator does not account at the time and in the manner required or does not permit inspection of his records after the finance director has demanded him to do so, the city council may, upon notification of any of these facts, declare the operator's cash deposit forfeited. 
(d)  A forfeiture does not relieve the operator from liability for any taxes due upon admissions to any event conducted by him. 
(e)  After the event ends and the finance director certifies that all accounts required of the operator under this article have been made and audited and that all taxes and penalties due have been paid to the city, the city council will refund all cash bonds deposited by the operator with the city and not declared forfeited to the operator by warrant drawn on the treasury in the form and manner as provided for other city warrants. 
(Code 1957, § 25.75; Ord. No. 1545, § 25, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 82-112. - Determination of tax due. 
If any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this article fails to file a statement and a remittance or if the finance director has reasonable cause to believe that an erroneous statement has been filed, the finance director may proceed to determine the amount due to the city and, in connection therewith, shall make such investigations and take such testimony and other evidence as may be necessary; provided, however, that notice and opportunity to be heard shall be given any person who may become liable for the amount owing prior to any determination by the finance director. 
(Code 1957, § 25.76; Ord. No. 1545, § 26, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 82-113. - Rules and regulations. 
The finance director shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax levied under this article. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in the office of the finance director. Failure or refusal to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated under this section shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 25.77; Ord. No. 1545, § 27, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 82-114. - Addition of other city taxes or fees. 
The tax imposed by this article is in addition to any other tax, license or permit fee that may be required of any person by this Code or any other city ordinance. 
(Code 1957, § 25.78)  
Sec. 82-115. - Disposition of funds. 
All taxes and penalties received pursuant to this article will be deposited by the finance director in the general fund, unless the city council, by resolution, directs otherwise. 
(Code 1957, § 25.79; Ord. No. 1545, § 28, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 82-116. - Right to inspect books and records. 
The finance director, either personally or through his authorized agents, will have the right at any reasonable time and place to examine all books, records and reports of the operator relative to the matters required by this article to be set forth in each account. All records will be retained for two years. 
(Code 1957, § 25.80; Ord. No. 1545, § 29, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 82-117. - Failure to remit; penalties for nonpayment. 
(a)  Every person required to collect a tax imposed by this article who fails to collect the tax or who fails to remit the tax shall be personally liable to the city for the amount of the tax. Any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this article who fails to remit the amount of the tax when due shall, in addition to all other penalties, pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount due. For each successive 30 days elapsing before payment, there shall be added an additional penalty of ten percent. 
(b)  The amount of any tax or any penalty imposed by this article will be considered a debt to the city. Any operator violating any of the sections of this article will be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of taxes and penalties imposed by this article. Attachment shall issue on verified complaint without any bond or affidavit given or required on behalf of plaintiff. 
(Code 1957, § 25.81)  
Sec. 82-118. - Violations and penalties. 
The conviction or punishment of any person for the violation of this article will not excuse or exempt the person from paying any license, tax, fee or penalty due or unpaid under this article. 
(Code 1957, § 25.82; Ord. No. 1537, §§ 12, 14, 10-21-2002)  
ARTICLE V. - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 
 
Sec. 82-119. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "San Fernando Preservation and Beautification Measure" and is codified under the following San Fernando Municipal Code article heading: "Transactions and Use Tax." 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 1678, § 3, 12-12-2018)  
Sec. 82-120. - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after June 4, 2013, pursuant to Taxation and Revenue Code § 7265. The provisions of this article shall not take effect until the operative date. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-121. - Purpose. 
The ordinance implementing this article was first adopted by a majority of San Fernando voters who cast votes at a June 4, 2013, special municipal election to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(1)  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City of San Fernando (hereinafter, "city") to adopt the ordinance implementing this tax which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
(2)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(3)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
(4)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 1678, § 4, 12-12-2018)  
Sec. 82-122. - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax implemented under this article; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-123. - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of 0.50 percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-124. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-125. - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this article for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of 0.50 percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-126. - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-127. - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
(1)  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefore. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
a.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of control, state board of equalization, state treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
b.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article. 
c.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
1.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
2.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
d.  In sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(2)  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-128. - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-129. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
(b)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
(1)  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(2)  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
(3)  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this article. 
(4)  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this article. 
(5)  For the purposes of subsections (b)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(c)  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this article, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
(1)  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
(2)  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in section 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
(3)  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this article. 
(4)  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this article. 
(5)  For the purposes of subsections (c)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(6)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
(7)  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
(d)  Any person subject to use tax under this Article may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-130. - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this article to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this article, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-131. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Article, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-132. - Annual public reports. 
On or before each anniversary of the operative date, the city shall complete a study and produce a report reviewing the collection, management and expenditure of revenue from the proposed tax and shall present a report explain and providing an overview of the same at an open and public meeting of the city council. this report shall be a public document. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-133. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the article and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-134. - Effective date. 
This article relates to the levying and collecting of the city transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately. However, as required by California Constitution article XIIIC and Revenue and Taxation Code and section 7285.9, no amendment to this article may increase the rates of the taxes above what is authorized by this article unless such amendment is submitted to and approved by the voters. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 82-135. - Termination of tax upon repeal by voters. 
This article and the transactions and use tax established and codified hereunder shall have an indefinite term. The forgoing notwithstanding, this article and the transactions and use tax established hereunder may be later terminated by the voters of the City of San Fernando by means of a ballot measure to repeal the same at a future general or special municipal election of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1678, § 2, 12-12-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1678, § 2, adopted December 12, 2018, repealed § 82-135. Former § 82-135 pertained to automatic expiration date and derived from Ord. No. 1626, adopted June 17, 2013. 
Editor's note— This article and the transactions and use tax established and codified under this article was first enacted by a vote of the people at a special municipal election held on June 4, 2013. The tax was first approved as Measure A, the City of San Fernando Temporary Transactions and Use Tax. The operative date of the tax was October 1, 2013 and the expiration date of the tax was to be 7 years thereafter at midnight, September 31, 2020. With the passage of Ordinance No. 1678 as Measure A, the San Fernando Preservation and Beautification Measure at a general municipal election held on November 6, 2018, the September 31, 2020 expiration date for the transactions and use tax was repealed and the tax was extended indefinitely until such time as Article V (Transactions and Use Tax) of Chapter 82 (Taxation) is repealed in its entirety by the vote of the people of the City of San Fernando at a future general or special municipal election or by such other legal procedures as may be authorized by law for the repeal of taxes.  
Sec. 82-136. - Declaration regarding use of tax revenues. 
The revenues generated by the tax imposed under this article may be used for any lawful governmental purpose of the city, as authorized by ordinance, resolution or action of the city council or by ordinance adopted by the electorate of the city. The transactions and use tax established under this article does not meet the criteria established by California Constitution Article IIIC, section 1(d) for special taxes and said tax is instead a general tax within the meaning of California Constitution Article IIIC, section 1(a) whose revenues may be used for any unrestricted general revenue purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 1678, § 5, 12-12-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1678, § 5, adopted December 12, 2018, renamed § 82-136 from "declaration" to "declaration regarding use of tax revenues."  
Chapter 86 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 106; performance standards relating to placement of satellite receiving antennas, § 106-1181 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 86-1—86-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDED BY STATE FRANCHISE HOLDERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1624, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 2012, amended former Art. II, Divs. 1—14, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to cable communications franchising and derived from 1495, § 2, adopted Nov. 16, 1998. 
 
Sec. 86-26. - Purpose and applicability. 
The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations for the provision of video service by state franchise holders, in accordance with the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act, California Public Utilities Code sections 5800—5970 ("DIVCA"). This article shall apply to video service providers operating within the city pursuant to a valid state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1624, § 1, 10-15-2012)  
Sec. 86-27. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
City means the City of San Fernando. 
City administrator means the city administrator of the City of San Fernando or his/her designee. 
Franchise fee shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (g) of Public Utilities Code section 5830 or its successor. 
Gross revenues shall have the meaning given that term by California Public Utilities Code section 5860 or its successor. 
Holder or holder of a state franchise shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (h) of Public Utilities Code section 5830 or its successor. 
Material breach shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (j) of Public Utilities Code section 5900 or its successor. 
Network shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (l) of Public Utilities Code section 5830 or its successor. 
State franchise shall have the meaning given that term by subdivision (p) of Public Utilities Code section 5830 or its successor. 
State franchise holder shall have the same meaning as "holder" or "holder of a state franchise" set forth in section 86-27. 
Video service shall have the meaning given that term by the California Public Utilities Code section 5830(s) or its successor. 
(Ord. No. 1624, § 1, 10-15-2012)  
Sec. 86-28. - Franchise fee for state franchise holders. 
Each state franchise holder shall remit to the city a franchise fee in the amount of five percent of the gross revenues of the state franchise holder in compliance with California Public Utilities Code sections 5840(q), 5860(a) and (d). 
(Ord. No. 1624, § 1, 10-15-2012)  
Sec. 86-29. - Public, educational, and governmental access ("PEG") channels. 
(1)  Each state franchise holder shall remit to the city a fee to support public, educational and governmental access PEG channel facilities in the amount of one percent of the gross revenues of the state franchise holder in compliance with California Public Utilities Code section 5870. All revenue collected pursuant to this fee shall be deposited in a separate fund and shall only be expended for the purpose of supporting PEG channel facilities. 
(2)  Each state franchise holder shall furnish, on an annual basis, a statement within 90 days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the state franchise holder, reflecting the total amount of gross revenues, as defined in Public Utilities Code section 5860, for the preceding calendar year, and all payments, deductions and computations used to determine the amount of the remittances required by subsection (1) of this section during the preceding calendar year. The city administrator may establish, and from time to time revise, such additional reporting requirements as are necessary to ensure that the basis for the calculation of the amount of remittances are adequately explained and documented, and each state franchise holder shall comply with such additional reporting requirements; provided that each state franchise holder shall have first been provided written notice of such requirements at least 15 days prior to the beginning of the calendar year. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subdivision (n) of Public Utilities Code section 5870, upon expiration of any state franchise, without any action of the city council, this section shall be deemed to have been automatically reauthorized, unless the state franchise holder has given the city written notice 60 days prior to the expiration of the state franchise that the section will expire pursuant to the terms of subdivision (n) of Public Utilities Code section 5870. 
(Ord. No. 1624, § 1, 10-15-2012)  
Sec. 86-30. - Customer service penalties by state franchise holders. 
(1)  Any state franchise holder shall comply with the customer service provisions set forth in Public Utilities Code section 5900. 
(2)  The city shall impose the following penalties against a state franchise holder for any material breach of the customer service provisions set forth in subsection (1) of this section: 
(a)  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a penalty of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(b)  For a second occurrence of a material breach of the same nature as the first material breach that occurs within 12 months, a penalty of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(c)  For a third or further occurrence of a material breach of the same nature as the previous material breaches that occurred within the preceding 12 months, a penalty of $2,500.00 shall be imposed for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(3)  The city administrator shall have the authority to assess penalties for any material breach by a holder of a state franchise. Prior to assessing penalties for a material breach, the city administrator shall first provide the state franchise holder with written notice of any alleged material breach of the customer service provisions set forth in California Public Utilities Code section 5900 and shall allow the state franchise holder at least 30 days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
(4)  A material breach for the purposes of assessing penalties shall be deemed to have occurred for each day within the jurisdiction of the city, following the expiration of the period specified in subsection (3) of this section that any material breach has not been remedied by the state franchise holder, irrespective of the number of customers affected. 
(5)  The city shall submit one-half of any penalty amounts it receives to the digital divide account established by California Public Utilities Code section 280.5. 
(6)  No monetary penalties shall be assessed for a material breach if it is out of the reasonable control of the state franchise holder. 
(7)  The penalty amounts set out in subsection (2) of this section are based on the maximums allowed under subsection (d) of California Public Utilities Code section 5900, and the city desires to set the penalty amounts at the highest amount authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1624, § 1, 10-15-2012)  
Sec. 86-31. - Authority to examine and audit business records. 
The city shall conduct audits and evaluations to ensure that it receives all franchise fee revenue to which it is entitled to at the times and in the amounts specified by Public Utilities Code section 5860. The city administrator is hereby authorized, either with or without the assistance of a duly authorized representative, to examine the business records of the holder of the state franchise in accordance with subdivision (i) of Public Utilities Code section 5860. 
(Ord. No. 1624, § 1, 10-15-2012)  
Chapter 90 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Placing handbills on vehicles, § 6-34; schedule for automobile parking lot or storage place, § 22-107; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; riding or driving animals and vehicles in parks, § 54-6; speed of vehicles, § 54-10; operation of vehicles for commercial purposes in parks, § 54-14; parking and business improvement areas, § 62-61 et seq.; parking for garage, patio and similar sales, § 66-70; vehicles for collection of solid waste, § 70-271 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; vehicular and pedestrian crossing, § 74-102; vehicle for hire, ch. 102; off-street parking, § 106-821 et seq. 
State Law reference— Uniformity of state traffic laws and applicability to municipalities, Vehicle Code § 21; powers of local authorities to regulate traffic, Vehicle Code §§ 21100, 21101. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generally. Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this section, but are defined in the state Vehicle Code, such definitions are incorporated in this chapter and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter as though set forth in full in this section. 
State Law reference— Definitions, Vehicle Code §§ 100—680. 
Central traffic district means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: 
Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way with the northwesterly boundary of the city; thence proceeding southwesterly along the northwesterly boundary of the city to the southwesterly boundary thereof; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly boundary to the centerline of Meyer Street (also city boundary line); thence southwesterly along the centerline of Meyer Street to the southwesterly line of Celis Street; thence along the southwesterly line of Celis Street to the northwesterly line of Workman Street; thence southwesterly along the northwesterly line of Workman Street to the southwesterly line of Pico Street; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly line of Pico Street to the northwesterly line of Carlisle Street; thence southwesterly along the northwesterly line of Carlisle Street to the southwesterly line of Kewen Street; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly line of Kewen Street to the southeasterly line of Chatsworth Drive; thence northeasterly along the southeasterly line of Chatsworth Drive to the southwesterly line of Pico Street; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly line of Pico Street to the southeasterly line of Wolfskill Street; thence northeasterly along the southeasterly line of Wolfskill Street to the southwesterly line of Celis Street; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly line of Celis Street to the southeasterly boundary of the city; thence northeasterly along the southeasterly boundary to the centerline of the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way; thence northwesterly along the centerline to the southeasterly line of Brand Boulevard; thence along the southeasterly line of Brand Boulevard to the northeasterly line of Second Street and its southeasterly prolongation; thence northwesterly along the northeasterly line of Second Street and its prolongation to the northwesterly line of Macneil Street; thence northeasterly along the northwesterly line of Macneil Street to the northeasterly line of Third Street; thence northwesterly along the northeasterly line of Third Street to the southeasterly line of Hagar Street; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly line of Hagar Street and the prolongation thereof to the centerline of the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way; thence northwesterly along such centerline to the northwesterly city limits and the point of beginning. 
Holidays means January 1, February 12, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, July 4, the first Monday in September, September 9, the second Monday in October, November 11, Thanksgiving Day and December 25. If January 1, February 12, July 4, September 9, November 11, Thanksgiving Day, or December 25 falls upon a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday. 
Loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Official time standard means, whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, the standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
Park or parking means the standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
State Law reference— Park or parking defined, Vehicle Code § 463. 
Parkway means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
Passenger loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian means any person who is afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle. The term "pedestrian" includes any person who is operating a self-propelled wheelchair, invalid tricycle, or motorized quadricycle and, because of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian, as specified in the preceding sentence. 
State Law reference— Pedestrian defined, Vehicle Code § 467. 
Police officer means every officer of the city police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any cessation of movement of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid compliance with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device or signal. 
State Law reference— Stop or stopping defined, Vehicle Code § 587. 
(Code 1957, § 13.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 90-2 which pertained to obedience to chapter and derived from Code 1957, § 13.2.  
Sec. 90-3. - Obedience to police officers and firefighters. 
(a)  It is unlawful to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of any peace officer, as defined in Penal Code § 830 et seq., when that peace officer is in uniform and is performing duties under any of the sections of this Code or to refuse to submit to any lawful inspection under this Code. 
(b)  It is unlawful to wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of any member of any fire department, paid, volunteer, or company operated, when wearing the badge or insignia of a firefighter and when in the course of his duties he is protecting the personnel and fire department equipment. 
(Code 1957, § 13.3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code §§ 2800, 2801.  
Sec. 90-4. - Persons authorized to direct traffic. 
No person other than an officer of the police department or a person deputized by the chief of police or person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this chapter, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city council or the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 13.4)  
Sec. 90-5. - Duty of persons riding bicycles. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those sections which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1957, § 13.5)  
Sec. 90-6. - Persons riding or driving animals. 
Every person riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and is subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those sections which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1957, § 13.5) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 21050.  
Sec. 90-7. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates or toy vehicle or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1957, § 13.6) 
State Law reference— Unlawful riding on portions of vehicles not designed or intended for passengers, Vehicle Code § 21712.  
Sec. 90-8. - Skateboards, roller skates and scooters. 
No person shall ride, use or propel any skateboard, roller skates or similar device or scooter on any sidewalk in any commercial zone within the city or on any sidewalk within the Civic Center area which is bounded by Maclay Street, Southern Pacific Railroad tracks, Brand Boulevard including the sidewalk immediately adjacent to San Fernando Junior High School and Third Street. 
(Code 1957, § 13.6.1)  
Sec. 90-9. - Vehicles used for advertising in central traffic district. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud-speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the central traffic district. 
(Code 1957, § 13.7) 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6.  
Sec. 90-10. - Animal-drawn vehicles in central traffic district. 
No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the central traffic district between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except during parades or upon a permit issued therefor by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 13.8) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14.  
Sec. 90-11. - Driving through, under or around railroad crossing gates. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1957, § 13.9)  
Sec. 90-12. - Truck routes for certain vehicles. 
(a)  Designation by ordinance and signs. Whenever any city ordinance designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a gross weight limit of 9,000 pounds, but not exceeding a maximum gross weight of 60,000 pounds, the city traffic engineer is authorized to designate such street by appropriate signs as a "truck traffic route" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a gross weight limit of 9,000 pounds, but not exceeding a maximum gross weight of 60,000 pounds. 
(b)  Limitations on use of streets other than truck routes. When any such truck traffic routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a gross weight limit of 9,000 pounds, but not exceeding a maximum gross weight of 60,000 pounds, shall drive on such routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of 9,000 pounds, but not exceeding a maximum gross weight of 60,000 pounds, coming from a truck traffic route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or 
(2)  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(d)  Schedule. Those streets and parts of streets described in section 90-952 of this chapter are declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a gross weight of 9,000 pounds, but not exceeding a maximum gross weight of 60,000 pounds. 
(Code 1957, § 13.11)  
Sec. 90-13. - Limitations on commercial vehicles using certain streets. 
(a)  Designation of restricted streets by ordinance; signs. Whenever any city ordinance designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance. 
(b)  Schedule. Those streets and parts of streets described in section 90-953 of this chapter are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the city or the public utilities commission; or 
(2)  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(d)  Use of restricted streets for pickups and deliveries. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any commercial vehicle from having ingress and egress to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(e)  Permit for use of restricted streets by unloaded trucks. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any unloaded truck having a gross weight of less than 9,000 pounds from having ingress and egress to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of getting to or from any property for which a permit is issued located on such restricted street, when the registered owner or operator of such truck has a valid permit therefor covering the truck and property issued by the city and prominently displayed on the truck, and such property is regularly used to store a truck by the registered owner or operator. All permits issued under this subsection shall expire December 31 of each year. Requirements under which such permit shall be granted by the city council, the fee to be charged therefor, the conditions thereof, and other regulations pertaining thereto shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council. Any permit so issued may be revoked by the city council for any misstatement in the application therefor or for violation of any of the terms, conditions and provisions thereof or of this Code or the city's resolution relating to the permit, after hearing, upon ten days' prior written notice by United States mail to the permittee to his address as it appears on the permit. 
(Code 1957, § 13.12)  
Sec. 90-14. - Driver training. 
(a)  Whenever the city traffic engineer finds and determines that it would be in the interest of automobile driver training programs in secondary schools and that traffic would not be unduly impeded, he may place or cause to be placed appropriate signs or barricades or both, specifying that particular streets are closed to through traffic during legal school hours, pursuant to the provisions of Vehicle Code § 459(i), for the purpose of conducting such driver training programs. 
(b)  A person shall not operate any vehicle on any portion of the highway so closed to through traffic, except for the purpose of going to or from a point within the specified closed area. 
(Code 1957, § 13.13)  
Sec. 90-15. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1957, § 13.16)  
Sec. 90-16. - Effect of approval or disapproval of state. 
(a)  Any section of this chapter which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the state department of motor vehicles is required by state law shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the department of motor vehicles. 
(b)  Whenever this chapter delegates authority to a city officer or authorizes action by the city council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by state law requires the prior approval of the state department of motor vehicles, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the city council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval in writing of the state department of motor vehicles in and to the extent required by Vehicle Code §§ 17000—17714 and 21000—23336. 
(Code 1957, § 13.17)  
Secs. 90-17—90-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-46. - City traffic engineer. 
(a)  Office established, officer designated; powers and duties generally. The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city engineer shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Duties generally. It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to: 
(1)  Determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals; 
(2)  Conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures; 
(3)  Conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions; 
(4)  Cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and 
(5)  Carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this chapter and other city ordinances. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.23, 13.24) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-91 et seq.  
Sec. 90-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 90-47 which pertained to enforcement and derived from Code 1957, § 13.172.  
Secs. 90-48—90-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRANSPORTATION AND SAFETY COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees, agencies and authorities, § 2-401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 90-71 - Established; composition; appointment and compensation of members; officers. 
(a)  There is established a transportation and safety commission of five members to be appointed by a different appointing councilperson, with such appointment to be ratified by the city council. Each member shall have full participation and voting rights. Each member shall also be a registered voter and city resident. Such members so appointed shall be persons who do not hold any office or position with the city. The terms of office of each member shall be one year. 
(b)  The members shall organize the transportation and safety commission and shall elect a chair and vice-chair. In the absence of the chair and vice-chair, any other member shall call the commission to order, whereupon a chair shall be elected from the members present to preside for that meeting. 
(Code 1957, § 13.25; Ord. No. 1586, § 6, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 90-72. - Duties generally. 
It shall be the duty of the transportation and safety commission to: 
(1)  Suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all city officers and agencies having authority with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic regulations; 
(2)  Stimulate and assist in the preparation and publication of transportation safety and traffic reports; 
(3)  Receive complaints having to do with traffic matters; and 
(4)  Recommend to the city council, the chief of the traffic division and other city officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of transportation safety and traffic regulations. 
(Code 1957, § 13.26)  
Sec. 90-73. - Meetings generally. 
The members of the transportation and safety commission shall meet at such time and place as may be fixed by resolution and may hold such other meetings as from time to time may be called in the form and manner required by law. 
(Code 1957, § 13.26.1)  
Sec. 90-74. - Absences from meetings. 
(a)  Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the transportation and safety commission by a member with or without consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and the office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city councilmember so assigned of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(b)  Absence from three regular meetings of the commission in a 12-month period by a member without consent of the commission or absence from four regular meetings of the commission within a 12-month period by a member with the consent of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of such member, and the office shall become vacant. The vacancy thus created shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city councilmember so assigned of a successor to fill the unexpired term of office. 
(Code 1957, § 13.26.2)  
Sec. 90-75. - Compensation. 
Each of the members of the transportation and safety commission shall receive compensation as the city council shall, from time to time, determine and fix by resolution. 
(Code 1957, § 13.26.3)  
Sec. 90-76. - Removal of members. 
Members of the transportation and safety commission shall be removed from office as provided in sections 2-35 and 90-74 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 13.26.4)  
Secs. 90-77—90-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - POLICE DEPARTMENT'S POWERS AND DUTIES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 90-101. - Enforcement of city traffic laws. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are designed by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13.27) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 1 et seq.  
Sec. 90-102. - Direction of traffic. 
Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or other signal in conformance with traffic laws. If a fire or other emergency occurs or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1957, § 13.28)  
Sec. 90-103. - Assistance by fire department at fires. 
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or when in the course of their duties they are protecting the personnel or equipment of the fire department, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. 
(Code 1957, § 13.29) 
State Law reference— Obedience to firefighters required, Vehicle Code § 2801.  
Secs. 90-104—90-125. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Traffic Division 
 
Sec. 90-126. - Established. 
There is established in the police department a traffic division to be under the control of an officer or police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 13.18)  
Sec. 90-127. - Duties generally. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to: 
(1)  Enforce the city's street traffic regulations and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city; 
(2)  Make arrests for traffic violations; 
(3)  Investigate traffic accidents; 
(4)  Cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other city officers in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and 
(5)  Carry out those duties specially imposed upon such division by this chapter and the city traffic ordinances. 
(Code 1957, § 13.19)  
Sec. 90-128. - Accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and in determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1957, § 13.20) 
State Law reference— Accidents generally, Vehicle Code §§ 2407, 2408, 20001—20016.  
Sec. 90-129. - Accident reports. 
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1957, § 13.21) 
State Law reference— Accident reports generally, Vehicle Code §§ 2407, 20008—20015.  
Sec. 90-130. - Annual traffic report. 
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 1957, § 13.22)  
Secs. 90-131—90-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 90-156. - Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The sections of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways apply to the drivers of all vehicles while engaged in the course of employment by this state, any political subdivision thereof, any municipal corporation, or any district, including authorized emergency vehicles subject to those exemptions granted such authorized emergency vehicles in this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 13.30) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 21052.  
Sec. 90-157. - Exemption of authorized emergency vehicles. 
The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle is exempt from the following provisions of the Vehicle Code: chapter 2 (Vehicle Code § 21350 et seq.), chapter 3 (Vehicle Code § 21650 et seq.), chapter 4 (Vehicle Code § 21800 et seq.), chapter 5 (Vehicle Code § 21950 et seq.), chapter 6 (Vehicle Code § 22100 et seq.), chapter 7 (Vehicle Code § 22348 et seq.), chapter 8 (Vehicle Code § 22450 et seq.), chapter 9 (Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq.) and chapter 10 (Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.) of division 11, and article 3 (Vehicle Code § 38305 et seq.) and article 4 (Vehicle Code § 38312 et seq.) of chapter 5 of division 16.5, under all of the following conditions: 
(1)  If the vehicle is being driven in response to an emergency call or while engaged in rescue operations or is being used in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or is responding to, but not returning from, a fire alarm, except that fire department vehicles are exempt whether directly responding to an emergency call or operated from one place to another as rendered desirable or necessary because of an emergency call and operated to the scene of the emergency or operated from one fire station to another or to some other location because of the emergency call. 
(2)  If the driver of the vehicle sounds a siren as may be reasonably necessary and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from the front as a warning to other drivers and pedestrians. A siren shall not be sounded by an authorized emergency vehicle except when required under this section. 
(Code 1957, § 13.31) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 21055.  
Sec. 90-158. - Duty to report where property damaged. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to any property, including vehicles, shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident and do either of the following: 
(1)  Locate and notify the owner or person in charge of that property of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle involved and, upon locating the driver of any other vehicle involved or the owner or person in charge of any damaged property, upon being requested, present his driver's license, and vehicle registration, to the other driver, property owner, or person in charge of that property. The information presented shall include the current residence address of the driver and of the registered owner. If the registered owner of an involved vehicle is present at the scene, the owner shall also, upon request, present his driver's license information, if available, or other valid identification to the other involved parties. 
(2)  Leave in a conspicuous place on the vehicle or other property damaged a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle involved and a statement of the circumstances thereof and shall without unnecessary delay notify the police department. 
(b)  Any person who parks a vehicle which, prior to the vehicle again being driven, becomes a runaway vehicle and is involved in an accident resulting in damage to any property, attended or unattended, shall comply with the requirements of this section relating to notification and reporting and shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalties of this section for failure to comply with the requirements. 
(Code 1957, § 13.32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 20002.  
Sec. 90-159. - Entry onto highway; yield to approaching traffic constituting immediate hazard; yield by approaching traffic. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any public or private property, or from an alley, shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic, as defined in Vehicle Code § 620, approaching on the highway close enough to constitute an immediate hazard and shall continue to yield the right-of-way to that traffic until the driver can proceed with reasonable safety. 
(b)  A driver having yielded as prescribed in subdivision (a) of this section may proceed to enter or cross the highway, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the highway shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle entering or crossing the intersection. 
(Code 1957, § 13.33) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 21804.  
Sec. 90-160. - Driving through funeral processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such processions are conspicuously so designated. 
(Code 1957, § 13.34) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions, Vehicle Code § 21100(a).  
Sec. 90-161. - Driving on sidewalk. 
Except as expressly permitted pursuant to the Vehicle Code, including Vehicle Code §§ 21100.4 and 21114.5, no person shall operate or move a motor vehicle upon a sidewalk except as may be necessary to enter or leave adjacent property. 
(Code 1957, § 13.35) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 21663.  
Sec. 90-162. - Driving on new pavement or freshly painted marking. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Code 1957, § 13.36)  
Sec. 90-163. - Driving onto or from limited access roadways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Code 1957, § 13.37)  
Sec. 90-164. - Certain vehicles prohibited upon freeways. 
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by state law, provided that official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. 
(Code 1957, § 13.38) 
State Law reference— Authority, Vehicle Code § 21760.  
Sec. 90-165. - Yield right-of-way intersections. 
In accordance with section 90-499 of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall comply with the provisions of Vehicle Code § 550.1 on approaches and entrances to intersections designated from time to time. 
(Code 1957, § 13.121)  
Sec. 90-166. - Railroad stops. 
In accordance with section 90-498 of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop before crossing the railroad tracks at those highway and railway grade crossings established from time to time. 
(Code 1957, § 13.115)  
Secs. 90-167—90-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-196. - Application of article. 
(a)  The sections of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this article, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The sections of this article imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the state Vehicle Code or the city ordinance prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1957, § 13.60)  
Sec. 90-197. - Parkways. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Code 1957, § 13.61)  
Sec. 90-198. - Parking for more than 72 hours. 
(a)  No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. 
(b)  If a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of 72 hours, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove such vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of the state Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1957, § 13.62)  
Sec. 90-199. - Displaying vehicle for sale or repair of vehicle. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1957, § 13.63)  
Sec. 90-200. - Parking on lefthand side of roadway. 
(a)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the lefthand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street, unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(b)  If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the lefthand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the lefthand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the lefthand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(d)  The requirement of parallel parking shall not apply if any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case that vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
(Code 1957, § 13.64) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to permit lefthand parking on one-way roadways, Vehicle Code § 22503.  
Sec. 90-201. - Angle parking. 
(a)  Marks or signs to designate where permitted. Whenever any city ordinance designates and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the city traffic engineer shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. 
(b)  Permitted streets designated. Angle parking shall be permitted upon those streets and parts of streets described in section 90-947 of this chapter. 
(c)  Method of parking. When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as provided in this section, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.65—13.67) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to permit angle parking, Vehicle Code § 22503.  
Sec. 90-202. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1957, § 13.68) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Sec. 90-203. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street, as indicated by such signs or markings, when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Code 1957, § 13.69)  
Sec. 90-204. - Parking on hills. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district, without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Code 1957, § 13.70)  
Sec. 90-205. - Prohibited in specified places. 
The city traffic engineer shall appropriately sign or mark the following places, and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of such places: 
(1)  At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone. 
(2)  At any place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop. 
(3)  Within 20 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. 
(4)  At any place where the city traffic engineer determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate dangerous traffic hazards. 
(Code 1957, § 13.71)  
Sec. 90-206. - Vehicles from which food or drinks are sold. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall park, stop or stand any vehicle upon any part of any city street and leave the vehicle stopped, parked or standing in any one location for a period of time longer than five minutes for the purposes of selling or delivering any food or drink from such vehicle, and no operator or person shall make a second stop after moving from the last place of parking, stopping or standing within a distance of 50 feet of the last place of parking, stopping or standing. No person shall park, stop or stand any vehicle upon any part of any city street for the purposes of selling any food or drink from such vehicle within 500 feet of any school property during school hours or within 200 feet of any marked crosswalk. No person shall use any musical or other sound-emitting device designed to attract customers while such vehicle is parked, stopped or standing in the manner and for the purposes described within this subsection. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall park or stand on any street any lunchwagon, eating cart or vehicle or pushcart from which articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so in accordance with articles II through V of chapter 58 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.72, 13.73)  
Sec. 90-207. - Permit for parking vehicle awaiting transportation of property for hire. 
No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit from the city council, which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
(Code 1957, § 13.74)  
Sec. 90-208. - Emergency no parking signs. 
(a)  Whenever the city traffic engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(b)  When signs authorized by this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Code 1957, § 13.76)  
Sec. 90-209. - Emergency reflectors; emergency warning signs or banners; disabled or parked vehicles. 
(a)  Every vehicle which, if operated during darkness, would be subject to the provisions of Vehicle Code § 25100, and every truck tractor, irrespective of width, shall at all times be equipped with at least three red emergency reflectors. The reflectors need be carried by only one vehicle in a combination. All reflectors shall be maintained in good working condition. 
(b)  When any such vehicle is disabled on the roadway during darkness, reflectors of the type specified in subsection (a) of this section shall be immediately placed as follows: 
(1)  One at the traffic side of the disabled vehicle, not more than ten feet to the front or rear thereof; 
(2)  One at a distance of approximately 100 feet to the rear of the disabled vehicle in the center of the traffic lane occupied by such vehicle; and 
(3)  One at a distance of approximately 100 feet to the front of the disabled vehicle in the center of the traffic lane occupied by such vehicle; 
(4)  If disablement of any such vehicle occurs within 500 feet of a curve, crest of a hill, or other obstruction to view, the driver shall so place the reflectors in that direction as to afford ample warning to other users of the highway, but in no case less than 100 nor more than 500 feet from the disabled vehicle; 
(5)  If disablement of the vehicle occurs upon any roadway of a divided or one-way highway, the driver shall place one reflector at a distance of approximately 200 feet and one such reflector at a distance of approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle in the center of the lane occupied by the stopped vehicle, and one such reflector at the traffic side of the vehicle not more than ten feet to the rear of the vehicle. 
(c)  When any such vehicle is disabled or parked off the roadway but within ten feet thereof during darkness, warning reflectors of the type specified in subsection (a) of this section shall be immediately placed by the driver as follows: one at a distance of approximately 200 feet and one at a distance of approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle, and one at the traffic side of the vehicle not more than ten feet to the rear of the vehicle. The reflectors shall, if possible, be placed between the edge of the roadway and the vehicle, but in no event less than two feet to the left of the widest portion of the vehicle or load thereon. 
(d)  Until the reflectors required by this section can be placed properly, the requirements of this section may be complied with temporarily by either placing lighted red fusees in the required locations or by use of turn signal lamps, but only if front turn signal lamps at each side are being flashed simultaneously and rear turn signal lamps at each side are being flashed simultaneously. 
(e)  The reflectors shall be displayed continuously during darkness while the vehicle remains disabled upon the roadway or parked or disabled within ten feet thereof. 
(f)  Subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this section do not apply to a vehicle under either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Parked in a legal position within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Parked in a legal position upon a roadway bounded by adjacent curbs. 
(g)  In addition to the reflectors specified in subsection (a) of this section, an emergency warning sign or banner may be attached to a vehicle which is disabled upon the roadway or which is parked or disabled within ten feet of a roadway. 
(Code 1957, § 13.77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 25300.  
Sec. 90-210. - Curb markings. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place and when required in this chapter shall place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth: 
(1)  Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the state Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
(2)  Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes and the loading or unloading of materials not more than 20 minutes. 
(3)  White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
a.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
b.  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times, except when such theater is closed. 
(4)  Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than 15 minutes at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays. 
(5)  Blue shall mean parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of disabled persons and disabled veterans. 
(b)  When the city traffic engineer, as authorized under subsection (a) of this section, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the subsections of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.78, 13.79) 
State Law reference— Authority, Vehicle Code § 21458.  
Sec. 90-211. - One-hour parking limitation. 
(a)  Central traffic district. When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within the central traffic district, except for such streets as are set forth in section 90-948 of this chapter, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(b)  Business districts outside of central traffic district. When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within a business district outside of the central traffic district, except for such streets as are set forth in section 90-948 of this chapter, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(c)  When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle on such streets as are set forth in section 90-954, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.80, 13.81; Ord. No. 1544, § 1, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 90-212. - Two-hour parking limitation on certain streets between certain hours. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle on any of the streets enumerated in section 90-948 of this chapter for a period of time longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays. 
(Code 1957, § 13.82)  
Sec. 90-213. - Three-hour parking limitation on municipal parking lots between certain hours. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle on any of the municipal parking lots enumerated in section 90-949 for a period of time longer than three hours at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays. However, this section shall not apply to any vehicle which has affixed thereon a valid permit for parking on such municipal parking lot, issued pursuant to any city ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1957, § 13.82.1)  
Sec. 90-214. - Unlimited time for parking on municipal parking lots between certain hours. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, any person may stop, stand or park any vehicle on any of the municipal parking lots enumerated in section 90-950 of this chapter between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Code 1957, § 13.82.2)  
Sec. 90-215. - Prohibited in central traffic district between certain hours. 
(a)  When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street in the central traffic district between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or materials subject to the limitations of section 90-249. 
(b)  When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any of the following enumerated streets in the central traffic district of the city between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials subject to the limitations of section 90-249: San Fernando Road between Mission Boulevard and Kittridge Street. 
(c)  When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any of the following enumerated streets or portions of streets in the central traffic district of the city between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials subject to the limitations of section 90-249: the northwesterly side of Maclay Avenue between Celis Street and Pico Street. 
(Code 1957, § 13.83)  
Sec. 90-216. - Streets where parking prohibited at all times. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in section 90-951 of this chapter unless exempt by permit. 
(Code 1957, § 13.84; Ord. No. 1544, § 3, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 90-217. - Overnight parking. 
(a)  Commercial vehicles. No person shall stop, stand or park any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more on any street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to commercial vehicles making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building and structure located on the restricted streets or highways or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(c)  Signing. Pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22507, signs giving adequate notice of the prohibitions contained in this section shall be placed within the city limits. 
(d)  Prohibited street locations. Prohibiting any vehicular parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following city streets: 
(1)  Arroyo Street between Fifth Street and the north city limits. 
(Code 1957, § 13.85; Ord. No. 1558, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 90-218. - Parking prohibited at certain times. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate the hours and days during which parking is prohibited on streets in the city for the purpose of street sweeping and is authorized to place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the parking of vehicles is prohibited during such days and hours. During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, no person shall park a vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established as a no parking zone. 
(Code 1957, § 13.85.5)  
Sec. 90-219. - Parking space markings. 
(a)  Installation and maintenance authorized. The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbing where authorized parking is permitted. 
(b)  Manner of parking inside markings. When parking space markings are placed in the highway or upon any municipal parking lot or parking area, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.86, 13.87)  
Sec. 90-220. - Parking of trailers, semitrailers, camp trailers, and recreational trailers. 
(a)  No person shall park any trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer, or recreational trailer upon any highway, street, alley, or public way or upon any public place otherwise ordinarily used for vehicular parking unless the trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer, or recreational trailer is at all times, while so parked, attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer, or recreational trailer in a normal manner upon the highway, street, alley or public way. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer, or recreational trailer which is: 
(1)  In the process of being loaded or unloaded, but in no instance for a period that exceeds two hours; 
(2)  Disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving, for a period not to exceed 24 hours, the disabled trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer recreational trailer on that portion of the highway, street, alley or public way or upon any public place otherwise ordinarily used for vehicular parking; 
(3)  Leased or owned by any permittee granted a permit for construction or repair work under any of the provisions of this code or by a public utility engaged in work for which no such permit is required, or a vehicle leased or owned by any contractor hired by such permittee or public utility, provided the trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer or recreational trailer is used in connection with such construction or repair work and is parked upon the construction or repair site, or within 150 feet thereof as measured from the limits of the work area as specified in the permit, and only during the period of the actual construction; or 
(4)  Leased or owned by a city department or a contractor or vendor hired by a city department for construction or repair work, or by a subcontractor thereof, provided such trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer, or recreational trailer is used in connection with such construction or repair work and is parked upon the construction or repair site, or within 150 feet thereof as measured from the limits of the work area, and only during the period of the actual construction or repair. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable in accordance with the provisions of chapter 1 of this City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 10-4-2004)  
Secs. 90-221—90-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
Sec. 90-246. - Authority to determine and mark zones; permissible locations. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
(1)  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district. 
(2)  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(Code 1957, § 13.88)  
Sec. 90-247. - Maximum curb length in block. 
No more than one-half of the total curb length in any block shall be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(Code 1957, § 13.89)  
Sec. 90-248. - Curb markings to indicate loading zones. 
(a)  Loading zones. Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line stenciled with black letters stating "loading only" upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
(b)  Passenger loading zones. Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line stenciled with black letters stating "passenger loading only" upon the top of all curbs in such zones. 
(Code 1957, § 13.90)  
Sec. 90-249. - Restrictions and time limits. 
(a)  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(c)  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
(d)  Within the total time limits specified in this section, this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted. 
(Code 1957, § 13.91)  
Sec. 90-250. - Limits for yellow loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in section 90-249. 
(Code 1957, § 13.92)  
Sec. 90-251. - Limits for passenger loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in section 90-249 of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 13.93)  
Sec. 90-252. - Limits in alleys. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley, and the time shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event shall the time consumed exceed more than 20 minutes. 
(Code 1957, § 13.94)  
Sec. 90-253. - Bus zones. 
(a)  Authority to establish. The city traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof, subject to the directives and limitations set forth in this section. 
(b)  Definition. The term "bus" as used in this section shall mean any motorbus, motorcoach, trackless trolley coach or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
(c)  Length. No bus zone shall exceed 80 feet in length. However, when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the city traffic engineer showing the necessity therefor, the city traffic engineer may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of 125 feet. 
(d)  Location near intersections. Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(e)  Location near safety zones. No bus zone shall be established opposite and to the right of a safety zone. 
(f)  Curb markings. The city traffic engineer shall paint a red line stenciled with white letters stating "no standing," together with the words "bus zone," upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone. 
(g)  Stopping in zones. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, except a bus, in a bus zone. 
(Code 1957, § 13.95) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of public carrier stands, Vehicle Code § 21112.  
Secs. 90-254—90-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING METERS 
 
Sec. 90-281. - Establishment of zones. 
All streets or portions of streets within the city on which the abutting property is zoned for business or industry under the city zoning ordinance in chapter 106 and all streets or portions of streets on which the abutting property may be zoned for business or industry and all city-owned or leased off-street parking lots are declared to be parking meter zones. If parking meters are installed, as provided in this division, along the curb next to or adjacent to any parking space in such zones, this division shall govern parking in such parking space. 
(Code 1957, § 13.96)  
Sec. 90-282. - Resolution authorizing installation and location. 
The city council may, by resolution, specify the streets or portions of streets or city-owned or leased off-street parking lots within the parking meter zones wherein the parking meters shall be installed, together with the maximum parking time limit thereon. The city engineer is authorized and directed to install or direct the installation of parking meters in such parking meter zones as so directed by the city council for the purpose and in such numbers and at such places as may be necessary to the regulation, control and inspection of the parking of vehicles therein, including the reservation of loading zones for commercial vehicles. 
(Code 1957, § 13.97)  
Sec. 90-283. - Installation and construction. 
Parking meters installed in parking meter zones shall be installed upon the curb or in off-street parking lots in the space immediately adjacent to the individual parking space described in section 90-284. Each parking meter shall be so constructed and adjusted as to show when properly operated and to signal that the space adjacent to which it is installed is or is not legally in use. 
(Code 1957, § 13.98)  
Sec. 90-284. - Marking of spaces; parking within marked spaces. 
The city engineer shall have lines and markings painted upon the curb or street or city-owned or leased off-street parking lot adjacent to each parking meter, designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall park within such line of marking. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park a vehicle in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings. 
(Code 1957, § 13.99)  
Sec. 90-285. - Parking beyond legal parking time. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or operated or controlled by him to be upon any street or city-owned or leased off-street parking lot within a parking meter zone, in any space adjacent to which a parking meter is installed, for more than the maximum parking time limit fixed and established by resolution of the city council and indicated in the parking meter space or any time during which the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such time as it is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except that such parking limitations shall not be operative on any Sunday or legal holiday, other than Saturday afternoon. 
(b)  Each hour of continued parking during which the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1957, § 13.100)  
Sec. 90-286. - Operation as prescribed by council. 
The denomination of the United States coin that shall be deposited in parking meters, the parking time allowed following the deposit of such coin and the directions which shall appear on the parking meters shall be such as may be prescribed by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1957, § 13.101)  
Sec. 90-287. - Deposit of coins. 
(a)  Required. Each parking meter shall be so designated that the deposit of a coin of the United States will set the mechanism of the meter in motion or will permit the mechanism to be so set in motion that the meter will show the unexpired parking time applicable to the parking space adjacent to the meter. The meter, when such parking time has expired, shall so indicate by a visible sign. 
(b)  Waiver by council. The council may, by resolution, provide and establish a daily or portion thereof, weekly, monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual charge payable in advance for the use of a parking meter space in each city-owned or leased off-street parking lot, and the city council, by resolution, may restrict the number of such spaces in any such lot that shall be rented on such basis. The council, by resolution, shall provide the necessary means or methods of evidencing the payment of such charge by parking meter hoods, stickers, cards, or other similar device. 
(c)  Exception when rental charge paid in advance. When any person has paid in advance the daily or portion thereof, weekly, monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual rental charge prescribed by the city council and during the period when the parking meter hood, sticker, card, or other similar device evidencing the payment of such charge is valid and in effect and when such parking meter hood, sticker, card, or device is displayed in the manner to be prescribed by resolution by the city council, a vehicle may be parked and remain parked in: 
(1)  A parking meter space in an off-street parking lot without the deposit of any coin in the parking meter, and when such parking meter indicates illegal parking; or 
(2)  A parking space in an off-street parking lot where no parking meters are installed without being in violation of section 90-948 of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.102—13.104)  
Sec. 90-288. - Temporary permits for use of metered spaces. 
(a)  Use for public displays. The city council upon application therefor may grant temporary permits for the use of parking meter spaces for public display purposes. 
(b)  Parking of construction equipment. The chief of police upon application may grant a permit for parking of construction equipment where necessary because of construction work on abutting property. 
(c)  Posting no parking signs and meter hoods. The chief of police is authorized (i) where it is required to facilitate the movement of traffic, and (ii) where a permit has been issued for the use of parking meter spaces to post no parking signs or hoods prohibiting parking in the parking meter spaces. The chief of police shall conspicuously post on each parking meter for each parking meter space wherein parking is to be prohibited or limited in use, as provided in this subsection, no parking signs or hoods over the parking meters. 
(d)  Parking in violation of no parking sign or hood. Any person, except for those given permission by the city council, parking a vehicle in any parking meter space which has been conspicuously posted with a no parking sign or hood as provided in subsection (c) of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(e)  Illegal posting of no parking sign or hood. Any person posting a no parking sign or hood on any parking meter on a parking space not included in the permit shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(f)  Charges and deposits. The council may, by resolution, provide and establish a charge to be made when public display or construction equipment is to be parked in a parking meter space, which charge shall be paid in advance to the police department or such other department as the council may determine by resolution. The council, by resolution, may also provide for a deposit for hoods or signs and provide the necessary means or methods of evidencing the method of payment of such charge by stickers or other similar device. 
(Code 1957, § 13.105)  
Sec. 90-289. - Use of slugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or other substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1957, § 13.106)  
Sec. 90-290. - Injuring or damaging. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate or for any person to deface, injure, tamper with or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed pursuant to this division or to hitch any animal thereto or to lean any bicycle against any meter. 
(Code 1957, § 13.107)  
Sec. 90-291. - Collection and deposit of moneys. 
It shall be the duty of the city council to designate some person to make regular collections of the money deposited in parking meters and to deliver such money to the city treasurer. It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to count the money and place it in a special account to be known as parking meter fund. Such person making such collections shall be bonded in the sum of $1,000.00 to ensure the faithful performance of his duties. 
(Code 1957, § 13.108)  
Sec. 90-292. - Use of moneys collected. 
All charges for use of parking meter spaces as provided in this division are levied and assessed as the fee to provide for the proper regulation, control and inspection of traffic upon the public streets or off-street parking lots, as the case may be, and to cover the cost of supervising, regulating and inspecting the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones provided for in this division and the cost of the acquisition, installation, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of parking meters and expenses incidental thereto and the acquisition by purchase or lease, establishment, improvement, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of off-street parking facilities. 
(Code 1957, § 13.109)  
Sec. 90-293. - Enforcement; issuing citations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce this division. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each community service officer to keep an account of and report the number of each parking meter which indicates that vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of this division, the date and hour of such violation, the make and state license number of such vehicle and any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(c)  The community service officer shall issue and attach in writing a citation for illegal parking in the same form and subject to the same procedure provided for by this chapter or city ordinances and state laws applicable to traffic regulations within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13.110)  
Secs. 90-294—90-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT OWNER'S CONSENT 
 
Sec. 90-321. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle upon any private property or upon property used for private parking purposes, without the consent of the owner of the property, the person entitled to the possession thereof for the time being, or the authorized agent of either, provided that signs specifying conditions under which parking is permitted shall have been posted at all entrances to such property. Such signs shall be approved both as to wording and posting by the police department. 
(Code 1957, § 13.121.1)  
Sec. 90-322. - Citation for vehicle illegally parked. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department may issue a citation to the owner or driver of any motor vehicle that has been parked or left standing on any private property, driveway or private parking lot or property used for private parking purposes in violation of section 90-321 of this division. The provisions of Vehicle Code § 591 shall be applicable in determining responsibility for such citation, and Vehicle Code § 591 is adopted by reference as a part of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 13.122)  
Sec. 90-323. - Persons authorized to remove illegally parked vehicle. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department, the owner of any private property or the person entitled to the possession thereof for the time being or the authorized agent of either may remove or cause to be removed any motor vehicle that has been parked or left standing on any private property, driveway or private parking lot or property used for private parking purposes in violation of section 90-321 of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 13.123)  
Sec. 90-324. - Liability for wrongful removal of illegally parked vehicle. 
If a vehicle removed from private property as provided in section 90-323 was rightfully there, the person who complained of the presence of such vehicle and/or the person, other than a member of the police department, who caused such vehicle to be removed shall be liable for any and all charges for towing and for caring for and keeping such vehicle safe. 
(Code 1957, § 13.124)  
Sec. 90-325. - Removal of illegally parked vehicle to garage or other place of safety. 
Any person referred to in section 90-323 of this division who removes any vehicle from any private property in the city is authorized to remove the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department. 
(Code 1957, § 13.125)  
Sec. 90-326. - Notice to owner of vehicle removed. 
Any person referred to in section 90-323 of this division who removes a vehicle from private property shall give notice to the owner of the motor vehicle as provided for and required by Vehicle Code § 585, which Vehicle Code § 585 as it existed on April 1, 1958, is adopted by reference as a part of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 13.126)  
Sec. 90-327. - Lien for towing and storage of vehicles. 
The keeper of any garage in which any vehicle is stored in accordance with this division shall have a lien thereon for his compensation for towing and for caring for and keeping safe such vehicle and may satisfy such lien upon compliance with and under the conditions stated in Vehicle Code § 585. 
(Code 1957, § 13.127)  
Secs. 90-328—90-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PARKING ON UNPAVED RESIDENTIAL FRONT YARD SURFACE AREAS 
 
Sec. 90-356. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following terms, whenever used in this division, shall have their respective meanings set forth in section 106-6 of this Code: "front lot line," "lot," "main building" and "setback." 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Front yard setback means the setback between the front of the main building and the front lot line. 
Owner of the property means the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. The term includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such land. 
Owner of the vehicle means the legal owner of record. 
Residential lot means a lot which is located in any residential (R) zone. 
(Code 1957, § 13.128.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-357. - Prohibited. 
No person shall park any vehicle on any unpaved area within the front yard setback of any residential lot. 
(Code 1957, § 13.128.2)  
Sec. 90-358. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Construction activities pursuant to a grading or building permit issued by the city; or 
(2)  Any activity performed for or on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1957, § 13.128.3)  
Sec. 90-359. - Supplemental nature of division. 
This division is not the exclusive regulation of vehicles parked on unpaved front yard setback areas of residential lots within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1957, § 13.128.4)  
Sec. 90-360. - Citation for vehicle illegally parked. 
Any regularly employed and salaried code enforcement officer, community service officer, community preservation officer or sworn police officer may issue a citation to the owner of any vehicle that has been parked on any unpaved area within the front yard setback of any residential lot, in violation of section 90-357 of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 13.128.5)  
Sec. 90-361. - Notice to property owner where vehicle illegally parked. 
Whenever the owner of the vehicle is cited three times for violating, at a single residential lot, section 90-357 of this division, the owner of the property shall be advised, in accordance with section 106-1142, to abate the public nuisance caused by the parking of the vehicle on an unpaved area within the front yard setback of the property. 
(Code 1957, § 13.128.6)  
Sec. 90-362. - Removal of vehicle illegally parked. 
Any vehicle for which, within a 30-day period, three citations are issued for violation of this division shall be subject to removal if the vehicle remains parked in violation of section 90-357 of this division for 90 or more consecutive days from issuance of the third citation. Removal shall be performed in accordance with the nuisance abatement procedures set forth in division 6 of article VI of chapter 106 of this Code. The owner of the vehicle shall be provided notice of all public hearings conducted pursuant to division 6 of article VI of chapter 106 of this Code in the same manner as the owner of the land. 
(Code 1957, § 13.128.7)  
Secs. 90-363—90-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PARKING CERTAIN COMMERCIAL VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL LOTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 102. 
 
Sec. 90-391. - Commercial vehicle parking prohibited on residential lots. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial vehicle means a vehicle registered with the department of motor vehicles as used for commercial purposes. The term "commercial vehicle" does not include a pickup truck, as defined in this subsection. 
Pickup truck means a motor truck with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of less than 11,500 pounds, an unladen weight of less than 8,001 pounds, and which is equipped with an open box-type bed not exceeding nine feet in length. The bed of a pickup truck may be covered or equipped with a bed-mounted storage compartment unit commonly called a utility body. 
(b)  No commercial vehicle which exceeds three-quarter-ton capacity shall be parked or left standing on any residentially zoned lot, except: 
(1)  When necessary for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to the property; or 
(2)  When such vehicle is parked in connection with and in aid of the performance of a service to or on the property only for such time as is reasonably necessary to complete such service. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 1, 12-7-1998)  
Secs. 90-392—90-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PARKING ZONES FOR THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED 
 
Sec. 90-421. - On-street parking. 
No person shall park any vehicle in any on-street vehicle parking space designated for the exclusive use of handicapped persons if such vehicle does not display one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled veterans and other handicapped persons pursuant to Vehicle Code §§ 9105 and 22511.5. The public works director shall determine the location of each parking space to be designated for the exclusive use of handicapped persons and shall paint blue markings at each such parking space as provided in Vehicle Code § 21458 and, in addition thereto, may indicate such parking spaces by signs or other suitable means. 
(Code 1957, § 13.155) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Sec. 90-422. - Off-street parking in city facilities. 
No person shall park any vehicle in any stall or space designated for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons in an off-street parking facility owned or operated by the city if such vehicle does not display one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled veterans and other handicapped persons pursuant to Vehicle Code §§ 9105 and 22511.5. The public works director shall determine the location of each parking space or stall to be designated for the exclusive use of handicapped persons and shall post immediately adjacent to each stall or space, and visible therefrom, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with an occupant in white on a blue background, as provided in Vehicle Code § 22507.8. 
(Code 1957, § 13.156) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Sec. 90-423. - Parking in private off-street parking facilities. 
No person shall park any vehicle in a stall or space in a private off-street parking facility designated for the exclusive use of handicapped persons if such vehicle does not display one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled veterans and other handicapped persons pursuant to Vehicle Code §§ 9105 and 22511.5, following the adoption of a resolution passed by the city council declaring the particular off-street parking facility as generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking. No such resolution shall be enacted without a public hearing thereon following ten days' prior written notice to the owner or operator of the privately owned and maintained off-street parking facility of the city's intention to adopt such a resolution. No such resolution shall apply to any off-street parking facility therein unless the owner or operator of the facility has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such off-street parking facility a notice, not less than 17 inches by 22 inches in size, with lettering not less than one inch in height, to the effect that such off-street parking facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control and unless the operator or owner determines the location of each parking space or stall to be devoted to the exclusive use of handicapped persons and designates each such parking space or stall with a sign as provided in Vehicle Code § 22507.8. 
(Code 1957, § 13.157) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Secs. 90-424—90-450. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 90-451. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commuter vehicle means a motor vehicle parked in a residential area which is not owned, leased or otherwise controlled by either: 
(1)  A resident who lives in the area designated as a parking permit district; or 
(2)  A guest visiting residents living in the area designated as a parking permit district. 
Guest means a person who is visiting at a dwelling unit located in a parking permit district. 
Guest permit means an annual permit issued pursuant to section 90-459. 
Parking permit means an annual permit issued pursuant to section 90-453. 
Parking permit district means a residential area with streets and boundaries designated by a city council resolution wherein a vehicle displaying a valid parking permit shall be exempt from parking restrictions established pursuant to this division. 
Permitted vehicle means a vehicle which displays a valid parking permit issued pursuant to section 90-453 or 90-459. 
Resident means a person who resides in a dwelling unit located in a parking permit district. 
(Code 1957, § 13.158) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-452. - Designation of parking permit districts. 
(a)  Generally. Parking permit districts may be established, modified or dissolved by a city council resolution. The city council, upon recommendation of the traffic commission, shall consider for designation as parking permit districts those areas satisfying the criteria established in subsection (b) of this section for the creation of such districts. When the council determines that the criteria, rules, and procedures required in this division have been met, it may establish, by resolution, parking permit districts with appropriate boundaries and parking restrictions. A motor vehicle displaying a valid parking permit or guest permit may be parked and shall be exempt from the parking restrictions established pursuant to the authority of this division in the parking permit district for which permit is issued. 
(b)  Process and criteria. The rules and procedures for creation of parking permit districts are as follows: 
(1)  Establishment process. Upon a recommendation of the traffic commission, an area may be evaluated as benefitting from the creation of a parking permit district. Boundaries of that proposed district will be determined by the traffic commission in that evaluation. 
(2)  Hearing and notification process. All residents within a proposed parking permit district shall be notified of a pending public hearing that may affect on-street parking in front of their properties. At a duly noticed public hearing, the traffic commission shall hear public testimony and recommend that city council approve, disapprove or amend the recommended district boundaries and parking restrictions. 
(3)  Criteria. If a significant number of residents in a contiguous on-street parking area request establishment of a parking permit district in their area or if, in the judgment of the traffic commission, an area may benefit from the establishment of a parking permit district, the traffic commission shall evaluate the situation and make a recommendation to the city council. 
(4)  Administration. The treasurer's department shall be designated as administrator of the parking permit program. The department's responsibilities shall include the collection of fees, issuance of permits and recordkeeping for this program. 
(Code 1957, § 13.159)  
Sec. 90-453. - Issuance of permits. 
Parking permits for parking permit districts shall be issued by the treasurer's department as follows: 
(1)  Each parking permit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued and shall identify thereon the particular parking permit district, the issuance number of the vehicle for which the permit is issued, and the date on which the permit shall expire. 
(2)  No more than three annual parking permits shall be issued to any one dwelling unit, except that, at the discretion of the police department, pursuant to section 90-457, additional parking permits may be issued. 
(3)  Parking permits may be issued only to residents of the parking permit district. 
(4)  Four guest permits may be issued to any one dwelling unit as provided in section 90-459. 
(Code 1957, § 13.161)  
Sec. 90-454. - Posting of parking permit areas. 
Upon designation of a parking permit district, the public works department shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the district, indicating prominently thereon the parking limitation, period of the day for its application, and the fact that motor vehicles with valid permits shall be exempt therefrom. 
(Code 1957, § 13.162)  
Sec. 90-455. - Parking permit exemption. 
(a)  A motor vehicle upon which a valid annual parking permit or guest permit is displayed shall be permitted to be parked on any block within the parking permit district for which it was issued without being limited by parking restrictions established pursuant to this division. Nothing contained in this section shall exempt permitted vehicles from any other traffic and parking regulations, statutes, or ordinances of either the state or the city. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, all other motor vehicles which do not display a valid parking permit or guest permit, which are parked within a parking permit district, shall be subject to the parking restrictions of this division. Any violation of this division shall subject the violator to the penalties of this chapter. 
(b)  A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated parking permit district. 
(c)  In addition to vehicles displaying a valid parking permit issued pursuant to this division, the following vehicles shall be exempt from parking restrictions established pursuant to this division: 
(1)  A motor vehicle, identified as owned by or operated under contract to a utility, whether privately, municipally or publicly owned, when used in the construction, operation, removal, or repair of utility property or facilities or engaged in authorized work in the designated parking permit district. 
(2)  A motor vehicle owned by or operated under contract to a governmental agency, when used in the course of official government business. 
(3)  A motor vehicle owned by or operated under contract to a commercial business, when used in the loading or unloading of property when otherwise used in connection with or in aid of the performance of a service to or on a property in the parking permit district. 
(Code 1957, § 13.163)  
Sec. 90-456. - Application for and duration of permit. 
Except as otherwise provided, each parking permit issued under this division shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Permits may be renewed annually upon reapplication in the manner required by the treasurer's department. Each application for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the applicant, the applicant's residence address within a parking permit district, the license number of the motor vehicle for which application is made, and such other information that may be deemed relevant by the treasurer's department. Annual parking permits may be issued only for the vehicles registered in the state. 
(Code 1957, § 13.164)  
Sec. 90-457. - Rules and regulations. 
The treasurer's department shall have authority to promulgate and administer rules and regulations regarding the issuance of permits, and the police department shall have authority to promulgate and administer rules and regulations to implement and enforce the program. These rules and regulations shall be submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 13.165)  
Sec. 90-458. - Penalty for violation. 
A violation of any of the following or any section of this division shall constitute an infraction: 
(1)  Unless otherwise exempted by this division, no person shall stand or park a motor vehicle without a valid parking permit in violation of any parking restrictions established pursuant to this division. 
(2)  No person shall falsely represent himself as eligible for a parking permit or furnish false information in an application for a parking permit to the treasurer's department. 
(3)  No annual parking permit issued pursuant to this division shall for any consideration, monetary or otherwise, be assigned or transferred by a resident for use by any nonresident. 
(4)  No person shall copy, produce or create a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit, nor shall any person use or display an expired permit or a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit. 
(5)  The permit of any person who, after a hearing, has been found by the police department to have violated any of the sections of this division shall be revoked, and no new permit shall be issued to that person or household for a period of one year. Such person, upon written notification of such revocation, shall surrender the permit to the treasurer's department within 15 days. No person shall use or display a revoked parking permit. 
(Code 1957, § 13.166)  
Sec. 90-459. - Guest permits. 
Pursuant to this division, any resident may apply to the treasurer's department for up to four guest permits for the use of guests visiting a resident. Such guest permits shall be valid only for the calendar year in which they are issued and are valid on any block within the parking permit district for which they were issued. Guest permits may not be used by commuter vehicles, and any such use shall subject the user and the permittee to the penalties of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 13.167)  
DIVISION 9. - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS 
 
Sec. 90-460. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this division, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charging means an electric vehicle parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is electrically connected to the charging station equipment. 
Electric vehicle means a "motor vehicle" as defined in the California Vehicle Code, and (i) which displays the State of California Air Board ZEV (zero emission vehicle) sticker or (ii) any vehicle defined by the air resources board as "off-vehicle charge capable" meaning a vehicle having the capability to charge a battery from an off-vehicle electric energy source that cannot be connected or coupled to the vehicle in any manner while the vehicle is being driven. 
Electric vehicle charging station or charging station means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this division, and delivers electricity from a source outside of an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1676, § 3, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 90-461. - Designation of electric vehicle parking spaces. 
(a)  Designation of parking spaces. The public works director, or designee, is authorized in accordance with the purposes of this division to designate spaces in off-street public parking facilities for the exclusive parking of electric vehicles that are connected to electric vehicle charging stations for the purpose of transfer of electricity to the battery or other energy storage device of an electric vehicle. 
(b)  Signs or markings. Upon designation of a parking space or spaces for the exclusive use of electric vehicles pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, above, the public works department shall place signs or markings giving adequate notice that the parking space or spaces are restricted and to be used only for such electric vehicles. The signs or markings shall be in compliance with Section 22511 of the California Vehicle Code indicating that vehicles left standing in violation of the restriction may be removed. The parking restriction shall not apply to the designated parking spaces until the sign or markings have been placed. 
(Ord. No. 1676, § 3, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 90-462. - Electric vehicle parking restriction. 
(a)  Where a sign designating a parking space for the exclusive use of charging electric vehicles is posted, no person shall park in that space: 
(1)  Any nonelectric motor vehicle; 
(2)  Any electric vehicle that is not connected to the electric vehicle charging station; 
(3)  Any electric vehicle that is not charging; or 
(4)  Any electric vehicle that has been charging for a period of time that exceeds the posted maximum allowable time limit for parking for all vehicles in the parking lot where the electric vehicle charging station is located; or if the parking lot or other location where the electric vehicle charging station is located does not have a maximum allowable time limit for parking, a period in excess of four hours. 
(b)  The police department and such other parking enforcement personnel as the city may designate are authorized to cite and/or remove or cause the removal of vehicles parked in violation of this section in accordance with Section 22511 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 1676, § 3, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 90-463. - Usage fees. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish and from time to time amend a schedule of fees which the city may charge members of the public for each electric vehicle charging session. 
(Ord. No. 1676, § 3, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 90-464. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be, for every such offense, guilty of an infraction. The city council may, by resolution, establish and from time to time amend a schedule of fines for any violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1676, § 3, 6-4-2018)  
Secs. 90-465—90-485. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic signs, signals and markings, Vehicle Code §§ 21350—21468. 
 
Sec. 90-486. - Authority of city traffic engineer to install. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required under this chapter or other city traffic ordinances to make effective this chapter or other city traffic ordinances. 
(b)  Whenever the state Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the city traffic engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices, subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or the city traffic ordinances or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 13.39) 
State Law reference— Local authorities authorized to regulate traffic by means of signaling devices, Vehicle Code § 459.  
Sec. 90-487. - Erection of signs designating one-way streets or alleys. 
Whenever any city ordinance or resolution designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1957, § 13.40)  
Sec. 90-488. - Placement and legibility of signs prior to enforcement. 
No section of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator, unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such sections of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1957, § 13.41)  
Sec. 90-489. - Obedience to devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to fail to obey any sign or signal erected or maintained to indicate and carry out the sections of this chapter or any local traffic ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to a local traffic ordinance or to fail to obey any device erected or maintained pursuant to Vehicle Code § 21352. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to acts constituting violations under chapter 9 of division 11 of the state Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq.) or to acts constituting violations of any traffic ordinance adopted pursuant to such statute. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.42, 13.49, 13.51(a)(1), (2)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 21461.  
Sec. 90-490. - Location and installation of traffic signals. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by resort to field observation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Department of Transportation—Traffic Manual, current edition, issued by the state department of motor vehicles. 
(c)  Whenever the city traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic, unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. 
(Code 1957, § 13.43)  
Sec. 90-491. - Lane markings on roadways. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. 
(Code 1957, § 13.44)  
Sec. 90-492. - Distinctive roadway markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state department of motor vehicles, pursuant to the Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1957, § 13.45)  
Sec. 90-493. - Removal, relocation or discontinuance of devices. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by state law or this chapter, whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain. 
(Code 1957, § 13.46)  
Sec. 90-494. - Hours of operation. 
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or in effect, except when such hours or days are specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 13.47)  
Sec. 90-495. - Signs, markers or buttons indicating turns at intersections. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make righthand or lefthand turns. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1957, § 13.48)  
Sec. 90-496. - Restricted turn signs. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, and such shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1957, § 13.50)  
Sec. 90-497. - Right turn against stop signals. 
The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs at any intersection inside or outside of the central traffic district where he determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal stop indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Code 1957, § 13.52(b))  
Sec. 90-498. - Erection, maintenance and specifications of stop signs; designation of through streets, stop intersections and railroad stops. 
(a)  Whenever any city ordinance or resolution designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in Vehicle Code § 471. 
(b)  Those streets and parts of streets described in section 90-945 of this chapter are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section. 
(c)  This section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are described in section 90-946 of this chapter. 
(d)  This section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as described in section 90-166 of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.53, 13.54)  
Sec. 90-499. - Designation of yield right-of-way intersections. 
(a)  The entrances to the intersections as described in section 90-165 of this chapter are declared to be yield right-of-way approaches to such intersections for the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall erect appropriate signs to give effect to this section. 
(Code 1957, § 13.54.5)  
Secs. 90-500—90-525. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Pedestrians, Vehicle Code §§ 21950—21969; power of local authorities to establish crosswalks, Vehicle Code § 21106. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-526. - Establishment, designation and maintenance of crosswalks. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district and at other places within or outside such district where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway, subject to the limitation contained in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length. Elsewhere, not more than one additional crosswalk shall be established in any one block, and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Code 1957, § 13.55) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to establish crosswalks, Vehicle Code § 21106.  
Sec. 90-527. - Use of crosswalks in central traffic district or business districts. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. 
(Code 1957, § 13.56)  
Sec. 90-528. - Crossing roadways at right angles. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Code 1957, § 13.57)  
Sec. 90-529. - Standing in roadways. 
No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk, if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee or any employee of a public utility, when necessarily upon a street in the line of duty. 
(Code 1957, § 13.58) 
State Law reference— Standing in roadways for purpose of soliciting rides, Vehicle Code § 21957.  
Sec. 90-530. - Restricted crossing of freeways. 
No pedestrian shall walk across or along any street established as a freeway, as defined by state law, except in the space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided that official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59)  
Secs. 90-531—90-555. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PEDESTRIAN MALL  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 90-556. - Established. 
The council declares and determines that a pedestrian mall is established under the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960 (Streets and Highways Code § 11000 et seq.) and that a general description of such pedestrian mall is as follows: San Fernando Road between the northwesterly line of Brand Boulevard and the southeasterly line of Maclay Avenue, and between the northwesterly line of Maclay Avenue and the southeasterly line of Mission Boulevard. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.1)  
Sec. 90-557. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Vehicle means any device by which a person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn, except a wheelchair, baby carriage, shopping cart or hand dolly. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-558. - Vehicles restricted. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be permitted on the pedestrian mall except in the places and upon the conditions provided in this section. 
(b)  The following vehicles are permitted on the pedestrian mall in the northwest and southeast vehicle driving lanes, in parking places and loading zones, in the places and upon the conditions set forth: 
(1)  Passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles with a capacity rating not exceeding three-quarter ton. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles and equipment of all types. 
(3)  City vehicles and equipment performing services. 
(4)  Public trams or similar vehicles operated by or under permit from the city. 
(5)  Commercial vehicles making deliveries or pickups to or from the businesses abutting the mall. 
(6)  Commercial vehicles in the loading zones provided and designated. 
(7)  Public utility vehicles and equipment. 
(8)  Commercial vehicles and equipment entering the mall where such entry is reasonably necessary for the purpose of performing work or services on the mall or on private properties abutting thereon and displaying a valid unrevoked permit of necessity issued by or at the direction of the chief of police. 
(9)  Other vehicles displaying an emergency permit issued by or at the direction of the chief of police. 
(c)  The following vehicles are permitted on such pedestrian mall at places other than the vehicular driving lanes, vehicle parking and loading lanes: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles and equipment of all types. 
(2)  City vehicles and equipment performing services. 
(3)  Public trams or similar vehicles operated by or under permit from the city. 
(4)  Public utility vehicles and equipment. 
(5)  Commercial vehicles and equipment displaying a valid and unrevoked permit of necessity by or at the direction of the chief of police. 
(6)  Other vehicles displaying an emergency permit issued by or at the direction of the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.3)  
Sec. 90-559. - Suspension of operation of division. 
The city council may at any time, by resolution or order entered in the council minutes, suspend the operation of this division for the purpose of permitting specified vehicles to travel on the pedestrian mall in connection with special events to be held thereon such as parades, auto shows and similar special events. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.9)  
Sec. 90-560. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 90-560 which pertained to penalty for violation and derived from Code 1957, § 13.59.10.  
Sec. 90-561. - Temporary use and closing to vehicular traffic. 
(a)  Permit required. The city council, by motion entered in its minutes, may authorize by permit the temporary use, not to exceed an aggregate of seven days at any one time, of the pedestrian mall for celebrations, fiestas, special events, and other purposes. In conjunction therewith the city council may, during such period, order the pedestrian mall closed to vehicular traffic when the council finds that such closing is necessary for the safety and protection of persons who are to use that portion of the mall and street and property located thereon during the temporary closing. In granting any such permit, the council may impose such conditions as it may deem appropriate. 
(b)  Temporary booths or stands during celebration. Temporary booths or stands may be located on the mall and portion of the street closed to vehicular traffic during such celebration for the display and sale of merchandise, food, and soft drinks upon the following conditions: 
(1)  A permit for each booth or stand and for what is to be displayed and sold therefrom must first be obtained from the city council. 
(2)  The director of buildings and the chiefs of the police and fire departments shall, before the issuance of any permit, approve the construction of the booth or stand and its location in the mall. 
(3)  No temporary booth or stand shall be approved if, in the opinion of any of such officers, the booth or stand is unsafe, constitutes a fire hazard, creates a police problem, or substantially interferes with the movement of pedestrians or safety equipment. 
(4)  Any booth or stand displaying and dispensing food or drinks shall obtain all necessary health department permits and shall comply with all laws and ordinances relating thereto except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(5)  All booths and stands shall be removed from the mall by 12:00 noon of the day following the close of the event for which the permit to use the mall was granted. 
(6)  The city may require a deposit from the organization sponsoring the event or from each booth or stand operator or both, guaranteeing that such booths and stands will be removed and the litter and debris cleaned up. 
(7)  The council may impose further and additional conditions. 
(c)  Insurance. The applicant for the permit to use the mall as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall, at the time of application therefor, furnish written assurance satisfactory to the city that, if the permit is issued to the applicant, the applicant shall, prior to the time of the issuance of the permit, deliver to the city clerk a policy of public liability and property damage insurance or certificate therefor, which must be approved by the city attorney. The insurance shall be in full force and effect during the time of the celebration, providing for general liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00 covering and insuring the applicant from and against all damages because of injury or death to persons and damage to property which may result from or be caused by such celebration, fiesta, special event, or other purpose and the erection, maintenance, and operation of the temporary booths and stands during such time. Each such policy shall bear appropriate endorsements showing that the city and all of its departments and officers are named as additional insureds, and with further endorsement that such coverage afforded by such policy shall not be reduced or cancelled without at least 15 days' prior written notice to the city. If a policy is cancelled or the coverage reduced and the effective date is prior to the commencement of the celebration, the council may then revoke and suspend the permit for the celebration. 
(d)  Construction standards. The temporary booths or stands for which a permit is granted under subsection (b) of this section need not comply with the provisions of the city building, electrical, and plumbing codes. However, all stands shall be erected under the supervision of the director of buildings who shall require that booths and stands be constructed in a manner which will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. 
(e)  Exceptions for operators of temporary booths and stands. The operators of temporary booths and stands need not comply with sections 74-190, 74-191 and 74-199 of this Code or with subdivision 1 of subsection D of section 11 of Ordinance No. 423 adopted December 26, 1945, as amended. 
(Code 1957, §§ 13.59.11, 13.59.28)  
Secs. 90-562—90-585. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Vehicle Permit 
 
Sec. 90-586. - Issuance. 
A permit for any vehicle or equipment to go on the pedestrian mall shall be issued only when use of the mall is reasonably necessary for the purpose of performing work or services on the mall or on private property abutting thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.4)  
Sec. 90-587. - Terms and conditions. 
Any permit issued under this subdivision for any vehicle or equipment allowing the vehicle or equipment to be on the pedestrian mall shall be subject to such terms, conditions and restrictions as the chief of police or other issuing officer may determine in order to protect persons or property on or abutting the mall and the physical integrity and appearance of the mall. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.5)  
Sec. 90-588. - Compliance by operators of vehicles. 
The operator or driver of any vehicle or equipment permitted on the pedestrian mall under this subdivision shall comply with all signs, markings and designations for the direction of travel, parking and loading and time limit therefor and all of the terms, conditions and restrictions of any permit issued for such vehicle or equipment to go on to such mall. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.6)  
Sec. 90-589. - Removal of vehicles or equipment without permit. 
Any vehicle or equipment on the pedestrian mall not displaying a required, valid, unrevoked permit shall be removed and stored at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.7)  
Sec. 90-590. - Revocation. 
Violation of any term, condition or restriction of any permit issued under this subdivision to go onto the pedestrian mall by the driver or operator of any vehicle or equipment shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such permit by the chief of police or other issuing officer. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.8)  
Secs. 90-591—90-615. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PEDESTRIAN MALL ADDITION NO. 1  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 90-616. - Established. 
The city council declares and determines that a pedestrian mall is established under the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960 (Streets and Highways Code § 11000 et seq.), to be known as San Fernando Road Pedestrian Mall Addition No. 1, and that a general description of the pedestrian mall is as follows: San Fernando Road between the southeasterly line of Brand Boulevard and the northwesterly line of Chatsworth Drive. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.15)  
Sec. 90-617. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Vehicle means any device by which a person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn, except a wheelchair, baby carriage, shopping cart, or hand dolly. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.16) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-618. - Vehicles restricted. 
No vehicle shall be permitted on the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 except in the places and upon the conditions provided in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.17)  
Sec. 90-619. - Vehicles permitted in certain driving lanes, parking places and loading zones. 
The following vehicles are permitted on the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 in the northwest and southeast vehicle driving lanes, in parking places, and loading zones, in the following places and upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles with a capacity rating not exceeding three-quarter ton. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles and equipment of all types. 
(3)  City vehicles and equipment performing services. 
(4)  Public trams or similar vehicles operated by or under permit from the city. 
(5)  Commercial vehicles making deliveries or pickups to or from the businesses abutting the mall. 
(6)  Commercial vehicles in the loading zones provided and designated. 
(7)  Public utility vehicles and equipment. 
(8)  Commercial vehicles and equipment entering the mall where such entry is reasonably necessary for the purpose of performing work or services on the mall or on private properties abutting thereon and displaying a valid unrevoked permit of necessity issued by or at the direction of the chief of police. 
(9)  Other vehicles displaying an emergency permit issued by or at the direction of the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.18)  
Sec. 90-620. - Vehicles permitted at places other than vehicular driving lanes, parking places and loading zones. 
The following vehicles are permitted on the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 at places thereon other than the vehicular driving lanes, vehicle parking places, and loading zones: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles and equipment of all types. 
(2)  City vehicles and equipment performing services. 
(3)  Public trams or similar vehicles operated by or under permit from the city. 
(4)  Public utility vehicles and equipment. 
(5)  Commercial vehicles and equipment displaying a valid and unrevoked permit of necessity by or at the direction of the chief of police. 
(6)  Other vehicles displaying an emergency permit issued by or at the direction of the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.19)  
Sec. 90-621. - Suspension of operation of division. 
The city council may at any time, by resolution or order entered in the council's minutes, suspend the operation of this division for the purpose of permitting specified vehicles to travel on the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 in connection with special events to be held thereon, such as parades, auto shows, and similar special events. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.25)  
Sec. 90-622. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any section of this division or any permit issued under this division and any person failing to comply with this division or any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions of any permit issued under this division is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in section 1-10. 
(b)  Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which violation of this division is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punished therefor as provided by this division. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.26)  
Sec. 90-623. - Operative date of division. 
The operative date of the prohibitions, rules, and regulations established by this division shall be July 1, 1968, provided that the city council may by ordinance fix an earlier operative date and may by ordinance, resolution, or order entered in the council minutes establish a later operative date, it being the intent of the city council to make such prohibitions, rules, and regulations operative immediately following the full completion of the work and improvements to be constructed on and in connection with the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 and under a proceeding being taken under the Improvement Act of 1911 (Streets and Highways Code § 5000 et seq.). 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.27)  
Secs. 90-624—90-645. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Vehicle or Equipment Permit 
 
Sec. 90-646. - Issuance. 
A permit for any vehicle or equipment to go on the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 shall be issued only when use of the mall is reasonably necessary for the purpose of performing work or services on the mall or on private property abutting thereon. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.20)  
Sec. 90-647. - Terms and conditions. 
Any permit issued under this subdivision for any vehicle or equipment allowing the vehicle or equipment to be on the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 shall be subject to such terms, conditions, and restrictions as the chief of police or other issuing officer may determine in order to protect persons or property on or abutting the mall and the physical integrity and appearance of the mall. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.21)  
Sec. 90-648. - Compliance by drivers or operators. 
The operator or driver of any vehicle or equipment permitted on the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 under this subdivision shall comply with all signs, markings and designations for the direction of travel, parking, and loading and time limits therefor and all of the terms, conditions, and restrictions of any permit issued for such vehicle or equipment to go onto the mall. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.22)  
Sec. 90-649. - Removal of vehicles not displaying valid permit. 
Any vehicle or equipment on the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 not displaying a required, valid, unrevoked permit shall be removed and stored at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.23)  
Sec. 90-650. - Revocation. 
Violation of any term, condition, or restriction of any permit issued under this subdivision to go onto the pedestrian mall addition no. 1 by the driver or operator of any vehicle or equipment shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such permit by the chief of police or other issuing officer. 
(Code 1957, § 13.59.24)  
Secs. 90-651—90-675. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic laws applicable to persons riding bicycles, Vehicle Code § 452; bicycles prohibited from vehicle crossings except when signs indicate otherwise, Vehicle Code § 609. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-676. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bicycle means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears, having either two or three wheels (one of which is at least 20 inches in diameter) or having a frame size of at least 14 inches, or having four or more wheels. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code §§ 231, 39000. 
Bicycle dealer means any person who sells, gives away, buys, or takes in trade, for the purpose of resale, more than five bicycles in any one calendar year, whether or not such bicycles are owned by such person. The term "bicycle dealer" also includes agents or employees of such person. 
Bicycle lane means any lane within the roadway designated by signs and markings for the operation of bicycles. 
Bicycle license means any license tag, decal or other indicia designated by the state in accordance with Vehicle Code § 39001 to be permanently affixed to the bicycle in a visible location and which bears a unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state. 
Bicycle path means any specifically designated area for bicycle travel, physically separated from the roadway. 
Bicycle registration certificate means the ownership card issued by the city licensing agency or agent upon receipt of the designated license fee. 
Bicycle route means any route recommended for bicycle travel, which may include bicycle paths and public streets for accommodating bicycle riders. 
Central business district and/or central traffic district means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: San Fernando Road and Truman Street between Hubbard Street and the east city limits; Maclay Avenue between Coronel Street and Eighth Street; San Fernando Mission Boulevard between O'Melveny Street and Truman Street; and that area bounded by Truman Street, Kalisher Street, Coronel Street and Chatsworth Drive. 
Licensing agency means that party designated by the chief of police as official licensing agency for bicycles in the city. 
Motorized bicycle means any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, or having no pedals if powered solely by electrical energy, and an automatic transmission and a motor which produces less than two gross brake horsepower and which is capable of propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour on level ground. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle Code § 406. 
(Code 1957, §§ 5.1—5.8) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-677. - Use of fees collected. 
There is established a special fund in the city treasury entitled the "bicycle license fund." Fees collected pursuant to this article by the licensing agency shall be deposited into such fund, and the city clerk is authorized to make the necessary disbursements for all costs of administering the bicycle licensing program provided for in this article. 
(Code 1957, § 5.31)  
Sec. 90-678. - Records. 
The licensing agency shall maintain records of each bicycle registered. Such records shall include but not be limited to the license number, the serial number of the bicycle, the make and type of the bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee. Records shall be maintained during the period of validity of the license or until notification that the bicycle is no longer to be operated. 
(Code 1957, § 5.46)  
Sec. 90-679. - Annual safety report. 
The city traffic engineer, with the advice of the chief of police or chief of the traffic division, and any other city officials having to do with bicycle matters shall prepare an annual bicycle safety report. Such report is to include accident data, enforcement, licensing, registration and educational activities, and any other information deemed pertinent. The report shall be submitted to the city council on or before January 31 of each calendar year. 
(Code 1957, § 5.47)  
Sec. 90-680. - Accident studies. 
The traffic division of the police department shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of bicycle accidents and in determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1957, § 5.48)  
Secs. 90-681—90-705. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 90-706. - Duties of traffic division. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division of the police department, in conjunction with the duties described within this chapter, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to: 
(1)  Enforce this article and all of the Vehicle Code sections applicable to bicycle traffic in the city; 
(2)  Make arrests for traffic violations; 
(3)  Investigate bicycle accidents; and 
(4)  Cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other city officers in the administration of this article and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and bicycle safety. 
(Code 1957, § 5.51)  
Sec. 90-707. - Police authorized to number bicycle frames. 
All bicycles sold as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall have, as a means of identification, serial numbers stamped on the bicycle in a manner determined by the director of motor vehicles. The police department or licensing agency may stamp numbers on the left rear fork end of any such bicycle not bearing a manufacturer's serial number. 
(Code 1957, § 5.52)  
Sec. 90-708. - Impoundment for violation of law. 
The licensing agency or any officer of the police department shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of this article and may retain possession of such bicycle until there is compliance with this article. 
(Code 1957, § 5.53)  
Sec. 90-709. - Impounding fee; violations. 
(a)  Impounding fee. Any person wishing to regain rightful possession of a bicycle impounded by the licensing agency shall pay $5.00 to the licensing agency. 
(b)  Violation. Any person who violates or wilfully fails to comply with any section of division 3 or 4 of this article shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1957, § 5.54)  
Secs. 90-710—90-735. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSING AND REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 90-736. - License required. 
No person residing in the city shall operate or use a bicycle upon any street or public highway in the city unless such bicycle has been duly licensed as provided in this division. For the purposes of this division, the term "bicycle" shall also include a motorized bicycle. 
(Code 1957, § 5.13)  
Sec. 90-737. - Acquisition of forms. 
The licensing agency shall procure from the state department of motor vehicles the necessary bicycle license and license renewal indicia as well as registration certificates or other forms required by state law for the licensing of bicycles. 
(Code 1957, § 5.14)  
Sec. 90-738. - Schedule of fees. 
The fees required to be paid pursuant to this division are as follows: 
(1)  For each new bicycle license and registration certificate, $2.00. 
(2)  For each transfer of a registration certificate, $1.00. 
(3)  For each replacement of a bicycle license or registration certificate, $1.00. 
(4)  For each bicycle license renewal, $1.00. 
(Code 1957, § 5.30)  
Sec. 90-739. - Issuance of forms. 
(a)  At the time that any person licenses a bicycle and pays the established license fee in accordance with this division, the licensing agency shall provide a registration certificate bearing the following: 
(1)  The date; 
(2)  The owner's name, address, telephone number; 
(3)  The bicycle license number; 
(4)  The date the bicycle license was issued; 
(5)  The bicycle manufacturer, type and frame number; and 
(6)  Any other descriptive material concerning the bicycle deemed necessary by the licensing agency. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section, at the time of licensing, the bicycle owner shall be issued a permanent bicycle license bearing the unique number reflecting the proper indicia procured from the director of motor vehicles pursuant to Vehicle Code § 39001. 
(Code 1957, § 5.15)  
Sec. 90-740. - Licensing upon request. 
Any bicycle not subject to this article may be licensed upon request of the owner. 
(Code 1957, § 5.16)  
Sec. 90-741. - Preregistration form; information required for retail sale. 
(a)  In accordance with Vehicle Code § 39006, each bicycle retailer and each bicycle dealer shall supply to each purchaser a preregistration form provided by the licensing agency and shall include, on the sales check or receipt given to the purchaser, a record of the following information: 
(1)  The name of the retailer; 
(2)  The address of the retailer; 
(3)  The year and make of the bicycle; 
(4)  The serial number of the bicycle if delivered to the purchaser in an assembled state; 
(5)  A general description of the bicycle; 
(6)  The name of the purchaser; and 
(7)  The address of the purchaser. 
(b)  A copy of the preregistration form shall be filled out and forwarded by the purchaser to the licensing agency within ten days of the date of sale. 
(Code 1957, § 5.17)  
Sec. 90-742. - Monthly sales reports required from bicycle dealers. 
Any bicycle dealer within the city is required to make a monthly report to the licensing agency giving the name, address and telephone number of all persons either buying, selling or trading new or used bicycles and the bicycle manufacturer, type, frame number, and bicycle license number, if any. 
(Code 1957, § 5.18)  
Sec. 90-743. - Transfer reports required. 
(a)  Seller or transferor. It shall be the duty of every person who sells or otherwise disposes of any bicycle or bicycle frame to endorse upon the registration certificate issued for such bicycle or bicycle frame a written transfer thereof setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the transferee; the date of transfer; and the signature of the transferor; and to report such sale or transfer of ownership by delivery of the registration certificate so endorsed to the licensing agency within ten days of the date of such sale or disposition. 
(b)  Buyer or transferee. It shall be the duty of any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle to apply for a transfer of the license to the transferee's own name within ten days of the date of such sale or disposition. 
(Code 1957, § 5.19)  
Sec. 90-744. - Destroyed, lost or stolen license indicia. 
No person shall tamper with, remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any bicycle license or license renewal indicia or registration form or certificate or remove, alter or mutilate the serial number or the identifying marks of the licensing agent's identifying symbol on any bicycle or bicycle frame licensed under this division except as otherwise provided by law. If any license or license renewal indicia or registration certificate or form issued pursuant to this division is lost, stolen or mutilated, the licensee of the bicycle shall immediately notify the licensing agency to obtain a duplicate license or license renewal indicia or registration certificate or form. The licensing agency shall, upon receipt of payment of the appropriate fee, thereupon issue to the licensee a replacement indicia or registration certificate or form. 
(Code 1957, § 5.20)  
Sec. 90-745. - Change of address. 
Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this division changes his address, that person shall, within ten days, notify the licensing agency in writing of both the old and the new address. 
(Code 1957, § 5.21)  
Sec. 90-746. - License renewal. 
Each new license indicia or license renewal indicia issued pursuant to this division shall be renewed on January 1 of the third year following the year of registration. Renewal of a bicycle license shall be indicated by the presence of a supplementary adhesive device affixed by a duly authorized agent of the licensing agency to the bicycle or bicycle frame on or near the indicia already appearing on the bicycle or bicycle frame. 
(Code 1957, § 5.22)  
Sec. 90-747. - Applicability to rental agencies. 
A rental agency operating within the city shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed as provided in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 5.23)  
Sec. 90-748. - Compliance with state law. 
In addition to all other requirements of licensing and registration set forth in this division, each bicycle retailer, dealer or purchaser shall comply with the requirements and provisions of Vehicle Code division 16.7. 
(Code 1957, § 5.24)  
Secs. 90-749—90-775. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - OPERATION 
 
Sec. 90-776. - Rights and duties. 
Every person operating a bicycle on a roadway, any paved shoulder, or a bicycle lane has all the rights and is subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle by state laws or by city ordinances, except those provisions of law and ordinance which by their nature can have no application and except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 5.32)  
Sec. 90-777. - Operation upon sidewalks. 
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the central business district, nor shall any person ride upon any other sidewalk within this city that has been posted with signs prohibiting such riding. 
(Code 1957, § 5.33) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Sec. 90-778. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle at any location that has been posted with signs prohibiting such parking. 
(Code 1957, § 5.34)  
Sec. 90-779. - Equipment. 
Any person operating a bicycle within the city limits shall equip the bicycle in accordance with the requirements of Vehicle Code §§ 21201 and 21201.5. 
(Code 1957, § 5.35)  
Sec. 90-780. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  Authority to install. The city traffic engineer shall have the authority, power and duty to place and maintain or to cause to be placed and maintained any official traffic control devices for the direct or incidental regulation of bicycle traffic. In so acting, the city traffic engineer shall conform to the provisions of the Vehicle Code, the state traffic manual and this chapter. 
(b)  Obedience to devices. The operator of any bicycle shall obey the instructions of any traffic control device placed in accordance with this division, with the exceptions granted in this article or unless otherwise directed by a police officer or authorized person. 
(c)  Authority to remove, relocate or discontinue devices. The city traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any bicycle facility or bicycle-related traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or by this division whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which normally warrant or require the installation no longer exist. 
(Code 1957, § 5.36)  
Sec. 90-781. - Lane markings. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark and designate bicycle lanes upon the surface of a roadway to designate that portion of the roadway to be traveled by bicycles and may place signs or may cause signs to be placed to prohibit or restrict parking, standing or stopping of motor vehicles to maintain the effectiveness of such lanes. 
(b)  If the city traffic engineer shall establish any bicycle lane, path or route which comes within the meaning of the term "bikeway," as that term is defined in Streets and Highways Code § 890.4, the city traffic engineer shall then comply with all the requirements of Streets and Highways Code § 890 et seq. (the California Bicycle Transportation Act) in designing, establishing or maintaining any such bicycle lane, path or route. 
(Code 1957, § 5.37)  
Sec. 90-782. - Obedience to police or authorized officers. 
No person operating a bicycle shall fail or refuse to comply with or shall fail or refuse to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer or a member of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. 
(Code 1957, § 5.38)  
Sec. 90-783. - Report of accident. 
(a)  In addition to any other requirements imposed by this division or by Vehicle Code division 10, the operator of a bicycle involved in any accident at whatever location within this city, which accident results in injury to any person, other than complaint of pain only, or in property damage in excess of $100.00 shall, within 24 hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the police. 
(b)  Every such report shall state the date and time when and the place where the accident took place, the names and addresses of the person owning and of the person operating such bicycle, the registration number of the bicycle, and shall briefly describe the circumstances of the accident. 
(c)  The operator of any bicycle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements of this section during any time of physical incapability, but such a report shall be made as required in subsection (a) of this section within 24 hours after regaining the ability to make such report. 
(Code 1957, § 5.39)  
Sec. 90-784. - Compliance with Vehicle Code. 
In addition to all other requirements regarding the operation of bicycles set forth in this division, every person operating a bicycle within the city limits shall comply with the requirements and provisions of Vehicle Code division 11, chapter 1, article 4 (Vehicle Code § 21200 et seq.). 
(Code 1957, § 5.40)  
Secs. 90-785—90-810. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ABANDONED VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-811. - Findings and declarations. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Vehicle Code § 22660 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council finds and declares that the accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, except as expressly permitted in this article, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1957, § 13.131)  
Sec. 90-812. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Highway means a way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term "highway" includes a street. 
Owner of the land means the owner of the land on which the vehicle is or parts of a vehicle are located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
Owner of the vehicle means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1957, § 13.132) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-813. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A vehicle or parts of a vehicle completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  A vehicle or parts thereof stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, a licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law, other than Vehicle Code ch. 10 (Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.) and this article. 
(Code 1957, § 13.133)  
Sec. 90-814. - Supplemental nature of article. 
This article is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1957, § 13.134)  
Sec. 90-815. - Enforcement; right of entry upon property. 
Except as otherwise provided, this article shall be administered and enforced by the chief of the police department. In the enforcement of this article, the chief of police and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1957, § 13.135)  
Sec. 90-816. - Franchise holder's right of entry upon property. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1957, § 13.136)  
Sec. 90-817. - Administrative costs. 
The city council shall, from time to time by resolution, determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs under this article, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1957, § 13.137) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 90-818. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing, or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property within the city for a period in excess of three days unless such vehicle is or parts of the vehicle are completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, a licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. 
(Code 1957, § 13.146)  
Sec. 90-819. - Failure or refusal to remove vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with division 2 of this article or state law where such state law is applicable. 
(Code 1957, § 13.147)  
Secs. 90-820—90-845. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL 
 
Sec. 90-846. - Authority. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 13.138)  
Sec. 90-847. - Notice of intention to abate. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership or unless such notice of intention to remove the vehicle is otherwise exempted under the provisions of Vehicle Code § 22661. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or Municipal Code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to ___________, license number _____, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or Municipal Code chapter number). 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the city and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
As Owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Administrative Officer within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed  _____
(Date) 	/s/ _____
(Chief of Police) 
 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—Notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle—Make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or Municipal Code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or Municipal Code chapter number). 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the city administrative officer within such 10-day period, the chief of police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed  _____
(Date) 	/s/ _____
(Chief of Police) 
 
(Code 1957, § 13.139)  
Sec. 90-848. - Request for public hearing; notice of hearing; abatement by city when request for hearing not filed. 
(a)  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the city administrative officer within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove as provided in section 90-847, a public hearing shall be held by the administrative officer on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
(b)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for a hearing is not received within ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Code 1957, § 13.140)  
Sec. 90-849. - Hearings; orders. 
(a)  All hearings under this division shall be held before the city administrative officer who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The administrative officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for denial. 
(b)  The administrative officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this article. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the administrative officer may find that a vehicle has or parts thereof have been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative on private or public property and order the vehicle or parts removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this division and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(c)  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the administrative officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
(d)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the administrative officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Code 1957, § 13.141)  
Sec. 90-850. - Appeal of decision. 
(a)  Any interested party may appeal the decision of the administrative officer made pursuant to this division by filing a written notice of appeal with the administrative officer within five days after his decision. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
(c)  The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in section 90-847. 
(d)  In conducting the hearing the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Code 1957, § 13.142)  
Sec. 90-851. - Disposition of vehicle if hearing not requested. 
If no hearing is requested under section 90-848, upon the expiration of the period of time to request such hearing or five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing the notice of the decision if such notice is required by section 90-849, or 15 days after such action of the city council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle that qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Vehicle Code § 5004. 
(Code 1957, § 13.143)  
Sec. 90-852. - Notice to department of motor vehicles of removal of vehicle. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as provided in this division, notice shall be given to the department of motor vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the department of motor vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates. 
(Code 1957, § 13.144)  
Sec. 90-853. - Assessment of costs. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to section 90-848 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Government Code § 38773.5 and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Code 1957, § 13.145)  
Secs. 90-854—90-880. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MEASURES 
 
Sec. 90-881. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative transportation means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling. 
Buspool means a vehicle carrying 16 or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule. 
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) means Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq., requiring all jurisdictions in the state to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development. 
Carpool means a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis. 
Developer means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing this article as determined by the property owner. 
Development project, development or project means any nonresidential development that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in section 90-883. Such development is limited to the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives and which exceed the thresholds defined in section 90-883 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage. 
Employee parking area means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees. Employee parking shall be calculated as follows: 
Type of Use 	Percent of Total 
Required Parking 
Devoted to 
Employees 
Commercial 	30 
Office/professional 	85 
Industrial/manufacturing 	90 
 
Preferential parking means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings, for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commuter passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single-occupant vehicles. 
Property owner means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with this article either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent. 
South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) means the regional authority appointed by the state legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties). 
Tenant means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project. 
Transportation demand management (TDM) means the alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant vehicles, such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks). 
Trip reduction means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single-occupant vehicles. 
Vanpool means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to 15 adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. 
Vehicle means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. 
(Code 1957, § 13.168) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-882. - Review of transit impacts. 
(a)  Prior to approval of any development project for which an environmental impact report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted. Projects for which a notice of preparation (NOP) for a draft environmental impact report has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall be exempted from its provisions. The Transit Impact Review Worksheet contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program Manual or similar worksheets shall be used in assessing impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, transit operators shall be sent a notice of preparation for all contemplated environmental impact reports and shall, as part of the notice of preparation process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the draft environmental impact report prepared for the project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(b)  Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain within the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and, therefore, covered by a previously certified environmental impact report. 
(Code 1957, § 13.169)  
Sec. 90-883. - Transportation demand and trip reduction measures. 
(a)  Applicability of requirements. Prior to approval of any development project under this article, the applicant shall make provision for, as a minimum, all of the applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures contained in subsection (b) of this section. This article shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed "complete" by the city pursuant to Government Code § 65943 or for which a notice of preparation for a draft environmental impact report has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. 
(b)  Development standards. Development standards shall be as follows: 
(1)  Nonresidential development of 25,000 square feet or more shall provide a bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site. 
b.  Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators. 
c.  Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations. 
d.  Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information. 
e.  A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site. 
(2)  Nonresidential development of 50,000 square feet or more shall comply with subsection (b)(1) of this section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  Not less than ten percent of employee parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrances, and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of the city. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces shall be signed/striped as demand warrants, provided that at all times at least one space for projects of 50,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet and two spaces for projects over 100,000 square feet shall be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles. 
b.  Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas. 
c.  Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first 50,000 square feet of nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional 50,000 square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of one-half or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or a locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city. 
(3)  Nonresidential development of 100,000 square feet or more shall comply with subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers. 
b.  Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development. 
c.  If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops. 
d.  Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on site. 
(Code 1957, § 13.170)  
Sec. 90-884. - Monitoring. 
Project compliance shall be monitored pursuant to the site plan review procedures contained in division 3 of article II of chapter 106 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 13.171)  
Secs. 90-885—90-910. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - TOWING 
 
Sec. 90-911. - Towing program; franchise fee. 
(a)  Franchise agreement. The city regularly requires motor vehicle towing and storage services, including the removal of abandoned, stolen and damaged vehicles; occasional towing and storage of city-owned vehicles; and special security for vehicles held for the investigation of crimes. Any towing or vehicle storage done on behalf of the city or at the request of the police department is classified as part of the city's towing program and shall be performed only by a towing and storage operator who has been approved by the city to perform such services and who has executed a franchise agreement with the city. 
(b)  Franchise fee. Pursuant to Vehicle Code § 12110, there is a franchise fee imposed on any franchise agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The fee shall be imposed for the purpose of recouping the costs of administration and operation of the towing program and shall be in an amount per vehicle towed as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 13.180)  
Secs. 90-912—90-940. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 90-941. - Amending of local speed limits. 
It is determined and declared, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that for safe operation of vehicles on the following streets the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth on those designated streets or parts of streets when signs are erected giving notice thereof, in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22358: 
Name of Street or 
Portion Affected 	Declared 
Prima Facie 
Speed Limit 
(miles per hour) 
Arroyo Avenue, from Glenoaks Boulevard to north city limits 	35 
Arroyo Street, from Glenoaks Boulevard to Fifth Street 	30 
Brand Boulevard, from Fourth Street to Glenoaks Boulevard 	30 
Brand Boulevard, from Truman Street to Fourth Street 	35 
Brand Boulevard, from Truman Street to the south city limits 	35 
Chatsworth Drive, from the south city limits to San Fernando Road 	30 
Eighth Street, from west city limits to Maclay Avenue 	25 
Fifth Street, from west city limits to east city limits 	30 
First Street, from Hubbard Avenue to Maclay Avenue 	30 
Fourth Street, from west city limits to east city limits 	30 
Glenoaks Boulevard, from west city limits to east city limits 	40 
Harding Avenue, from north city limits to Glenoaks Boulevard 	25 
Harding Avenue, from Glenoaks Boulevard to Fourth Street 	25 
Harding Avenue, from Fourth Street to First Street 	25 
Hubbard Avenue, from south city limits to north city limits 	35 
Maclay Avenue from Truman Street to Fourth Street 	25 
Maclay Avenue, from Fourth Street to Glenoaks Boulevard 	30 
Maclay Avenue, from Glenoaks Boulevard to north city limits 	30 
Mission Boulevard, from south city limits to Truman Street 	35 
Orange Grove Avenue, from Glenoaks Boulevard to north city limits 	25 
Orange Grove Avenue, from Glenoaks Boulevard to Fourth Street 	25 
San Fernando Road, from Kittridge Street to east city limits 	30 
San Fernando Road, from west city limits to Mission Boulevard 	35 
Seventh Street, from west city limits to Maclay Avenue 	25 
Truman Street, from west city limits to east city limits 	35 
Workman Street, from south city limits to San Fernando Road 	25 
 
(Code 1957, § 13.14; Ord. No. 1571, § 1, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 1582, § 1, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 1589, § 1, 5-18-2009; Ord. No. 1616, § 1, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1639, § 1, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1616, § 1, adopted June 4, 2012, changed the title of § 90-941 from speed limits; amending state speed limits to decrease of local speed limits.  
Sec. 90-942. - Amending of speed limits on narrow streets. 
It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the state prima facie speed limit of 25 miles per hour in a business or residence district or in a public park on any street having a roadway not exceeding 25 feet in width is more than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets, and it is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour on those designated streets or parts thereof when signs are erected giving notice thereof, in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22358.3: 
Name of Street or 
Portion Affected 	Declared 
Prima Facie 
Speed Limit 
(miles per hour) 
Park Avenue, from Fourth Street to First Street 	15 
San Fernando Road, from Mission Boulevard to Kittridge Street 	20 
 
(Code 1957, § 13.111; Ord. No. 1580, § 2, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 1589, § 1, 5-18-2009; Ord. No. 1616, § 2, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 1639, § 2, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1616, § 2, adopted June 4, 2012, changed the title of § 90-941 from decrease of state maximum speed limit to decrease of speed limits on narrow streets.  
Secs. 90-943. - Reserved.  
Sec. 90-944. - One-way alleys. 
In accordance with section 90-487 of this chapter and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the following alleys: 
First Street and Second Street. 
Northwesterly on the alley parallel to and between First Street and Second Street and between Hagar Street and Maclay Avenue. 
Southeasterly on the alley parallel to and between First Street and Second Street and between Maclay Avenue and Macneil Street. 
Maclay Avenue and Hagar Street. Southwesterly on the alley parallel to and between Maclay Avenue and Hagar Street and between Second Street and First Street. 
Maclay Avenue and Macneil Street. Southwesterly on the alley parallel to and between Maclay Avenue and Macneil Street and between Second Street and the alley. 
Maclay Avenue and Mission Boulevard. Southwesterly on the alley parallel to and between Maclay Avenue and Mission Boulevard and between Celis Street and Pico Street. 
San Fernando Road and Celis Street. Southeasterly on the alley parallel to and between San Fernando Road and Celis Street and lying between Brand Boulevard and Maclay Avenue to its intersection with the alley running at right angles thereto and parallel to Brand Boulevard and extending to Celis Street; thence southwesterly along the alley to the alley's intersection with Celis Street. 
San Fernando Road and Truman Street. Southeasterly on the alley parallel to and between San Fernando Road and Truman Street and between: 
Maclay Avenue and Brand Boulevard. 
Maclay Avenue and Mission Boulevard. 
(Code 1957, § 13.112)  
Sec. 90-945. - Through streets. 
In accordance with section 90-499 of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at the entrances of all streets in the city intersecting the following through streets, except where specific exception is made: 
Brand Boulevard, except at San Fernando Road, Truman Street, Library Street, Seventh Street and Eighth Street. 
Chatsworth Drive, except at San Fernando Road. 
Eighth Street, except at Maclay Avenue and Arroyo Avenue. 
Fifth Street, except at Maclay Avenue. 
First Street, except at Hubbard Avenue, Maclay Avenue, Brand Boulevard, Jessie Street and Park Avenue. 
Fourth Street, except at Maclay Avenue, Brand Boulevard and Park Avenue. 
Glenoaks Boulevard, except at Maclay Avenue. 
Griswold Avenue, except at Fourth Street and Glenoaks Boulevard. 
Harding Avenue, except at First Street. 
Hubbard Avenue, except at San Fernando Road and Truman Street. 
Kalisher Street, except at San Fernando Road, Celis Street, Coronel Street, and Griffith Street. 
Maclay Avenue, except at San Fernando Road, Truman Street, and Kewen Street. 
Meyer Street at Celis Street, Pico Street and Coronel Street. 
Mission Boulevard, except at San Fernando Road and Truman Street. 
Orange Grove Avenue, except at First Street. 
San Fernando Road. 
Second Street at Meyer Street, Fermoore Street and Workman Street. 
Seventh Street, except at Maclay Avenue, Griswold Avenue and Arroyo Avenue. 
South Huntington Street, except at Truman Street, San Fernando Road, Celis Street and Hollister Street. 
Third Street, except at Harding Avenue, Hays Street, Alexander Street, Hagar Street, Maclay Avenue, Brand Boulevard and Jessie Street. 
Truman Street. 
Wolfskill Street, except at Celis Street, San Fernando Road and Truman Street. 
Workman Street, except at San Fernando Road, Truman Street and Celis Street. 
(Code 1957, § 13.113) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Sec. 90-946. - Stop intersections. 
In accordance with section 90-498 of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at the entrance to those intersections described as follows: 
Applegate Street entrance into Arroyo Avenue. 
Brand Boulevard and Library Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Brand Boulevard and Third Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Carlisle Street. All entrances into Pico Street, Coronel Street, Hollister Street, Kewen Street, Mott Street and O'Melveny Street. 
Celis Street and Lazard Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Chatsworth Drive and Hollister Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Chatsworth Drive and Mott Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Chatsworth Drive and O'Melveny Street. All three entrances at the intersection. 
Cork Street entrance into Pearwood Avenue. 
DeGarmo Street entrance into: 
Alexander Street. 
Hagar Street. 
Harps Street. 
Eighth Street and Lazard Street. All three entrances at the intersection. 
Eighth Street entrance into Arroyo Avenue. 
Fayecroft Avenue entrance into Lucas Street. 
Fifth Street and Arroyo Avenue. All three entrances at the intersection. 
First Street Southeasterly entrance into: 
Jessie Street. 
Park Avenue. 
Fourth Street and Griswold Avenue. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Fourth Street and Park Avenue. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Griffith Street entrance into Carlisle Street. 
Hewitt Street entrance into Carlisle Street. 
Huntington Street entrance into: 
Hollister Street. 
Second Street. 
Huntington Street and Celis Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Huntington Street and Fermoore Street. Southbound entrance at the intersection. 
Huntington Street and Griffith Street. All three entrances at the intersection. 
Kalisher Street and Celis Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Kalisher Street and Coronel Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Kalisher Street and Griffith Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Lashburn Street entrance into: 
Jackman Street. 
Pearwood Avenue. 
Lazard Street at its entrances into Pico Street and Coronel Street. 
Library Street. All entrances into Huntington Street, Fermoore Street, Workman Street, Harps Street, Alexander Street, Hagar Street, Newton Street, and Fox Street. 
Maclay Avenue and Kewen Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Maclay Avenue and Mott Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Maclay Avenue and O'Melveny Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Macneil Street entrances into Second Street, Library Street, Morningside Court, and Lucas Street. 
Macneil Street and Second Street. All three entrances at the intersection. 
Macneil Street and Third Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Mott Street and Kalisher Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Newton Street entrance into DeGarmo Street. 
Second Street. All entrances into Harps Street, Alexander Street, and Hagar Street. 
Second Street and Orange Grove Avenue. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Seventh Street entrance into Griswold Avenue. 
Third Street. All entrances into Harps Street, Alexander Street, Hagar Street, and Jessie Street. 
Wolfskill Street and Celis Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Wolfskill Street and Hollister Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Wolfskill Street and Woodworth Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Woodworth Street entrance into Carlisle Street. 
Workman Street entrances into Hollister Street and Mott Street. 
Workman Street and Celis Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
Workman Street and Griffith Street. All four entrances at the intersection. 
(Code 1957, § 13.114; Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 1505, § 1, 5-3-1999; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 1549, § 4, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 1552, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 1555, § 1, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 1571, § 1, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 1589, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 90-947. - Angle parking. 
In accordance with subsection 90-201(c) of this chapter and when signs or markings are in place giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles may stand or park a vehicle only as indicated by such markings or signs on the following streets or portions thereof: 
First Street, both sides between Park Avenue and the southeasterly city boundary line. 
Harding Avenue, both sides between First Street and the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way boundary line. 
Park Avenue, both sides of the southeasterly roadway portion between First Street and Fourth Street. 
(Code 1957, § 13.116; Ord. No. 1571, § 1, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 1580, § 3, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 1589, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 90-948. - Two-hour parking areas. 
In accordance with section 90-212 of this chapter, parking is limited to two hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays, upon any of the following streets or portions thereof: 
Brand Boulevard between the southwesterly line of the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way and the northeasterly line of Hollister Street, excepting therefrom such portion thereof as may be established for a 12-minute zone. 
Brand Boulevard between Third Street to Library Avenue. 
Celis Street between: 
Mission Boulevard and Workman Street. 
The southeasterly line of Mission Boulevard and the northwesterly line of Chatsworth Drive. 
Chatsworth Drive between: 
Kewen Street and the southwesterly city boundary. 
The southwesterly line of San Fernando Road and the northeasterly line of Pico Street. 
Coronel Street between Mission Boulevard and Brand Boulevard. 
DeFoe Street between Maclay Avenue and Brand Boulevard. 
DeGarmo Street between Harding Avenue and Griswold Avenue. 
DeHaven Street between Maclay Avenue and Griswold Avenue. 
Eighth Street between Harding Avenue and Brand Boulevard. 
Fifth Street between the northwesterly and southwesterly city boundaries. 
First Street between: 
Hagar Street and Hubbard Avenue. 
Maclay Street and Macneil Street. 
MacNeil Street to Brand Boulevard. 
Fourth Street between: 
Hubbard Avenue and the southeasterly city boundary. 
Macneil Street to Jessie Street. 
Fox Street between Fourth Street and Fifth Street. 
Glenoaks Boulevard between the northwesterly and southeasterly city boundaries. 
Griswold Avenue between Third and Fourth Streets. 
Griswold Street between Third Street to Library Avenue. 
Harding Avenue between First Street and Second Street. 
Hollister Avenue between Maclay Avenue and Carlisle Street. 
Hubbard Avenue between the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way and Fourth Street. 
Huntington Street between First Street and Second Street. 
Jessie Street between: 
The Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way and Fourth Street. 
Third Street to Fourth Street. 
Kalisher Street between San Fernando Road and the southwesterly city boundary. 
Kittridge Street between the northeasterly line of San Fernando Road and the southwesterly line of Truman Street, as shown and delineated upon the map thereof prepared by Robert E. James, City Engineer, Plan No. P-203, on file in the office of the city engineer. 
Knox Street between Harding Avenue and Maclay Avenue. 
Library Street between Brand Boulevard and Harding Avenue and between Fox Street and Pacoima Wash Channel. 
Lucas Street between Alexander Street and Brand Boulevard. 
Maclay Avenue between: 
Pico Street and the southwesterly city boundary. 
The northeasterly line of Pico Street and the southwesterly line of Truman Street. 
Third Street and the northeasterly city limits. 
Macneil Street between First Street and Fourth Street. 
Mission Boulevard between Pico Street and the southwesterly city boundary. 
Morningside Court between Brand Boulevard and Maclay Avenue. 
Mott Street between Brand Boulevard and Wolfskill Street. 
Mountain View Street between Harding Avenue and Maclay Avenue. 
Newton Street between: 
Third Street and Fourth Street. 
Third Street to Library Avenue. 
Orange Grove Avenue between the MTA railroad right-of-way and Second Street. 
Pico Street from Chatsworth Drive to Workman Street. 
San Fernando Road, northwesterly side: between the northeasterly prolongation of the southeasterly line of Kalisher Street and the northwesterly line of Wolfskill Street; southwesterly side thereof; between the southeasterly line of Kalisher Street and the northwesterly line of Wolfskill Street, excepting therefrom such portion thereof as may be established for a 12-minute zone. 
Second Street between: 
Hagar Street and Hubbard Avenue. 
Maclay Street and Macneil Street. 
Seventh Street between Harding Avenue and Brand Boulevard. 
Third Street between: 
Harding Avenue and Hagar Street and between Macneil Street and Jessie Street. 
Maclay Street and Macneil Street. 
Macneil Street to Jessie Street. 
Truman Street: 
Between the northwesterly line of Maclay Avenue and the southeasterly line of Workman Street. 
Southwesterly side: between the northwesterly line of Brand Boulevard and the southeasterly line of Maclay Avenue. 
Warren Street between Harding Avenue and Maclay Avenue. 
Woodworth Street between Chatsworth Drive and Wolfskill Street. 
Workman Street between Pico Street and the southwesterly city boundary. 
(Code 1957, § 13.117; Ord. No. 1509, § 1, 9-21-1999; Ord. No. 1544, § 2, 10-6-2003)  
Sec. 90-949. - Three-hour parking lots. 
In accordance with section 90-213 of this chapter, parking is limited to three hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays, upon any of the following municipal parking lots or portions thereof; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any vehicle which has affixed thereon a valid permit on such municipal parking lot, issued pursuant to any city resolution or ordinance: 
(1)  Municipal Parking Lot 2. 
(2)  Municipal Parking Lot 9. 
(Code 1957, § 13.117.1)  
Sec. 90-950. - Unlimited parking areas. 
In accordance with section 90-214 of this chapter, parking is allowed for an unlimited time period between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day at the following municipal parking lots: 
(1)  Municipal Parking Lot 3. 
(2)  Municipal Parking Lot 4. 
(3)  Municipal Parking Lot 5. 
(4)  Municipal Parking Lot 8. 
(5)  Municipal Parking Lot 10. 
(6)  Municipal Parking Lot 11. 
(7)  Municipal Parking Lot 12. 
(Code 1957, § 13.117.2)  
Sec. 90-951. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
In accordance with section 90-216 of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets: 
Carlisle Street, between Pico Street and O'Melveny Street. 
Fermoore Street (half street), between Second Street and a point 290 feet southwesterly. 
Jessie Street, between Glenoaks Boulevard and a point 353 feet southwesterly. 
Library Street, southwest side, between Maclay Avenue and Brand Boulevard. 
Maclay Avenue, southeast side, between San Fernando Road and Celis Street. 
Meyer Street, southeasterly side, between Truman Street and the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way, and along the northeasterly side of the southeasterly one-half of such portion of the street. 
Park Avenue, southeast side of the northwesterly roadway, between First Street and Fourth Street. 
Third Street, south side, between Macneil Street and Brand Boulevard, and along the north side, between Brand Boulevard and Newton Street. 
Truman Street, northeasterly side, from a point commencing 30 feet southeasterly from the centerline of Kittridge Street and extending southeasterly 45 feet, and from a point commencing 22 feet northwesterly from the centerline of Wolfskill Street and extending northwesterly 300 feet. 
Wolfskill Street, between San Fernando Road and Truman Street. 
(Code 1957, § 13.118; Ord. No. 1571, § 1, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 1589, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 90-952. - Truck routes. 
In accordance with section 90-12 of this chapter and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following streets or portions of streets are declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a gross weight of 9,000 pounds, but not exceeding a maximum gross weight of 60,000 pounds: 
Brand Boulevard, from Truman Avenue to the southwesterly city limits. 
Glenoaks Boulevard, from the northwesterly city limits to the southeasterly city limits. 
Hubbard Street, from the northeasterly city limits to the southwesterly city limits. 
Mission Boulevard, from Truman Avenue to the southwesterly city limits. 
Truman Street, from the northwesterly city limits to the southeasterly city limits. 
(Code 1957, § 13.119; Ord. No. 1580, § 4, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-953. - Streets to be used by commercial vehicles. 
In accordance with section 90-13 of this chapter, commercial vehicles with a capacity rating in excess of three-fourths ton, but not exceeding a maximum gross weight of 9,000 pounds, are prohibited from using the city streets, except the following: 
Arroyo Avenue. 
Brand Boulevard, from the southwesterly city limits to First Street. 
Celis Street. 
Chatsworth Drive, from Freeman Street to Pico Street. 
Fifth Street, from Arroyo Avenue to Jessie Street. 
First Street, between Brand Boulevard and Hubbard Avenue. 
Fourth Street, from Jessie Street to the southeasterly boundary. 
Fox Street: 
From Fourth Street to Library Street. 
From Truman Street to Pico Street. 
Glenoaks Boulevard, from the southeasterly city limits to the northwesterly city limits. 
Hubbard Avenue, from San Fernando Road to Fourth Street. 
Huntington Street, from Truman Street to Celis Street. 
Kalisher Street, from Truman Street to Pico Street. 
Lazard Street, from Truman Street to Celis Street. 
Library Street, from Fox Street to Park Avenue. 
Maclay Avenue, from Pico Street to Truman Street. 
Meyer Street, from Truman Street to Celis Street. 
Mission Boulevard. 
Park Avenue, between Fourth Street and Fifth Street. 
Pico Street, between Kalisher Street and Fox Street. 
Truman Street. 
Wolfskill Street, from Truman Street to Pico Street. 
Workman Street, from Truman Street to Celis Street. 
(Code 1957, § 13.120; Ord. No. 1580, § 5, 11-19-2007) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74.  
Chapter 94 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; electrical code, § 18-61 et seq.; mechanical code, § 18-91 et seq.; plumbing code, § 18-121 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 62; solid waste and recyclables collection services, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; poles, hydrants and signs as an obstruction on streets, § 74-193; subdivisions, ch. 78; telecommunications, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Authority, Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 94-1—94-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-26. - Purpose of division and sewer service and use charges. 
The purpose of this division and of the sewer service and use charges established in division 2 of this article is to derive revenue which shall be used only for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of the city's sanitary sewer system; to repay principal and interest on any bonds which may be issued for the construction or reconstruction of such sanitary or sewer facilities; and to repay federal or state loans or advances which may be made to the city for the construction or reconstruction of sanitary or sewer facilities. However, no such revenue shall be used for the acquisition or construction of new local street sewers or laterals as distinguished from main trunk interceptor and outfall sewers. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.1)  
Sec. 94-27. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the sections of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.2)  
Sec. 94-28. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction and application of this article and any council resolutions adopted pursuant to this article, unless otherwise specified in this article or any such resolution. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Club or lodge means any association primarily organized for some common nonprofit purpose, including lodges, fraternal orders, patriotic organizations, service clubs, and chambers of commerce, but not including groups organized primarily to render service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Commercial, industrial and miscellaneous premises means a premises, other than a single-family premises, multiple-family premises, other residential premises, or institutional premises, designed, improved, or used for any purpose other than a single-family, multiple-family, other residential, or institutional purpose. 
Institutional premises means any public, private, or nonprofit school, church, hospital, lodge, club, library, memorial building, and any other public or nonprofit facility. 
Multiple-family premises means a premises which is designed, improved, or used as a residence for two or more families, living separately, in separate dwelling units, and which is not designed, improved, or used for any other purpose. 
Other residential premises means a premises having a building or group of buildings containing individual guestrooms for one or more guests and no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite of rooms, including but not limited to motels, boardinghouses, hotels, roominghouses, dormitories, fraternities, and sororities. 
Person means any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, institutional owner, or any public corporation. 
Premises means a separate lot or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, which is connected, directly or indirectly, to the sanitary sewer system or any portion thereof or from which any sewage is discharged or conducted, directly or indirectly, into the sewer system. 
Public corporation means the city or any political subdivision, city, county, district, the state, or the United States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof. 
Sanitary sewer system means all of the sewers, treatment plants, and other facilities owned or operated or partly owned or operated or leased by the city for carrying, collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial waste. 
Separate dwelling unit means a premises or portion thereof designed for occupancy for residential purposes by one family, with sleeping, kitchen, and bathroom facilities provided therein for the exclusive use of such family. 
Sewage refers to a combination of liquid or human waste carried away from residences, business buildings, and institutions, which is known as domestic sewage, together with the liquid or water-carried waste resulting from the manufacturing process employed in commercial and industrial establishments, including the washing, cleaning, or drain water from such process and/or establishments, which is known as industrial waste. 
Single-family premises means a premises which is designed, improved, or used as a residence for one family only and which is not designed, improved, or used for any other purpose. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-29. - Permit to discharge sewage into city sewer systems; capital facility charge. 
(a)  Generally. Each person having a premises with an existing sewer connection with the city's sewer system is granted a permit to discharge domestic sewage from the premises. All other persons in the city who shall require service connection with the city sewer system whereby the domestic sewage or commercial or industrial waste or both is disposed of by the city must pay a capital facility charge to the city and must obtain from the public works director or the city engineer or his authorized representative a permit to discharge such sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewer system. 
(b)  Capital facility charge. Before any sewer connection permit shall be issued, the applicant therefor shall pay to the city a capital facility charge in accordance with a schedule of charges adopted by resolution of the city council. No connection to the city sewer system shall be made until after the charges have been paid. 
(c)  Permit application. Application for a permit to discharge such domestic sewage or commercial or industrial waste shall be in writing and shall contain, among other things, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The proposed location of the connections. 
(3)  The character of waste or sewage proposed to be discharged. 
(4)  Other information that may be deemed to be necessary by the public works director or city engineer. 
(d)  Criteria for issuance of permit. The public works director or city engineer shall issue a permit to the applicant as requested if the public works director or city engineer finds and determines that: 
(1)  Such waste will not result in damage to the sewer system. 
(2)  The pipeline in which the connection has discharged or is to discharge has sufficient capacity for the disposition of those wastes and the discharge will not cause undue burden on the sewer system or treatment plant or the parts thereof owned and/or under lease by the city or be in violation of any contracts relative to the disposal of sewage with other public entities. 
(3)  The capital facility charge described in subsection (b) of this section has been paid by the applicant. 
then the public works director or city engineer shall issue a permit to the applicant as requested. 
(e)  Compliance with rules and regulations. The permit shall be subject to the rules and regulations herein imposed and such other rules and regulations as may be adopted by resolutions of the city council from time to time. 
(f)  Conditions of permit. In issuing any permit, the public works director or city engineer may impose conditions to the use thereunder that may be reasonably required to protect the city sewer system. 
(g)  Construction standards. Plans for sewerage construction shall meet all design requirements of the City of Los Angeles and this city. Inspection of all sewerage construction shall be made by the city engineer. 
(h)  Prohibited waste discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, yard drainage, including evaporative-type air cooler discharge water into any sewer facility which is directly or indirectly connected to the sewer facilities of the city. 
(i)  Prohibited toxic discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer which directly or indirectly connects to the city's sewer system any toxic or other hazardous waste, if in the opinion of the engineer such waste may have an adverse or harmful effect on sewers, maintenance personnel, wastewater treatment plant personnel or equipment, treatment plant effluent quality, public or private property, or that may otherwise endanger the public, the local environment or create a public nuisance. The engineer, in determining acceptability of specific wastes, shall consider the nature of the waste and the adequacy and nature of the collection, treatment and disposal system available to accept the waste. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.4)  
Sec. 94-30. - Revocation of permit. 
The public works director and city engineer, with the approval of the city administrative officer, may revoke any permit issued to any person who discharges sewage into the city sewer system for any of the grounds upon which the city or public works director and city engineer could refuse a permit in the first instance or upon any of the grounds upon which the city or public works director and city engineer could refuse or discontinue sewer services after first notifying in writing the person in whose name such permit is issued, specifying the violation and giving such permittee not less than five days' prior notice, after deposit of such notice in the United States mail at the city, addressed to the permittee, of the hearing on such proposed revocation. Such notice may be served personally or may be mailed through United States mail. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.5)  
Sec. 94-31. - Refusal or discontinuance of services. 
The city may refuse to furnish sanitary sewer service and may discontinue all services to any premises where the sewage from such premises is found by the public works director and city engineer to be detrimental or injurious to the city sanitary sewer system or to other premises or where the public works director and city engineer find that negligent or wasteful use of water exists on any premises which adversely affects the city's sanitary sewer system or where the public works director and city engineer find that the discharge of sewage from any premises would have originally constituted grounds for refusal of the issuance of a permit. The city shall have the right to refuse or disconnect sewer service to any premises if necessary to protect the city against fraud or abuse. The public works director and city engineer are charged with the enforcement of all of the sections of this division and division 2 of this article, except that the city clerk shall handle all billings and collections. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.17)  
Sec. 94-32. - Disconnection for violation. 
If a violation, other than nonpayment of sewer service charges, of any section of this division or division 2 of this article or any resolution adopted pursuant to this division or division 2 occurs, the public works director and city engineer may, with the prior approval of the city administrative officer, disconnect any premises from the sanitary sewer system after first notifying in writing the person causing, allowing, or committing such violation; specifying the violation; and, if applicable, the time after which, upon the failure of such person to prevent or rectify the violation, the public works director and city engineer will exercise their authority to disconnect the premises from the sanitary sewer system. However, such time shall not be less than five days after the deposit of such notice in the United States mail at the city, addressed to the person to whom notice is given. If such violation results in a public nuisance, hazard, or menace, the public works director and city engineer may, with the approval of the city administrative officer, enter upon the premises without notice and do such things and expend such sums as may be necessary to abate such nuisance, hazard, or menace, and the reasonable value of the things done and the amounts expended in so doing shall be a charge against the person or owner of the property so in violation. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.18)  
Sec. 94-33. - Remedies of city for nonpayment or other violations. 
Upon failure of the owner of any premises to pay any sewer service or use charges prior to delinquency or if the owner or occupant of any premises shall violate any other section of this division or division 2 of this article or any resolution adopted by the city council pursuant to this division or division 2 of this article, any one or more of the following actions authorized by this section may or, where required, must be taken by the city to enforce such payment or correct such violation: 
(1)  When all or any part of any bill remains unpaid after the date on which it becomes delinquent, a penalty of ten percent of the total amount of such bill shall be added to such bill upon its becoming delinquent. 
(2)  When any bill for sewer service remains unpaid after such bill becomes delinquent and when a violation of any other section of this division or division 2 of this article shall continue for a period of 60 days, the public works director and city engineer may also disconnect the premises from the sanitary sewer system, subject to the notice required in section 94-32 of this division. Whenever the premises has been disconnected from the sanitary sewer system for nonpayment of sewer service and use charge or for other violations of this division or division 2 of this article, such premises shall not be reconnected to the sanitary sewer system until all delinquent charges and penalties have been paid and until a connection permit shall have been obtained and until such of the following charges as are applicable shall have been paid: a sewer disconnection fee equal to the actual cost to the city of such disconnection and a sewer reconnection fee equal to the actual cost to the city of such reconnection, and until the owner and/or occupant of such premises shall otherwise have complied with this division or division 2 of this article. 
(3)  When premises are disconnected from the sanitary sewer system, the public works director and city engineer may take or request any authorized public officer to take such steps as may be legally taken to abate any nuisance on such premises and to prohibit occupancy of such premises until they shall be reconnected to the sanitary sewer system. 
(4)  The city clerk may institute action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect any charges which may be due and payable in the same manner as any other debts owing to the city may be collected. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.19)  
Sec. 94-34. - Appeals from decisions. 
(a)  Any person who shall be dissatisfied with the action of the public works director and city engineer in denying a permit or granting a permit wherein conditions are imposed or in modifying or revoking a permit or with any other order of the public works director and city engineer or city administrative officer by which such person may be affected pursuant to this division or division 2 of this article may, within five days from the date of such action on the part of the public works director and city engineer or city administrative officer or both, appeal to the council by filing notice thereof, in triplicate, with the city clerk. The city clerk shall immediately forward a copy of such appeal to the public works director and city engineer and city administrative officer. After such appeal, the public works director and city engineer and/or administrative officer shall transmit to the council a report setting forth the reason for denying the permit, requiring a change therein, imposing conditions prior to granting the permit, modifying or revoking the permit, or the reason for any other order made by the public works director and city engineer and/or the administrative officer affecting the person appealing. 
(b)  The council shall have full power to review any action on the part of the public works director and city engineer and/or the administrative officer or any order made by them, and the determination of the council shall be final. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.20)  
Secs. 94-35—94-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 94-61. - Schedule of capital facilities charges for sewer connections. 
(a)  Schedule. The following schedule of capital facility charges imposed pursuant to section 94-29 of this article is adopted: 
_____ 
User Classification 	Unit of Usage 	
GROUP I RESIDENTIAL: 		
Typical Domestic (3 bedrm SFR) 	Unit 	$1,798 
Residential (boarding house) 	Bed 	586 
Residential Apt. (bachelor) 	Dwelling unit 	625 
Residential Apt. (1 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	938 
Residential Apt. (2 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	1,251 
Residential Apt. (3 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	1,564 
Residential Apt. (<3 bedroom) 	Additional bedroom 	313 
Residential Condo (1 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	938 
Residential Condo (2 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	1,251 
Residential Condo (3 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	1,564 
Residential Condo (<3 bedroom) 	Additional bedroom 	313 
Residential Duplex/Townhouse/SFD (1 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	1,016 
Residential Duplex/Townhouse/SFD (2 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	1,407 
Residential Duplex/Townhouse/SFD (3 bedroom) 	Dwelling unit 	1,798 
Residential Duplex/Townhouse/SFD (<3 bedroom) 	Additional bedroom 	391 
Residential Rm. Addition (bedroom) 	Bedroom 	391 
Residential Room Conversion into a Bedroom 	Bedroom 	391 
Residential Mobile Home 	Dwelling unit 	1,251 
Residential, Artist ( 2/3 area) 	1,000 gr. sq. ft. 	625 
Residential, Artist Residence 	Dwelling unit 	625 
Residential Guest Home (without kitchen) 	Bedroom 	313 
Rest Home 	Bed 	520 
Mortuary—Living Area 	1,000 sq. ft. 	577 
				
GROUP II COMMERCIAL 		
Auto Parking 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$132 
Barber Shop 	1,000 sq. ft. 	659 
Beauty Parlor 	1,000 sq. ft. 	1,847 
Car Wash (1) (2) 	Calculated individually based on flow and strength 
Church 	Fixed Seat 	27 
Commercial Use 	1,000 sq. ft. 	527 
Dental Office/Clinic 	1,000 sq. ft. 	1,539 
Department & Retail Stores 	1,000 sq. ft. 	527 
Film Processing (1 hr. photo) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	659 
Food Processing Plant (industrial) 	Calculated individually based on flow and strength 
Health Club/Spa 	1,000 sq. ft. 	5,274 
Hospitals 	Bed 	518 
Indoor Theatre 	Seat 	26 
Laundromats 	Calculated individually based on flow and strength 
Laundromats 	Machine 	1,089 
Library: Public Area 	1,000 sq. ft. 	527 
Lumber Yard 	Calculated individually based on flow and strength 
Membership Organizations 	1,000 sq. ft. 	527 
Motion Pictures (studios) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	527 
Professional Offices 	1,000 sq. ft. 	923 
Social Services 	1,000 sq. ft. 	923 
Soft Water Service 	1,000 sq. ft. 	923 
Theatre, cinema 	1,000 sq. ft. 	26 
Warehouse 	1,000 sq. ft. 	132 
				
GROUP III COMMERCIAL 		
Gas Station (4 bays max) 	Per station 	$ 3,165 
Hotels-Motels (w/o restaurants) 	Room 	953 
Manufacturing 	Calculated individually based on flow and strength 
Manufacturing (industrial) 	Calculated individually based on flow and strength 
Repair and Service Stations 	1,000 sq. ft. 	3,164 
				
GROUP IV COMMERCIAL 		
Bakeries (wholesale)/Doughnut Shop 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$ 3,772 
Banquet Room/Ball Room 	1,000 sq. ft. 	10,777 
Cafeteria 	Seat 	404 
Doughnut Shop 	1,000 sq. ft. 	3,772 
Hotels-Motels (w/restaurants)(3) 		
Mortuary—Embalming Area 	Calculated individually based on flow and strength 
User Classification 	Unit of Usage 	
Restaurants, take-out 	1,000 sq. ft. 	4,042 
Restaurants (drive-in, fast food) 	Seat 	270 
Restaurants (fast food, outdoor seat) 	Seat 	162 
Restaurants (full serve, indoor seat) 	Seat 	404 
Restaurants (full serve, outdoor seat) 	Seat 	243 
Supermarkets 	x flow(gpd) 
				
GROUP V INSTITUTIONAL 		
Church School Day Care/Elem. 	Occupant 	$ 50 
Church School (1 day use) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	1,250 
Schools: Elementary/Junior 	Student 	50 
Schools: High 	Student 	75 
				
GROUP VI LARGE VOLUME USERS 	Calculated individually based on flow and strength 
 
(1)  L. A. bills by average process flow. 
(2)  Car wash area is the tunnel area and restaurant area is the gross customer area. 
(3)  Calculated separately as motel and restaurant. 
_____
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this fee is for sewage treatment; the collected fee shall be used to increase treatment capacity and lines for city residents. There is a direct relationship between the use of the fee and the type of development described above and between the need for the facility and the type of project in that houses and commercial and industrial facilities need sewage treatment. The relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the portion of the facility attributed to the development as described above is set forth in the Wastewater Rate Study dated June 28, 2004 prepared by the public works director which was based on the September 14, 1999 Wastewater Rate Study prepared by Black & Veatch Corporation, Consulting Engineers, and which is on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(c)  Rate adjustment. The fees for sewage treatment are significantly based on fees payable to the City of Los Angeles per the contract between that city and the City of San Fernando. The City of San Fernando portion of capital facilities charges is calculated to be 34.79% above the payable amount due to the City of Los Angeles. Therefore, the Schedule of capital facilities charges for sewer connections detailed in subsection (a) should be adjusted to reflect any annual or other increase in payment due to the City of Los Angeles. This adjustment is independent and may be applied in addition to any other applicable adjustment. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.4.1; Ord. No. 1511, § 1, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1550, § 1, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 1570, § 1, 1-17-2006)  
Sec. 94-62. - Payment of sewer service and use fees prerequisite to use of sanitary sewer system. 
No person shall discharge or allow the discharge of sewage or other waste material into the city sanitary sewer system without having a valid and unrevoked permit from the public works director and city engineer therefor, as provided in division 1 of this article, and then only upon the payment of the sewer service and use fees and charges as set forth in this division, as such fees and charges may be amended and modified from time to time by amendments or by resolutions adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.6)  
Sec. 94-63. - Free service. 
No facilities or services of the sanitary sewer system shall be furnished to any premises or to any owner or other person free of charge. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.7)  
Sec. 94-64. - Responsibility for payments. 
The owner of any premises is and shall be responsible for payment of any and all sewer service and use charges applicable to premises owned by him. It shall be the duty of each such owner to ascertain from the city clerk the amount and due date of any such charge applicable to the premises owned by him and to pay such charge when due and payable. It also shall be the duty of every owner of premises to inform the city clerk immediately of all circumstances and of any change in any circumstances which will in any way affect the applicability of any charge to premises owned by him or the amount of any such charge. In particular, but not by way of limitation, an owner of any premises shall immediately inform the city clerk of any sale or transfer of such premises by or to such owner. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.8)  
Sec. 94-65. - Vacant premises; request for disconnection. 
If any premises shall become vacant, the applicable sewer service fees and charges shall continue to be charged to and collected from the owner of such premises until the public works director and city engineer receive written request from such owner to disconnect such premises from the sanitary sewer system. If such request for disconnection is made, the owner of the premises shall pay a sewer disconnection fee equal to the actual cost to the city of such disconnection and upon reconnection shall pay a sewer reconnection fee equal to the actual cost to the city of such reconnection. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.9)  
Sec. 94-66. - Sewer service and use charges. 
The following sewer service and use charges are established and shall be charged and collected by the city for all services furnished in connection with its sanitary sewer system. Such sewer service and use charges shall be applied to or for each premises which is connected, directly or indirectly, to the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof for each premises from which any sewage is conveyed or discharged directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewer system. The amount of sewer service and use charges for each premises shall be the sum of the base fee and the unit cost per 100 cubic feet of water used as follows: 
	FY 	FY 	FY 	FY 	FY 
Customer Class 	2012/13 	2013/14 	2014/15 	2015/16 	2016/17 
Residential 	$ 28.32 	$ 31.15 	$ 32.70 	$ 32.70 	$ 32.70 
Group II Commercial 	16.30 	17.93 	18.83 	18.83 	18.83 
Group III Commercial 	16.30 	17.93 	18.83 	18.83 	18.83 
Group IV Commercial 	16.30 	17.93 	18.83 	18.83 	18.83 
City Property 	16.30 	17.93 	18.83 	18.83 	18.83 
Industrial 	16.30 	17.93 	18.83 	18.83 	18.83 
Schools 	16.30 	17.93 	18.83 	18.83 	18.83 
Higher Education 	16.30 	17.93 	18.83 	18.83 	18.83 
 
Unit Cost for ($/HCF) Water Used 
	FY 	FY 	FY 	FY 	FY 
Customer Class 	2012/13 	2013/14 	2014/15 	2015/16 	2016/17 
Group II Commercial 	$ 1.63 	$ 1.80 	$ 1.89 	$ 1.89 	$ 1.89 
Group III Commercial 	2.63 	2.90 	3.04 	3.04 	3.04 
Group IV Commercial 	3.94 	4.35 	4.57 	4.57 	4.57 
City Property 	1.25 	1.37 	1.44 	1.44 	1.44 
Industrial 	1.25 	1.37 	1.44 	1.44 	1.44 
Schools 1 	1.11 	1.22 	1.28 	1.28 	1.28 
Higher Education 1 	1.11 	1.22 	1.28 	1.28 	1.28 
 
1 Charge per student (ADA). 
Sources: City of San Fernando; Willdan Financial Services. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.10; Ord. No. 1511, § 2, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 1550, § 2, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 5-7-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1614, § 1, adopted May 7, 2012, changed the title of § 94-66 from sewer service charges generally to sewer service and use charges.  
Sec. 94-67. - Charges for general business classifications. 
(a)  The following groups are established for general business classification for the purposes of rated calculation per wastewater strength. The uses cited in connection with the listing of the following groups are examples of the types of business classifications applicable for each such group. These examples are not intended as an exclusive listing of uses for each such group: 
_____ 
			Average Wastewater Discharge of Suspended Solids Plus Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
Group II Commercial: 	Less than 400 milligrams/liter 
	Typical uses include: 	
		Soft water service 	
		Carwash 	
		Professional offices 	
		Laundromats 	
		Department and retail stores 	
		Warehouse 	
		Hospital 	
		Indoor theater 	
		Motion pictures (studio) 	
Group III Commercial: 	400 to 1,000 milligrams/liter 
	Typical uses include: 	
		Hotels-motels (w/o restaurants) 	
		Repair and service stations 	
		Manufacturing 	
		Lumberyard 	
Group IV Commercial: 	More than 1,000 milligrams/liter 
	Typical uses include: 	
		Hotels-motels (w/restaurants) 	
		Bakeries (wholesale) 	
		Supermarkets 	
		Restaurants 	
Group V Institutional: 	
	Typical uses include: 	
		Membership organizations 	
		Social services 	
		Schools 	
		City government 	
 
_____
(b)  Wastewater strength data is calculated based on the state water resources control board's (SWRCB) "Revenue Program Guidelines for Wastewater Agencies." 
(Code 1957, § 22A.10.1)  
Sec. 94-68. - Amending charges by ordinance. 
The sewer service and use charges as established in this division may be modified and amended from time to time by ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.11)  
Sec. 94-69. - Annual increase. 
(a)  On July 1, 1993 and on July 1 of each year thereafter, the charges imposed under section 94-61 shall automatically increase by the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers for Los Angeles—Anaheim—Riverside (1982-84 equals 100) as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics ("index"), rounded to the nearest cent. The increases shall be cumulative. In determining the percentage increase, the index for the month of May immediately preceding the adjustment date shall be compared with the index for the like month of the previous year. In no event, however, shall the rates imposed be adjusted downward to reflect a percentage decrease in the index. 
(b)  Commencing on July 1, 2015 and on July 1, 2016 and July 1, 2017, the charges imposed under this article, section 94-66, shall automatically increase by the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers for Los Angeles—Anaheim—Riverside (1982-84 equals 100) as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics ("index"), rounded to the nearest cent. The increases shall be cumulative. In determining the percentage increase, the index for the month of May immediately preceding the adjustment date shall be compared with the index for the like month of the previous year. In no event, however, shall the rates imposed be adjusted downward to reflect a percentage decrease in the index. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.11.1; Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 5-7-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1614, § 2, adopted May 7, 2012, changed the title of § 94-66 from annual amendment to charges based on consumer price index to annual increase.  
Sec. 94-70. - Due date of charges. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in division 1 of this article or this division, all sewer service and use charges shall be due and payable on the first day of the next succeeding month following the month in which the charges were incurred and shall become delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the last day of the month. 
(b)  If the billing by the city is bimonthly, such sewer service charges shall become due on the first day of the first month following the bimonthly period for which the charges are billed, and the charges shall become delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the last day of the month. 
(c)  Payments for such service charges made by the United States mail, where the envelopes containing such payments are properly addressed, bear sufficient postage, and are postmarked at any time prior to 12:00 midnight of the day on which such charges would otherwise become delinquent, shall be accepted as payment before delinquency. If the day on which the payment of charges would otherwise be delinquent falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, the next full business day thereafter shall be considered as the day on which the delinquency occurs. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.13)  
Sec. 94-71. - Billing. 
Except as otherwise provided in division 1 of this article or this division, the city clerk shall ascertain the amount of each sewer service and use charge applicable to each premises in the city and shall mail to the owner of each premises in the city, immediately following the date any sewer service and use charges become due and payable, a bill for the sewer service and use charges which are then due and payable. Such bill shall be mailed to the person listed as the owner on the last equalized assessment roll of the county at the address shown on such assessment roll or to the address of such owner on file with the city clerk or to the successor in interest of such owner if the name and address of such successor in interest is known to the city clerk. The failure of the city clerk to mail any such bill or the failure of any owner to receive any such bill shall not excuse the owner of any premises from the obligation of paying any sewer service and use charge for any premises owned by him. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.14)  
Sec. 94-72. - Charges billed with water bills. 
So long as water service is connected to the premises liable for sewer and use charges and water is delivered to such premises by the city and bills are rendered by the city therefor, it shall be presumed that the sewer service and use have been rendered by the city to and for the premises and the person in whose name the water service is charged on the city's records. The sewer service and use charge shall be billed by the city with the water bills rendered by the city. Payment of the charge shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as water bills are paid, and all rules and regulations governing the collection of water bills shall apply in every particular to the collection of bills for the sewer service and use charges; provided, however, that the city clerk shall bill and collect all special charges for sewer service and use and all charges which are billed to a person other than the person in whose name the water meter is connected. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.15)  
Sec. 94-73. - Adjustments. 
It is the intent of this division, in establishing different sewer service and use charges for different classes of premises, to establish higher charges for those classes of premises which derive greater benefit from or impose greater burdens upon the sanitary sewer system because of the quality, quantity, or rate of flow of sewage which may be or is discharged by such class of premises into the sewer system, giving full consideration to other fees or taxes which may be paid by owners of the premises for the operation, maintenance, expansion, extension, or development of the sewer system. If, with respect to any of such premises, the city council should find that the charge applicable thereto is unfair and inequitable, the council may, by resolution, agreement, or otherwise, establish a special sewer service and use charge for such premises, different from those provided in this division and having a closer relationship to the benefit received or burden placed by such premises from or upon the sanitary sewer system, giving due consideration to other fees or taxes paid by such premises for the sewer system. However, any such agreement and any such special sewer service charge may at any time be revoked or changed by resolution of the council whenever it finds that continuance of the charge would be unfair or inequitable under the circumstances. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.16)  
Secs. 94-74—94-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES 
 
Sec. 94-101. - Adoption of title 20, division 2, of county Code. 
Subject to certain changes, deletions, and amendments, as set forth in this division, division 2 of title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code (referred to in this division as "code"), entitled "Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste," is adopted as the sanitary sewers and industrial waste regulations for the city. The code is made a part of this division as if set forth in full in this article. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.30)  
Sec. 94-102. - County references. 
For purposes of this article and whenever the context so dictates, references in the code adopted in section 94-101 to county officials and entities shall be amended to substitute city equivalents thereto wherever they may appear. For example, the term "City of San Fernando" shall be substituted for the term "County of Los Angeles"; the term "city" shall be substituted for the term "county"; the term "city council" shall be substituted for the term "board of supervisors"; and the term "city director of public works" shall be substituted for the term "county engineer." 
(Code 1957, § 22A.32)  
Sec. 94-103. - Amendments. 
The sections of the code adopted by section 94-101 are amended, as designated, to read as follows: 
Section 20.20.361 is deleted. 
Notwithstanding any sections of the code adopted by section 94-101 to the contrary: 
Any industrial wastewater discharger who discharges or causes the discharge of prohibited wastewaters which cause damage to city facilities, detrimental effects on treatment processes or any other damages to the city shall be liable to the city for all damages occasioned thereby, including any penalty assessed against the city pursuant to federal law and as a result of such prohibited discharge. 
Section 20.24.100 Administration is amended to read as follows: 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of these regulations. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city engineer may be delegated by the city engineer to persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employment of the city. 
Section 20.24.190 Availability of city facilities is amended to read as follows: 
If sewerage capacity is not available, the city may require the industrial wastewater discharger to restrict discharge until sufficient capacity can be made available. When requested, the city will advise persons desiring to locate new facilities as to the areas where industrial wastewater of their proposed quantity and quality can be received by available sewerage facilities. The city may refuse service to persons locating facilities in areas where their proposed quantity or quality of industrial wastewater is unacceptable in the available sewerage facility. 
Section 20.24.220 Industrial wastewater user charges is added to read as follows: 
A system of user charges shall be established by the city council to reflect fair and equitable charges for actual usage of sewer facilities. Such charges shall be based upon yearly volume, chemical oxygen demand (COD), suspended solids, and such other parameters or constituents that may be determined by the city engineer to create a burden upon the sewer system. 
Section 20.24.230 Industry classifications is added to read as follows: 
The city engineer may classify discharges by industrial categories and establish average industrial wastewater flow quantity and quality for each industrial category. 
Section 20.24.240 Discrepancies between actual and reported effluent quantities is added to read as follows: 
Should measurements of other investigations indicate that the industrial wastewater discharger has discharged industrial wastewater, chemical oxygen demand, suspended solids or other wastewater constituents at rates or in quantities in excess of those stated by the discharger on any report establishing the basis for industrial wastewater treatment and disposal charges, the city engineer shall notify the discharger and require that the discharger furnish all information in his possession relevant to the apparent discrepancy. 
If, after making proper allowance for relevant factors, the city engineer is unable to resolve the discrepancy, he shall make a determination of the amount of any supplemental charges due to the city together with interest and penalty charges due thereon and shall notify the discharger of this supplemental charge. All costs of additional flow metering, sampling, and analyses performed by city shall be paid for by the discharger. 
Section 20.28.020 Fees, records and charges is amended to read as follows: 
The city clerk shall keep a permanent and accurate account of all fees and charges received under these regulations, containing the names and addresses of the persons on whose accounts the fees and charges were paid, the date and amount thereof, and the purpose for which charges were paid. 
Section 20.28.040 is deleted. 
Section 20.28.050 is deleted. 
Section 20.28.060 is deleted. 
Section 20.28.070 is deleted and Section 20.28.070 Refund procedures is added to read as follows: 
A. In the event that any person shall have paid a fee as required under the sections set forth below and no work or processing has been done on these functions by the county engineer and the project has been formally abandoned or canceled, such person, upon presentation to the county engineer of a request in writing, on special provided forms, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to 80 percent of the fee actually paid: 
Section 	Type of Fee 
20.36.230 	Industrial waste disposal permit—Application fee—Schedule. 
20.36.245 	Industrial waste plan review—Fee schedule. 
 
Section 20.36.031 Manholes, opening or entering prohibited is amended to read as follows: 
An unauthorized person shall not open or enter, or cause to be opened or entered, for any purpose whatsoever, any manhole in any public sewer without a permit from the city engineer. 
Section 20.36.136 Self-monitoring; effluent violation is amended to read as follows: 
If sampling performed by any permittee indicates a violation, the permittee shall notify the city engineer within 24 hours of becoming aware or should have become aware of the violation. The permittee shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. 
Section 20.36.137 Analytical requirements is amended to read as follows: 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as required by the city engineer, by permit or otherwise shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 or, if 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and the director. 
Section 20.36.185 Failure to comply, is added to read as follows: 
In the event of a failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city engineer may take such steps as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance. These include, but are not limited to, immediate blockage or disconnection of the discharger's connection to the POTW. 
Section 20.36.195 Request for hearing is added to read as follows: 
Filing of such a request shall not stay a suspension. In the event of hearing requests, the city council shall hold a hearing on the suspension within 14 days of receipt of the request. At the close of the hearing the city council shall make its determination whether to terminate or conditionally terminate the suspension imposed by the city engineer, or the city council may cause the permit to be revoked. Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given to the suspended discharger. At this hearing the suspended discharger may appear personally or through counsel, cross examine witnesses, and present evidence in his own behalf. 
In the event that the city council fails to meet within the time set forth above or fails to make a determination within 72 hours after the close of the hearing, the order of suspension shall be stayed until a city council determination is made with respect to the action of the city engineer. 
Section 20.36.210 Revocation of permit is amended to read as follows: 
The city may revoke an industrial wastewater permit upon a finding that the discharger has violated any provision of this section or the city's rules and regulations. No revocation shall be ordered until a notice and hearing on the questions has been held by the city council. At this hearing, the discharger may appear personally or through counsel, cross examine witnesses, and present evidence in his own behalf. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the discharger at least 15 days prior to the date of hearing. 
Any discharger whose industrial wastewater permit has been revoked shall immediately cease and desist all discharge of any industrial waste covered by the permit. The city engineer may disconnect or permanently block the discharger's connection, if such action is necessary, to ensure compliance with the order of revocation. 
After revocation of a discharger's industrial waste permit, there shall be no further discharge of industrial wastewater by that discharger into the POTW, the storm drain system, or the waters of the state unless there has been a new application filed, all fees and charges that would be required upon an initial application and all delinquent fees, charges, penalties and other sums owed by the discharger and/or the applicant to the city have been paid to the city, and a new industrial wastewater permit has been issued. Any costs incurred by the city, including administrative costs and investigative fees, in revoking the permit and disconnecting the connection if necessary, shall also be paid for by the discharger before issuance of a new industrial wastewater permit. 
Section 20.36.225 Additional emergency remedial measures is added to read as follows: 
The city engineer shall have full power and authority to take any necessary precautions, including but not limited to decontamination, sewer closure, packaging, diking, and transportation of materials, in order to protect life, protect property, or prevent further damage resulting from a condition that is likely to result in a discharge which presents an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or welfare; or which either singly or by interaction with other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the POTW; or which places the city in violation of its NPDES permit. In the pursuit of such an operation, city personnel, any party contracting with the city, or duly authorized representative of another government agency shall have immediate access to the premises. The city engineer may prohibit approach to the scene of such emergency by any person, vehicle, vessel or thing, and all persons not actually employed in the extinguishment of the condition or the preservation of lives and property in the vicinity thereof. 
Section 20.36.230 Industrial waste disposal permit, application fee schedule is amended to read as follows: 
The director shall collect a permit application fee for each application received. Such fee shall be separate and apart from any fee or deposit collected for industrial waste plan review or imposed under provisions of the plumbing code, or other city ordinance or regulations, or by reason of any license, agreement or contract between the applicant and other public agency. Such application fee shall not be refundable even though the application be denied except as provided in section 20.28.070. 
The city council, by resolution, shall establish, and may from time to time adjust or otherwise amend, a schedule of fees imposed pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fee set forth in the adopted fee schedule shall exceed the reasonable estimated cost of providing the services for which the fee is imposed. 
Section 20.36.245 Industrial waste plan review, fee schedule is amended to read as follows: 
A. The director shall collect a plan review fee for each set of plans received for any single site or location. Such fee shall be separate and apart from any fee or deposit collected for any permit or inspection or imposed by any other county ordinance or regulation. Such plan review fee shall be applied to any submittal required by the director pursuant to this division 2 and shall not be refundable even though the submittal be rejected or the project terminated except as provided in section 20.28.070. 
The city council, by resolution, shall establish, and may from time to time adjust or otherwise amend, a schedule of fees imposed pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fee set forth in the adopted fee schedule shall exceed the reasonable estimated cost of providing the services for which the fee is imposed. 
B. The director may impose a reinstatement fee of one-half of the plan review fee if the applicant fails to correct any plans or submittal upon written notice of correction or request for additional information by the director after three attempts have been made to gain such correction. 
Section 20.36.250 Annual inspection fee; scheduling and billing is amended to read as follows: 
A. For each industrial waste disposal permit issued by the director, an annual inspection fee shall be due and payable to the City annually, in advance, on a billing date to be determined by the director. 
The city council, by resolution, shall establish, and may from time to time adjust or otherwise amend, a schedule of fees imposed pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fee set forth in the adopted fee schedule shall exceed the reasonable estimated cost of providing the services for which the fee is imposed. 
B. Immediately upon issuance of a new permit, the permittee shall be billed a percentage of the inspection fee, determined by the days remaining in the billing period, as scheduled below: 
Days Remaining in 
Billing Period 	Percent of Fee Due 
1—60 	0 
61—120 	25 
121—210 	50 
211—300 	75 
301—365 	100 
 
C. The annual inspection fee shall be increased by an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council for each approved rainwater diversion system. 
Section 20.36.265 Wastewater sampling and analysis fee is amended to read as follows: 
The director may charge the discharger a fee, to be determined by resolution of the city council, for each analysis performed by or on behalf of the director on wastewater samples taken from the discharger. 
Section 20.36.270 Miscellaneous services fees is amended to read as follows: 
The following services shall have fees which shall be paid before a review is made, approval is granted, inspection is made, operation is allowed or remedial action is implemented: 
D. Table II - Services 
Inspection of pretreatment facility pursuant to section 20.36.220 
Review of site remedial investigation and cleanup plan to correct unauthorized release of industrial waste, initial deposit 
Additional site remedial investigation and cleanup plan review and approval, per hour 
Inspections outside of normal business hours, per hour 
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated 
Additional plan review or revisions of previously approved plans, per hour 
Collection of wastewater samples 
The city council, by resolution, shall establish, and may from time to time adjust or otherwise amend, a schedule of fees imposed pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fee set forth in the adopted fee schedule shall exceed the reasonable estimated cost of providing the services for which the fee is imposed. 
Section 20.36.295 Annual review of fees is amended to read as follows: 
The amount of fees in this chapter may be adjusted from time to time on an as-needed basis by resolution of the city council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such adjustment shall decrease any fee, and further, no fee shall exceed the reasonable estimated cost of providing the services for which the fee is collected. 
Section 20.36.405 Discharge prohibitions is added to read as follows: 
A. Except as expressly allowed in an industrial waste discharge permit, no person shall discharge, permit the discharge, cause the discharge or contribute to the discharge of the following to the POTW, the storm drain systems or waters of the state: 
(1)  Gasoline, mercury, total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, solvents, pesticides, or jet fuel. 
(2)  Any liquids, solids or gasses which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the municipal wastewater system. Included in this prohibition are wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius). At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(3)  Any waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gasses in such quantities that, alone or in combination with other waste substances, may create a hazard for humans, animals or the local environment; interfere detrimentally with wastewater treatment processes; cause a public nuisance; or cause any hazardous condition to occur in the sewer system. 
(4)  Any waste having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0, or having any corrosive or detrimental characteristic that may cause injury to wastewater treatment or maintenance personnel or may cause damage to structures equipment or other physical facilities of the sewer system. 
(5)  Any solids or viscous substances of such size or in such quantity that they may cause obstruction to flow in the POTW resulting in interference or be detrimental to proper wastewater treatment plant operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to, asphalt, dead animals, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bones, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, or other similar paper products, either whole or ground. 
(6)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city engineer. 
(7)  Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations. 
(8)  Any excessive amounts of petroleum or mineral based cutting oils, commonly called soluble oil, and which form persistent water emulsions. 
(9)  Any dispersed biodegradable oils, fats and greases, such as lard, tallow or vegetable oil in excessive concentrations that would tend to cause adverse effects on the sewer system. 
(10)  Any waste with an excessively high concentration of cyanide. 
(11)  Any unreasonably large amounts of undissolved or dissolved solids. 
(12)  Any wastes containing dissolved sulfides above a concentration of 0.1 milligram/liter. 
(13)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems. 
(14)  Any wastes requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes. 
(15)  Any excessive amounts of chlorinated hydrocarbon or organic phosphorous type compounds. 
(16)  excessive amounts of deionized water, steam condensate or distilled water. 
(17)  Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 50 degrees Fahrenheit and 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(18)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plants effluent thereby violating the city's NPDES permits. 
(19)  Any garbage or waste that is not ground sufficiently to pass through a three-eighths-inch screen. 
(20)  Any wastes containing excessive quantities of iron, boron, chromium, phenols, plastic, resins, copper, nickel, zinc, silver, lead, mercury, cadmium, selenium, arsenic or any other objectionable materials toxic to humans, animals, the local environment or to biological or other wastewater treatment processes. 
(21)  Any blow-down or bleed water from cooling towers or other evaporative coolers exceeding one-third of the makeup water. 
(22)  Any single pass cooling water. 
(23)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the city engineer in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(24)  Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy. 
(25)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system. 
(26)  Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(27)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city engineer in a wastewater permit. 
(28)  Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system. 
(29)  Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR 261 except as may be specifically authorized by the city engineer. 
(30)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause or contribute to interference with the POTW. 
(31)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case effluent exceeding a temperature of 140 degrees Fahrenheit or which exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit at the point of entry into the POTW treatment plant. 
(32)  Petroleum, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(33)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gasses, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(34)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city engineer. 
(35)  Floatable material which is readily removable. 
(36)  Any substance which may cause the treatment plan effluent or any other residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the system cause the city to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under section 405 of the act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or other state requirements applicable to the sludge use and disposal practices being used by the city. 
(37)  Any wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to pass through or interfere with the municipal wastewater system, any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or constitute a hazard to humans, animals, plant or fish life or to exceed any limitation set forth to this section. 
B. Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that these wastes could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system. 
C. The city may, from time to time, establish or revise by resolution, quantitative limitations with respect to the wastes referred to in this section. Such limitations shall be designed to bring the city into compliance with applicable state and federal requirements. 
D. Hospital wastes. Hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors, and convalescent homes: 
(1)  May discharge, through a city-approved grinder installation with inlet size and design features suitable for its intended use and so constructed that all particles pass through a maximum three-eighths-inch opening, wastes of the following categories: 
a.  Wet organic kitchen wastes from food preparation and disposal but excluding all paper and plastic items. 
b.  Disposable hypodermic needles, syringes and associated articles following their use. 
c.  Infectious wastes, defined as: 
i.  Laboratory and surgical operating room wastes except as excluded in subsection (2)(b) below. 
ii.  Wastes from outpatient areas and emergency rooms similar to those included in subsection (i) above. 
iii.  Equipment, instruments, utensils, and other materials of a disposable nature that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are used in the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated by public health agencies. 
(2)  Shall not discharge to the sewer by any means: 
a.  Solid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are isolated because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease. 
b.  Recognizable portions of the human anatomy. 
c.  Wastes excluded by other provisions of these regulations except as specifically permitted in subsection (1) above. 
d.  All solid wastes not included in subsection (1) above. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the health officer of Los Angeles County to define wastes as being infectious and, with the concurrence of the city engineer, to require that they be discharged to the sewer. 
Section 20.36.406 Specific pollutant limitations is added to read as follows: 
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits: 
Arsenic 	3.0 mg/l 
Cadmium 	15.0 mg/l 
Chromium (total) 	10.0 mg/l 
Copper 	15.0 mg/l 
Cyanide (free) 	2.0 mg/l 
Cyanide (total) 	10.0 mg/l 
Lead 	5.0 mg/l 
Nickel 	12.0 mg/l 
pH 	5.5—11.0 standards units 
Silver 	5.0 mg/l 
Zinc 	25.0 mg/l 
Dissolved sulfides 	0.1 mg/l 
Dispensed oil and grease 	600.0 mg/l 
Floatable oil and grease 	None visible 
Temperature 	140° F 
 
All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metals. Compliance with all parameters may be determined from a single grab sample as well as composite sampling. 
Section 20.36.407 City's right of revision is added to read as follows: 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the city's sanitary sewer system if deemed necessary to comply with the objective of this code. 
(Code 1957, §§ 22A.31—22A.60; Ord. No. 1633, § 2, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 1679, §§ 3, 4, 8-6-2018)  
Sec. 94-104. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the sections of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.61)  
Sec. 94-105. - Contract for services. 
The city may contract for inspection and/or enforcement services with any governmental or private entity to implement and enforce this division and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1957, § 22A.62)  
Secs. 94-106—94-109. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE 
 
Sec. 94-110. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Fats, oils and grease or FOG shall mean non-petroleum organic polar compounds derived from animal, plant, or both animal and plant sources, that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules and that are detectable and measurable using analytical procedures established in Part 136 of Title 40 of the United States Code of Federal Regulations, as may be amended. 
FOG disposal system shall mean a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept fats, oils and grease from wastewater discharge, including a gravity grease interceptor or hydromechanical grease interceptor. 
Food service establishment or FSE shall mean an operation within the boundaries of the city that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends or otherwise provides food for human consumption at the retail level and operates in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, and which has any process or device that uses or produces significant amounts fats, oils, or grease. An operation is not considered an FSE when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing significant amounts of fats, oils or grease. 
Gravity grease interceptor shall mean a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept fats, oils and grease from wastewater discharge and is identified by volume, 30-minute retention time, baffle(s), a minimum of two compartments, a minimum total volume of 750 gallons, and gravity separation. 
Health officer shall mean the city's building official or city engineer. 
Hydromechanical grease interceptor shall mean a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept fats, oils and grease from a wastewater discharge and is identified by flow rate and separation and retention efficiency. The design incorporates air entrainment, hydromechanical separation, interior baffling, and/or barriers in combination or separately, and one of the following: 
(1)  External flow control, with air intake (vent): directly connected. 
(2)  External flow control, without air intake (vent): directly connected. 
(3)  Without external flow control, directly connected. 
(4)  Without external flow control, indirectly connected. 
Sanitary sewer overflow shall mean any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system. Discharges into temporary storage and conveyance facilities of sanitary sewer systems are not considered to be sanitary sewer overflows. Sanitary sewer overflows include: 
(1)  Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that reach waters of the United States; 
(2)  Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that do not reach waters of the United States; 
(3)  Wastewater backups into buildings and on private property that are caused by blockages or flow conditions within the publicly owned portion of a sanitary sewer system. 
Sanitary sewer system shall mean any system of pipes, pump stations, sewer lines, or other conveyances, upstream of a wastewater treatment plant headworks used to collect and convey wastewater to the publicly owned treatment facility. Temporary storage and conveyance facilities (such as vaults, temporary piping, construction trenches, wet wells, impoundments, tanks, etc.) are considered to be a part of the sanitary sewer system. 
Sewer lateral shall mean the wastewater connection between a building's wastewater facilities and a public sewer system. 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 94-111. - FOG discharge prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer system, any water or sewage, or liquid waste of any kind containing fats, oils and grease that exceeds a concentration level adopted by a regulatory agency, that clog, obstruct or fill the same, that may in any way damage or interfere with or prevent the effective use thereof, that may cause sanitary sewer overflows, or that may necessitate or require frequent repair, cleaning out or flushing of such sewer system to render the same operative. 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 94-112. - Installation required of FOG disposal systems. 
(a)  New FSEs or existing FSEs undergoing remodeling, retrofitting or change in operations. Wastewater discharge originating from fixtures and equipment which may contain fats, oils and grease, including, but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, soup kettles, automatic vent cleaning devices, and floor drains located in areas where FOG-containing materials may exist, shall be drained into the sanitary sewer system only through a FOG disposal system. Multiple FOG disposal systems may be required to satisfy the requirements of this section. The health officer may waive the requirements of this section upon determination that compliance may create a health hazard and/or be impeded by a physical constraint that is impractical to overcome when retrofitting an existing FSE. 
(b)  Existing FSEs. Wastewater discharge originating from fixtures and equipment which may contain fats, oils and grease, including, but not limited to, scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, soup kettles, automatic vent cleaning devices, and floor drains located in areas where FOG-containing materials may exist, and which causes sewer lateral and/or sanitary sewer systems failures, blockages, overflows, or other interferences, shall be drained into the sanitary sewer system only through a FOG disposal system. 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 94-113. - FOG disposal system requirements. 
(a)  FOG disposal systems shall be installed in areas that are at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, maintenance, servicing and removal of the recovered fats, oils and grease in a manner that does not require entry into a food or utensil handling area as follows: 
(1)  Hydromechanical grease interceptors shall not be installed in a food or utensil handling area unless specifically approved by the health officer. Plumbing fixtures and equipment connected to such hydromechanical grease interceptor shall be provided with an approved type of flow control so that the total flow through the device or devices shall not be greater than the rated flow of the FOG disposal system. 
(2)  Hydromechanical grease interceptors shall be installed as provided for in subsection (a)(1) with the additional provision that the storage of removed fats, oils and grease also be outside of food and utensil handling areas in a secure location that protects against the accidental spill of fats, oils and grease onto floor drains, parking lots, catch basins, storm drains, sidewalks, streets, or gutters and is protected from inundation by stormwater flows. 
(3)  Gravity grease interceptors shall be installed outside of the structure containing the kitchen, food or utensil handling area(s) in a location affording ease of inspection, cleaning, maintenance and servicing without entry to the structure unless otherwise approved by the health officer. Such device shall be designed and sized to retain fats, oils and grease until accumulations can be removed by pumping the gravity grease interceptor. When so required by the health officer, gravity grease interceptors shall be equipped with an approved sample box. 
(b)  FOG disposal systems shall be maintained in efficient operating condition. 
(c)  FOG disposal systems shall be cleaned and fats, oils and grease removed at regular intervals. 
(d)  Fats, oils and grease removed shall be waste hauled periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for FOG disposal systems and disposed of in a proper manner and at regular intervals. 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 94-114. - Existing FOG disposal systems. 
Existing FOG disposal systems may remain in service provided such systems are properly maintained to effectively reduce the discharge of fats, oils and grease, are operating within original design parameters, and have not been altered in a manner not approved by the health officer. Such authorization does not preclude the health officer from establishing discharge limitations which may require the modification, enlargement, addition or replacement of a FOG disposal system to protect the sanitary sewer system from blockages or overflows. 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 94-115. - Variance of FOG disposal system requirements. 
(a)  The health officer may grant a variance from the FOG disposal system requirements of sections 94-112, 94-113, and 94-114 of this article to allow alternative technology that is, at least, equally effective in controlling the discharge of fats, oils and grease in lieu of a FOG disposal system, where an FSE demonstrates to the health officer's satisfaction that it is impossible to install, operate or maintain a FOG disposal system, or where an FSE demonstrates to the health officer's satisfaction that any discharge of fats, oils and grease from the FSE is negligible and will not have a significant impact on the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  An FSE may submit an application for variance from the FOG disposal system requirements to the health officer. The health officer shall determine the terms and conditions for issuance of a variance. The health officer may revoke a variance at any time when any one of the terms and conditions for its issuance is not satisfied. 
(c)  Any decision of the health officer to grant or deny a variance may be appealed to the city administrator by any person within ten days after notice of the health officer's decision has been provided to the applicant. An applicant for a variance shall file an application and pay an application fee in the amount set forth by resolution of the city council. Any decision on appeal of the city administrator's decision to grant or deny a variance may be appealed to the city council by any person within ten days after notice of the city administrator's decision has been provided to the applicant. The decision of the city council upon an appeal from an action of the city administrator shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 94-116. - Public nuisance. 
The city council finds and determines that sanitary sewer overflows may cause threat and injury to the public's health, safety and general welfare and are declared to be public nuisances and shall be punishable as such. Further, the discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this article or of any order issued by the health officer, as authorized by this article, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 94-117. - Sanitary sewer overflows—Abatement orders and clean up costs. 
Notwithstanding any waiver or variance of FOG disposal system requirements under this article, FSEs determined by the health officer to contribute to a sanitary sewer system blockage, overflow, or interference resulting from the discharge of wastewater containing fats, oils, and grease, may be ordered by the health officer to immediately install and maintain a FOG disposal system, and may be subject to a plan determined by the health officer to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sanitary sewer line failures, blockages, overflows, or other interferences. Sewer lateral failures and sanitary sewer overflows caused by an FSE or multiple FSEs shall be the responsibility of the private property owner(s) or the FSE(s), and any individual as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s). If the city must act immediately to contain and clean up a sanitary sewer overflow caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or serving an FSE, or at the request of the property owner or operator of the FSE, or because of failure of the property owner or FSE to abate the condition causing immediate threat to the public's health, safety or general welfare, the city's costs for such abatement and damages for any injuries to the city's sanitary sewer system shall be entirely borne by the operator(s) of the FSE(s), and any individual as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s), and shall constitute a debt to the city and become due and immediately payable upon the city's request for reimbursement of such costs. If the city is unable to recover all costs and damages from the operator(s) of the FSE(s), or any individual as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s), the costs shall be borne by the private property owner(s) or both the private property owner(s) and the operator(s) of the FSE(s), and any individual as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s). 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 94-118. - Right of entry. 
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the health officer, or city representatives, reasonable access to all parts of the FSE for the purpose of inspection and sampling during all times the FSE is open or operating, or any other reasonable time. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to the health officer or city representatives attempting to inspect any FSE involved directly or indirectly with the discharge of wastewater into the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. U-1591, § 3, 11-2-2009)  
Secs. 94-119—94-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-131. - Water division established. 
The water division is created and established as an operating division under the general direction of the public works director. 
(Code 1957, § 28.1)  
Sec. 94-132. - Responsibility of water division. 
It shall be the responsibility of the water division to obtain water through extraction and diversion facilities owned or leased and operated by it or others and acquire water by purchase, exchange or otherwise and to distribute water to the inhabitants of and property in the city for domestic, irrigation, recreation, commercial and industrial purposes. 
(Code 1957, § 28.2)  
Sec. 94-133. - Supervision of water division. 
The water division shall be under the supervision of the water superintendent, and he shall be directly responsible and report to the public works director, who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 28.3)  
Sec. 94-134. - Adoption of rules and regulations and rates, charges and penalties. 
(a)  Under this article the city council may from time to time by resolution: 
(1)  Adopt rules and regulations for the operation and maintenance of the water division. 
(2)  Establish, fix and modify the rates, charges and penalties for the furnishing of water and the time and method of payment therefor. 
(3)  Prescribe rules for the extension of water mains within the city and along its boundaries. 
(4)  From time to time amend such rules, regulations and rates and adopt new rules, regulations, rates and conditions if need be. 
(b)  The violation of any such rules and regulations so adopted by the council by resolution shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 28.4)  
Sec. 94-135. - Property of city. 
All services and water meters installed by the water division shall remain at all times the property of the city and shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the city when rendered unserviceable by normal wear and tear. 
(Code 1957, § 28.5)  
Sec. 94-136. - Unauthorized connections; interference with meters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than one who is duly authorized by the public works director or water superintendent, to connect or disconnect any water service or to turn on or suffer or cause to be turned on any water service that has been turned off by the water division from any building or premises in the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle or interfere with any water meters or service in the city without written permission from the public works director or water superintendent. 
(Code 1957, § 28.6)  
Sec. 94-137. - Liability of consumer for injury to meters. 
Any damage to a water meter resulting from vandalism, carelessness or neglect of the consumer or any member of his family or anyone employed by him and any damage which may result from hot water or steam from a boiler, water heater, or otherwise shall be charged to and paid for by such consumer to the water division on presentation of the bill therefor. If such bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off from such premises without further notice and shall not be turned on again until all charges are paid. 
(Code 1957, § 28.7)  
Sec. 94-138. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 94-138 which pertained to penalty for violation and derived from Code 1957, § 28.8.  
Sec. 94-139. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Any authorized city official or employee shall have the right of entry into buildings or premises regulated by this article during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection, checking, changing, or reading water meters installed in such dwellings or premises. The city employees so designated shall be furnished with appropriate identification which shall be displayed on request. 
(b)  If any authorized city inspector, foreman, or employee is refused admittance to any premises supplied by water by the city or on being admitted is hindered or prevented from making such examination, reading, or inspection due to the maintenance on such premises by a dog or animals or for any other reason, the water superintendent or director may cause the service of water to the premises to be discontinued after giving written notice to the owner or occupant of his intention to do so. The notice shall be deemed served upon the owner or occupant thereof if it is mailed to his last known address and a copy thereof mailed to the premises if his mailing address is not at the same premises. The service of water may be discontinued until the owner or occupant has given satisfactory assurance to the water superintendent or director that any inspector, foreman, or employee will not be hindered or prevented from making the examination, reading or inspection. 
(Code 1957, § 28.40)  
Sec. 94-140. - Unlawful acts and trespass. 
It is unlawful for any person to open any fire hydrant, street hydrant, stopcock, gate valve, or to interfere in any manner with any street water service, water connection, or any water meter attached to any service pipe connected with the water mains or to turn on or off water mains or water pipes of the city or to tap, break, or injure any water main or water pipe of the city or any reservoir or to tap any water service pipe or to take or draw water from any water main, pipe, or hydrant of the city without first having made written application for water service, as provided in this article, and paying the established water rate or service charge. It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon the public property of the water division without written permission from the water superintendent or director. 
(Code 1957, § 28.41)  
Sec. 94-141. - Repairs to water mains, meter and lines. 
The city shall at its own expense make all repairs necessary to water mains, meters, and pipelines connecting with water mains. The city shall make no repair or do any work whatsoever on the water pipeline beyond the meter connection. Any repair made necessary by any act of negligence or carelessness by the consumer or any other person shall be charged to and collected from the consumer or the person responsible. The city will in no case be liable for damage occasioned by water running from an open or faulty fixture or from broken or damaged pipe beyond the city's meter. 
(Code 1957, § 28.42)  
Sec. 94-142. - Turning water off or on in emergency. 
The water division shall have the power and authority to turn off the water supply without notice in any emergency or disaster or for the purpose of repair, replacement, construction, reconstruction of any water line or appurtenant part of the city's water system or the installation of any meter or for the failure to pay any water bill or other charge of the water division within the times and in the manner prescribed in this article. The director or water superintendent shall make reasonable effort to notify all consumers prior to such emergency that the water is to be turned off or on. 
(Code 1957, § 28.43)  
Sec. 94-143. - Supplying to other than occupant of premises. 
It is unlawful for any person to supply water to any other person other than the occupants of the premises of such consumer. 
(Code 1957, § 28.44)  
Sec. 94-144. - Street numbers. 
No applicant for water service shall be entitled to the service until the building or premises where such water is to be furnished is numbered as required by article V of chapter 74 of this Code and such number is given to the water division. 
(Code 1957, § 28.45)  
Sec. 94-145. - Service application form. 
Before any water will be supplied by the city to any person who requires service from the city-owned water system to water pipes on any real property, the owner or occupant of the property shall make a written application to the finance department for such service and service connection upon a form provided in the finance division. 
(Code 1957, § 28.50)  
Sec. 94-146. - Service application deposit. 
(a)  A security deposit will be required unless the applicant for water service has had a previous utility account with the city within the prior 24 months and has regularly paid all bills for water from the city promptly for 12 months immediately prior to closing that service account. If an applicant cannot qualify for credit under this requirement, he shall make a security deposit in the amount set forth in section 94-263. However, the owner of the property or his authorized agent may guarantee payment for the tenant, and such guarantee shall be accepted provided the owner's credit has been established as provided in this subsection. Where such service is for commercial uses, the security deposit required may be twice the average monthly bills of consumers of his class. 
(b)  After 12 payments have been made in the month in which they were due for monthly billing or after six payments have been made in the month in which they were due for bimonthly billing, the deposit will be credited to the depositor. 
(Code 1957, § 28.51)  
Sec. 94-147. - Consumer moving into location with current service. 
When a consumer moves into a place of business or residence from which water service was not previously discontinued and does not call at the office and make proper arrangements for service within a period of three days, the service will be discontinued and the administrative/reconnection service charge collected before service is again resumed. 
(Code 1957, § 28.52)  
Sec. 94-148. - Turning on water supply. 
When turning on the water supply as requested and the house and property is vacant, the city will endeavor to ascertain if water is running on the inside of the building. If such is found to be the case, the meter will be left shut off at the curb cock on the inlet side of the meter or on the outlet side at the customer hand valve between the house and the meter, and a notice will be left at the property stating why water was not turned on. Every property owner for his own convenience and safety must have a customer-owned wheel valve at some convenient place between the meter and the building. 
(Code 1957, § 28.53)  
Sec. 94-149. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  Upon notification by the owner or occupant of a building or premises to have the water shut off, the city shall have the water shut off on the supply side of the meter within 48 hours of receiving written notice to discontinue service. At that time the meter reading shall be recorded and a bill rendered which shall include a cost for the amount of water used according to the rates and charges provided and for the prorated monthly minimum service charge due for the fractional part of the current billing period. 
(b)  The person last accepting responsibility for the water utility account shall be responsible for all charges and fees until notification is received by the service office to close the account in the name of that person. A valid forwarding address is also required to relieve the consumer of liability for the water utility bill. 
(Code 1957, § 28.54)  
Sec. 94-150. - Temporary service. 
Any applicant for temporary water service shall be required to deposit the estimated cost of the facilities required and the water to be used. Upon discontinuance of use, payment will be adjusted to the actual cost to the city of placing and removing meter, connection, etc., and the water consumed will be billed at regular rates. 
(Code 1957, § 28.55)  
Sec. 94-151. - Responsibility for payments. 
(a)  Except for master-metered apartment buildings or unless a property owner consents by written agreement that water service be furnished to tenants on the property owner's account, the occupant of any premises shall be responsible for payment of any water and service charges applicable to premises occupied by him. It shall be the occupant's duty to inform the city immediately of all circumstances and of any change in circumstances that will in any way affect the applicability of any charge to premises occupied by him or the amount of any such charge. In particular, but not by way of limitation, an occupant of any premises shall immediately inform the city clerk of any sale or transfer of the ownership or leasehold interest to such premises by or to such occupant. 
(b)  Whenever the property is vacant or unoccupied and the owner or his authorized agent or lessee notifies the city in writing that until further notice no water will be required on the premises, there shall be no charge for water on the premises from the time of notifying the city until further notice is given by such owner or agent or lessee that the discontinued service be resumed. 
(Code 1957, § 28.56)  
Sec. 94-152. - Prior delinquent bills. 
An applicant may be refused water service if he has previous delinquent and unpaid bills for water service at another location served by the city or other delinquent or unpaid city bills, licenses, fees, permits, or other charges. 
(Code 1957, § 28.57)  
Sec. 94-153. - Supplanted service. 
If the city's public works improvements interfere with existing water service to a consumer provided by a supplier other than the city, the city may, upon agreement of all parties affected, provide such water service instead of such other supplier. The city reserves the right and power to contract separately with any such consumer for the sale and delivery of water at times, places and prices to be fixed by the city council. The council may agree to furnish water to such consumer at prices equivalent to those paid by the city consumer to the supplanted supplier if it finds the city benefits thereby. 
(Code 1957, § 28.58)  
Sec. 94-154. - Billing. 
(a)  Water meters shall be read as near monthly as possible where the billing is to be monthly and as near bimonthly as possible where bimonthly billing is to be used. The finance director shall, as soon as practical, after the first day of the month succeeding the month for which the charges were incurred for monthly billing and the first day of the month succeeding the two-month period in which the charges were incurred for bimonthly billing, mail or deliver to each consumer a statement of water service charges for the preceding month or two-month period, as the case may be. All charges shall be due and payable at the office of the city treasurer on the first day of the next succeeding month following the month in which the charges were incurred and shall become delinquent at 12:00 midnight on the last day of the month. If bimonthly billing is made by the city, such water service charges shall become due on the first day of the first month following the bimonthly period for which the charges are billed, and the charges shall become delinquent at 12:00 midnight on the last day of the month. 
(b)  Payment for such service charges made by United States mail where the envelope containing such payments is properly addressed, bears sufficient postage, and is postmarked at any time prior to 12:00 midnight of the day on which such charges would otherwise become delinquent shall be accepted as payment before delinquency. If the day on which the payment of charges would otherwise be delinquent falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the next full business day thereafter shall be considered as a day on which the delinquency occurs. 
(c)  City hall is the only authorized paying station. If paid elsewhere, the city is not responsible if payment is delayed in reaching the office, and penalties for late payment will be charged. 
(Code 1957, § 28.60; Ord. No. 1545, § 30, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 94-155. - Nonreceipt of bills. 
The city is responsible for delivering the water bills to the United States Postal Service. Failure of the consumer to receive a bill from the United States Postal Service does not relieve the consumer of the requirement for payment, nor is nonreceipt of a bill cause to remove a penalty from the account. 
(Code 1957, § 28.61)  
Sec. 94-156. - Registration failure; bill estimation. 
If a water meter fails to register during any month, a charge will be made upon the amount of water used during the same month of the previous year. If there was no meter at the premises in question during the previous year, a charge will be made upon the estimate fixed by the water superintendent or director which shall be paid by the consumer. 
(Code 1957, § 28.62)  
Sec. 94-157. - Assumption of use. 
(a)  In all cases the city will assume that water has been used where any person has had the opportunity to use water, and even though he may not have used any water during the month or billing period he will not be entitled to any rebate from the regular rate provided in such cases unless he has notified the city in writing to discontinue such service. 
(b)  The city's regular rates for water shall be charged in every instance for premises vacated until the city shall have been notified in writing by the owner or his agent and filed with the service clerk in the water division of the discontinuance of the use of water upon such premises. 
(Code 1957, § 28.63)  
Sec. 94-158. - Liability during discontinued period. 
If, after water service has been discontinued but before the service is reconnected for the new customer, the meter indicates water has been used, the owner of the property shall be responsible for charges incurred during the discontinued period. 
(Code 1957, § 28.64)  
Sec. 94-159. - Records. 
The city shall keep a complete set of books or accounts showing all financial transactions with reference to the city water division and shall make or cause to be made all collections for water service. 
(Code 1957, § 28.65)  
Sec. 94-160. - Dispute settlement. 
If a dispute arises between any water consumer and the city concerning water service or the amount of the water bill to such consumer, the dispute may be settled subject to the approval of the city council and the finance director. The provisions and procedures provided for in this section are permissive, only, and shall in no way affect any of the other sections of this article or bind the city to any set formula for settling disputes. 
(Code 1957, § 28.66; Ord. No. 1545, § 31, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 94-161. - Delinquent penalties. 
When all or any part of any water bill remains unpaid after the date on which it becomes delinquent, a penalty of ten percent of the total amount of such bill shall be added to such bill upon its becoming delinquent and shall be collected from the consumer. 
(Code 1957, § 28.70)  
Sec. 94-162. - Disconnection notice. 
A final notice of imminent disconnection of water service shall be made to the occupants of the premises before service is discontinued. A fee per unit for this notification will be charged to the account as pursuant to section 94-263. 
(Code 1957, § 28.71)  
Sec. 94-163. - Disconnection for delinquency. 
If a bill for water service charges, penalties, and disconnection notice delivery fee is not paid, the water service shall be turned off after a final notice advising the customer of such shutoff on or before the expiration of approximately 20 days following the date on which it becomes delinquent. A further administrative/reconnection fee; other delinquent or unpaid city bills, licenses, fees, permits, or other charges; and a security deposit shall be paid before the service is then reconnected, pursuant to section 94-263. No checks shall be accepted for payment of disconnected accounts. 
(Code 1957, § 28.72)  
Sec. 94-164. - Deposit increase for delinquent accounts. 
If a consumer who has made a deposit to guarantee the payment of water service charges fails to pay his delinquent bill together with all added penalties and fees before the 20th day following the day in which such bill becomes delinquent, the deposit shall be increased to the minimum set by section 94-263, or increased to the equivalent of the delinquent amount including penalties and fees. 
(Code 1957, § 28.73)  
Sec. 94-165. - Payment extensions and penalty and fee waivers. 
If the finance director determines that an extension of time or relief from any penalty for violation of this division should be granted, the director or designee may authorize in writing an extension of such time limits not to exceed 30 days or authorize the waiver of penalties. Only one such extension or waiver shall be granted in a calendar year, except in hardship situations as determined by the finance director, who shall maintain a record of reasons for granting the extension. No extension of time may be granted to waive delinquent penalties. Elected officials are not eligible for any payment extensions and penalty and fee waivers without the express consent of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 28.74; Ord. No. 1489, § 1, 1-20-1998; Ord. No. 1545, § 32, 11-3-2003)  
Sec. 94-166. - Penalty for turning on water after turnoff. 
No person shall turn on water or suffer it to be turned on at any meter or other connection to the city's water distribution system after the water has been turned off by the city. Meter readings will be taken when the meter is shut off, and any increase in the reading will be considered proof that the meter had been turned on, even if found in the off position when checked. For each time the employees of the water division are required to again turn the water off or determine that the meter had been turned on and off, a tampering fee shall be charged pursuant to section 94-263. 
(Code 1957, § 28.75)  
Sec. 94-167. - Returned checks. 
When a water customer presents the city with a check or other negotiable instrument in payment of a water bill that is not negotiable either because of a insufficient funds, closed account, or other reason, the customer, pursuant to section 94-263, shall present the city with cash covering the amount of the check plus a penalty. If payment is not made, disconnection shall take place within 48 hours of notification of the customer with appropriate reconnection penalties. 
(Code 1957, § 28.76)  
Sec. 94-168. - Connection. 
Upon the applicant for water service having complied with all the requirements relating to written application for service, the city will cause the property described to be connected to the city water main subject to this Code, and the applicant shall bear the cost of the installation of service. 
(Code 1957, § 28.80)  
Sec. 94-169. - Connection size. 
The city reserves the right to determine the size of the water service connection and its location with respect to the boundaries of the premises to be served. The laying of the consumer pipe to the curb shall not be done until the service connection is installed. If the consumer lays his pipe to the curb before or after the service connection is installed and its location is more than five feet from where the service connection enters the property, the consumer shall bear the extra cost of connecting the service connecting pipe to the consumer pipe. 
(Code 1957, § 28.81)  
Sec. 94-170. - One meter per lot. 
No more than one water meter shall be installed on any lot or parcel of real property without the approval and consent of the director or water superintendent. 
(Code 1957, § 28.82)  
Sec. 94-171. - Multiple meters. 
For the purpose of making charges, all water meters upon a consumer's premises will be considered separately, and the reading thereof shall not be combined. However, when the water division shall, for operating necessity, install upon the consumer's premises in place of one meter two or more in parallel, the reading of such two or more meters shall be combined for the purpose of making charges. 
(Code 1957, § 28.83)  
Sec. 94-172. - Restoration of property after connecting service pipe to meter. 
When any plumber or any other person connecting a water service pipe to the property side of a water meter uses water for testing the pipes, he shall leave the service box in as good condition as found and shall leave the water shut off, if found shut off, and shall in writing notify the city at the time the connection is made. Any damage caused by the negligence or carelessness of any plumber or other person to any part of the meter box or connection shall be paid by such plumber or person to the city on demand. 
(Code 1957, § 28.84)  
Sec. 94-173. - Billing for connection of meter. 
The water division may connect a meter to any water service or service pipe at any time it deems it expedient to do so and render a corrected bill from the date of installation of such meter according to the meter rates and charges. 
(Code 1957, § 28.85)  
Sec. 94-174. - Distance of sewer or gas service from water service. 
No sewer ditch, sewer pipe, gas pipe, or any other service pipe shall be installed or maintained nearer than three feet to any water service pipe, water main, or water service meter of the city. Reference is hereby made to the city's water construction standards. 
(Code 1957, § 28.86)  
Sec. 94-175. - City property ownership. 
All water services and water meters installed by the water division shall remain at all times the property of the city and shall be maintained, repaired, and renewed by the city when rendered unserviceable by normal wear and tear when in its judgment such repairs are needed. Where water meter replacements, repairs, or adjustments are rendered necessary by a consumer's negligence or carelessness or by any member of his family or any person in his employ, any expenses caused to the city thereby shall be charged to and collected from the consumer. 
(Code 1957, § 28.87)  
Sec. 94-176. - Curbstop or meter shutoff valve. 
Every water service connection installed by the city shall be equipped with a curbstop or shutoff valve on the inlet side of the water meter. Such valve or curbstop is intended for the exclusive use by the city in controlling the water supply through the service connection pipe. If the curbstop or shutoff valve is damaged by the consumer's use to an extent requiring repair or replacement, such repair or replacement shall be at the consumer's expense. For ordinary usage, a consumer shall provide his own valves between the meter and the first half or branch of the consumer's service line. 
(Code 1957, § 28.88)  
Sec. 94-177. - Shutoff valve installation. 
A consumer of water shall install at his own expense a shutoff valve inside the property line at a location accessible to the city employees in the water division. 
(Code 1957, § 28.89)  
Sec. 94-178. - Checkvalve required. 
If the placing of a checkvalve on the property side of the city's water facilities or to the water meter of any consumer is necessary in the opinion of the water superintendent for the water system safety and protection or appliances thereof, such consumer shall be notified in writing by the water superintendent to have an approved checkvalve installed at his expense. If, after five days' written notice, such checkvalve has not been installed and working, the service shall be discontinued and the water shut off until such a checkvalve is installed and the city notified. Service shall be restored only upon payment of required administrative/reconnection charge. After such checkvalve is installed, the consumer shall be required to provide an annual or more frequent, if required by the director, inspection of the checkvalve by a qualified inspector and provide the city with a certificate showing that the checkvalve is functioning properly. 
(Code 1957, § 28.90)  
Sec. 94-179. - Backflow device. 
Backflow devices shall be installed pursuant to division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1957, § 28.91)  
Sec. 94-180. - Common service connection. 
(a)  No service connection for water shall be made for the purpose of supplying through a common service two or more independent consumers occupying premises held under the same ownership unless the houses are on the same lot or the property is what is known as a court or apartment house, and then only provided the owner of such premises shall agree in writing to pay all charges for water served thereto. 
(b)  No water shall be served for two or more parcels of property separately owned through a common service pipe unless there is no water main contiguous to the premises from which service may be had and, further, unless the consumer first in order of service from the water main shall in writing guarantee the payment of water rates and charges for all parcels of property so served and for the monthly minimum charge under this article. 
(c)  Water served through a meter shall not be transported through pipes, conduits, or hoses across lot lines or property lines except as noted in this section. 
(Code 1957, § 28.92)  
Sec. 94-181. - Vandalism to meters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than city employees and such persons who are authorized by the city, to connect or disconnect any water service from any building or premises in the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner tamper, meddle or interfere with any part of any water meter or service in the city. Any such vandalism to any city meter or other water division device or equipment may result in tampering fees and/or legal action. 
(b)  After the water meter is so connected to the water service or service pipe, any damage to such meter resulting from vandalism, carelessness, or negligence of the consumer or any member of his family or anyone employed by him or any damage which may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or otherwise shall be paid for by such consumer to the city. If such bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off from the premises without further notice, and the water shall not be turned on until all charges are paid. 
(Code 1957, § 28.93)  
Sec. 94-182. - Cutting off or interfering with meter. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or cut off or remove a water meter from any water service where it has been installed without first receiving written permission from the water superintendent or director. Such permission shall be granted only for the purpose of tests, replacements, repairs to the meter or service pipes, and readjustments of service of similar emergency. 
(Code 1957, § 28.94)  
Sec. 94-183. - Reinstallation fee. 
Water meters that have been out of service for six months or more shall be removed and a service charge made for reinstallation. 
(Code 1957, § 28.95)  
Sec. 94-184. - Penalty for city's removal of meter. 
When it becomes necessary, in order to protect the city's interest and prevent the unauthorized use of water, to remove the water meter from the premises, a further penalty shall be imposed and collected before service is continued, provided that such removal or discontinuance is made necessary because of a violation of or by the failure on the part of the user or owner to perform some act required of him by this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 28.96)  
Sec. 94-185. - Meter testing. 
Any water consumer may demand that the meter, through which water is being furnished, be examined and tested by the water division for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the amount of water which is being delivered through it. Such demand shall be made in writing to the water division and shall be accompanied by a deposit. Upon receipt of such demand it shall be the duty of the water division to cause the meter to be examined and tested. If on examination and test the meter shall be found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter shall be substituted for it, and the deposit shall be repaid to the person making the application and the water bill for the current period adjusted in such a manner as the water superintendent may deem fair and just. If the meter is found to register not over three percent fast, the deposit shall be forfeited to the city and the water bill paid as rendered. 
(Code 1957, § 28.97)  
Sec. 94-186. - Size of mains. 
The minimum size of water mains to be installed by the city or by others under the direction of the city's water division shall be eight inches. 
(Code 1957, § 28.100)  
Sec. 94-187. - Water main installation and extension generally. 
The city council reserves the right and power to fix and establish rules for the installation and extension of water mains within the city. After such main or pipe has been installed and accepted by the city, it shall thereafter be the property of the city and shall be maintained by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 28.101)  
Sec. 94-188. - Application for water main extension. 
(a)  Any person requesting a water main extension by the city shall deposit with the city a sum fixed by the director equal to the estimated cost thereof plus the then-current city's overhead cost attributable to such work. 
(b)  The city upon completion of such work shall deduct from such deposit the actual cost and overhead attributable thereto and reimburse any remaining balance to the person depositing the cost. If for any reason the deposit is not sufficient to pay the actual cost thereof, together with overhead attributable thereto, the person applying for such extension shall pay the excess forthwith on demand of the city, and until paid the city may refuse to supply water for such extension. Where any such extension will thereafter provide the means of supplying water to property other than that owned by the applicant, the cost of such extension shall be spread by the city engineer on a square-footage basis to all property that can be served therefrom. Any person thereafter connecting a meter on to such extension to serve water to any property not owned by the original applicant shall pay to the city, in addition to all meter and water charges, an extension charge equal to the property area in square-foot charge as spread by the city engineer, multiplied by the square footage of his property fronting on the street served by such extension, which sum so collected shall be reimbursed to the original depositor who originally paid for the extension, provided the right to reimburse accrues within ten years from the date extension was first completed. 
(Code 1957, § 28.102)  
Sec. 94-189. - Service maintenance. 
The service connection extending from the water main to the water meter shall be maintained by the city. All pipes and fixtures extending or lying beyond the meter shall be installed and maintained by the property owner. 
(Code 1957, § 28.103)  
Sec. 94-190. - Use in boiler, hydraulic elevators, power pumps and similar apparatus. 
It is unlawful for any person to draw any water from any city pipes or water mains directly into any stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump, or similar apparatus. If a consumer desires water from the city to be used in any stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump, or similar apparatus, the consumer shall first apply in writing to the city council. If a permit is granted by the city council, such consumer shall provide a tank or reservoir of such capacity as required by standard practice. No such tank or reservoir shall be installed or used unless and until the plans and specifications have been examined and approved in writing by the director or water superintendent. 
(Code 1957, § 28.104)  
Sec. 94-191. - Use of fire hydrants generally. 
Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires and shall be opened and used only by the fire department or other city officials authorized to do so. 
(Code 1957, § 28.110) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 94-192. - Fire hydrant size. 
The minimum size of fire hydrants to be installed by the city or by others under the direction of the city's water division shall be six inches inlet with one- to 2½-inch and one- to four-inch outlets. Reference is made to the city's water construction standards. 
(Code 1957, § 28.111) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 94-193. - Installation or connection of fire hydrant with main. 
No fire hydrant shall be placed or installed or connected with the city's water mains by any person unless and until permission has been granted by the director or water superintendent. 
(Code 1957, § 28.112) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 94-194. - Location of fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be located on private property and public rights-of-way so that at all times the maximum length of hose required to reach from any combustible structure or material to the nearest hydrant shall be 150 feet in all zones except single-family residential, in which the maximum length shall be 300 feet. All hydrants, pipes and appurtenances on private property will be dedicated to the city along with easements providing access for necessary operation. 
(Code 1957, § 28.113) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.  
Sec. 94-195. - Fire hydrant opening responsibilities. 
Every person authorized to open the fire hydrant shall replace the cap on the outlet, when the fire hydrant is not in use, and leave the hydrant in as good as condition as when found. Such officer or person shall report to the water superintendent or director any leaks or breaks or damage to the fire hydrant immediately upon discovery. 
(Code 1957, § 28.114)  
Sec. 94-196. - Use of fire hydrants. 
All persons using water through fire hydrants or other hydrants owned or controlled by the city shall be required to obtain a permit to do so from the water division, which shall issue no such permit to any person who has violated any of the sections of this article or whose indebtedness to the water division for water used or damage to hydrants is delinquent. 
(Code 1957, § 28.115)  
Sec. 94-197. - Construction work. 
A contractor and any other person desiring to use water in construction work where connections must be made other than through a meter shall in each and every case make written application for and shall obtain a written permit for the water use from the water superintendent before connecting with any water main, standpipe, or using water therefrom and shall make the deposit required by the water superintendent sufficient in his opinion to cover the estimated cost of the water to be used. Such permit shall be exhibited upon the work for which it has been issued during the full time the water is being used pursuant to such permit. 
(Code 1957, § 28.116)  
Sec. 94-198. - Fire hydrant wrench. 
Every person authorized to open fire hydrants will be required to use an official fire hydrant wrench and to furnish a cutoff valve to regulate the flow of water beyond the fire hydrant and to replace the caps on the outlets when they are not in use. Failure to do so will be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the hydrants and the refusal to grant subsequent permits for the use of fire hydrants. 
(Code 1957, § 28.117)  
Secs. 94-199—94-225. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 94-226. - Established. 
Pursuant to the authority and requirements of title 17 of the California Administrative Code and the county public health code, cross connection control regulations for the city's water system are adopted. 
(Code 1957, § 28.16)  
Sec. 94-227. - Policy. 
The city has the responsibility, within its service area, to prevent water from unapproved sources or any other substances from entering the public potable water system. The cross connection regulations in this division, including an inspection program, are designed to satisfy the responsibilities set forth in the state regulations and the county health code and to protect the public. 
(Code 1957, § 28.17)  
Sec. 94-228. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Provide standards for the protection of the public potable water supply. 
(2)  Protect the public potable water system at the service connections by isolating within the consumer's premises actual or potential pollution or contamination which may result from the backflow through cross connections. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(Code 1957, § 28.18)  
Sec. 94-229. - Definitions. 
The definitions in title 17, article 1, General, section 7583 of the California Administrative Code (referred to as "DOHS regulations") are incorporated in this division and made a part of this division. 
(Code 1957, § 28.19) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-230. - Backflow protection devices required. 
(a)  Cross connections. The service connection to each premises where an actual or a potential cross connection may exist shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. 
(b)  Responsibility for installation, testing and maintenance. The responsibility to install, test, and maintain backflow prevention devices as required by this division rests solely with the water user and/or owner. 
(Code 1957, § 28.20)  
Sec. 94-231. - Type of backflow prevention devices. 
The type of approved backflow prevention device shall depend upon the degree of hazard. The decision as to when, where and which device shall be used rests within the city's discretion and shall depend upon the facts of each particular situation. In determining the degree of hazard and the type of approved backflow device required, the city shall comply with the DOHS regulations and those of the state fire marshal. The following standards shall apply except when in conflict with the DOHS regulations, which shall be controlling: 
(1)  Commercial or industrial buildings. At the service connection to premises containing commercial or industrial buildings subject to varying and unknown use, the city water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The decision as to which device shall be installed rests within the discretion of the city. 
(2)  Industrial facilities. At the service connection to industrial facilities which are deemed to be using hazardous materials as determined by the county fire department during the hazardous materials inventory or by the city and which could reasonably be expected to enter the city water supply, the city water supply shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow device or by an approved double check assembly, as determined by the city based on its inspections and information supplied by the industry during the request for water service application. In any event, all internal hose bibs and sink spigots with hose threads shall have functional hose bib atmospheric vacuum breakers installed. 
(3)  Sewage and hazardous substances. At the service connection to any premises where the city water supply is used to supplement a reclaimed water supply or reclaimed water is in use or where there is wastewater pumping and/or treatment without interconnection with the city's potable water system, an approved air gap separation is required. This excludes a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. A reduced pressure principle backflow assembly may be provided in lieu of an air gap if approved by the state department of health services and by the city. Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter the potable water system, excluding a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump, a reduced pressure principle backflow assembly may be provided in lieu of an air gap if approved by the state department of health services and by the city. Premises where there are irrigation systems into which approved reduced pressure principle backflow is required. 
(4)  Auxiliary water supplies. At the service connection to any premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system, a reduced pressure principle backflow assembly or double check may be provided in lieu of an air gap if approved by the state department of health services and the city. For premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system, a double check may be provided in lieu of a reduced pressure principle backflow assembly if approved by the state department of health services and the city. 
(5)  Hospitals, mortuaries, medical buildings, etc. At the service connection to human or veterinary hospitals, medical buildings, mortuaries or dental facilities or other premises where special hazards exist, the city water supply shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
(6)  Fire protection systems. Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply not interconnected on or to the premises will require an approved double checkvalve assembly. For premises where the system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply, an air gap separation is required. A reduced pressure principle backflow assembly may be accepted in lieu of an air gap if approved by the state department of health services and the city. 
(7)  List of devices. A list of backflow prevention devices that are acceptable to the city is available at city hall. Any device not listed will not be accepted. 
(8)  Approved list of certified testers. An approved list of certified testers may be obtained at city hall. 
(9)  Right to reject. The city reserves the right to reject any installation or device. 
(10)  Restricted, classified or other closed facilities. On premises where entry is restricted so that cross connection inspections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at short notice to ensure that cross connections do not exist, the city shall require the installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
(Code 1957, § 28.21)  
Sec. 94-232. - Inspection and testing of backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  Original test. The original test of backflow prevention devices shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  All backflow prevention devices shall be inspected, tested, and certified operational when the device is originally installed or relocated. 
(2)  All tests shall be conducted by a certified tester who shall prepare a report certifying that the device has been tested and is operating satisfactorily. 
(b)  Test by certified tester. Backflow prevention devices shall be inspected, tested and certified operational at least once a year or more frequently if required due to a high risk of failure. Any device which is found to be not operating properly shall be repaired or replaced at the sole expense of the water user or owner. All tests shall be conducted by a certified tester who, at the expense of the water user or owner, shall prepare a report on the city's testing notification form certifying that the device has been tested and is operating satisfactorily. Any device which fails the test shall immediately be repaired and retested. 
(c)  Spot tests and inspection by city. The city will maintain a program of random or spot testing the various backflow prevention devices installed within the city service area. This may be done (i) at the time of installation and (ii) periodically thereafter. This will in no way relieve the owner of his responsibility for maintaining functional devices, but will serve to help ensure that the program is serving its intended purpose. Any device which is found to be not operating properly shall be repaired or replaced at the sole expense of the water user or owner. 
(d)  Water user duty. The water user and/or owner shall cause annual tests to be made of the device at the expense of the water user or owner. Defective devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced immediately at the expense of the water user and/or owner. Notice of annual testing will be provided by the city on a courtesy basis, but failure to receive such notice shall not relieve the user of his duty under this section. 
(e)  Reports. Reports of inspections, tests, repairs, and overhauling of the device and corrections made shall be submitted to the city within ten days of the test date by the water user and/or owner of the device. Such reports shall be submitted to the city on forms supplied by the city. No other forms will be accepted. 
(f)  More frequent inspection. Where successive annual reports indicate defective operation of a backflow prevention device, the city may require more frequent inspections or may require replacement of the device. 
(g)  Duty of tester. The certified tester shall be responsible for the competency of inspections, corrective actions, and the accuracy of reports required under this section. 
(h)  Replacement of obsolete devices. Obsolete backflow prevention devices must be replaced by the owner and/or user when notified by the city that the device is no longer acceptable. Any obsolete device may be upgraded, provided that a factory manufactured upgrading kit is available. Any upgraded backflow prevention device must meet city standards. 
(i)  Location and installation. All backflow prevention devices shall be installed as near the meter as practical, no less than 12 inches or more than 36 inches above the surrounding ground, and in an accessible location for testing and servicing. Where a pressure vacuum breaker is used, the pressure vacuum breaker shall be installed 12 inches above the highest outlet. The exact location shall be approved by the city prior to installation. 
(j)  Testing methods. Unless permitted or required otherwise by the DOHS regulations, test results of backflow prevention devices will only be accepted if performed in accordance with the methods used by the county with the instruments listed. 
(1)  The differential test gauge is to be used to test reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies and pressure vacuum breakers. 
(2)  The duplex gauge is to be used to test double checkvalve assemblies. The duplex gauge is not to be used to test reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies or pressure vacuum breakers. 
(Code 1957, § 28.22)  
Sec. 94-233. - Booster pumps. 
When it becomes necessary, because of low water pressure or special operating conditions, to install a booster pump on the water service to any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff switch designed to shut off the pump when the pressure on the inlet side is 25 psig or lower. It shall be the duty of the consumer to maintain the cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the city at least once a year that the device is operable. Low pressure cutoff device certification shall be by a person deemed competent by the city. 
(Code 1957, § 28.23)  
Sec. 94-234. - Enforcement. 
(a)  New service connections. No new water service connections shall be completed or meters installed until there has been compliance with this division to the satisfaction of the city. 
(b)  Existing service connections. Existing service connections shall be brought into compliance with this division when the owner/user is so notified by the city. Failure to comply will result in termination of water service. 
(c)  Termination of water service. The city may immediately discontinue service to any premises where an actual or potential cross connection or other hazard to the city's water supply is found to exist. Any user who violates any of the sections of this division or who removes, alters, bypasses, or renders inoperative any backflow prevention device installed or who fails to test the device as required under this division shall be subject to immediate termination of water service. 
(d)  Restoration of water service. Water service terminated pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of this section shall not be restored until the hazard is eliminated and/or until such violations of this division have been corrected to the satisfaction of the city. No water service shall be restored until the city has received reimbursement for any costs incurred in terminating the water service and advance payment for the cost of service restoration. 
(e)  Appeal. Procedures for appeals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any water user whose service is subject to termination under this section may appeal the termination to the city administrative officer, who shall review the facts and circumstances which led to termination. The city administrative officer may affirm, modify or rescind the termination or the terms and conditions for restoration. 
(2)  The decision of the city administrative officer may be appealed to the city council by the user. The city council shall review, with fair opportunity for presentation of the user's position, the facts and circumstances and the city administrative's officer determination. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(f)  Civil and criminal actions. Violation of this division may constitute a public nuisance within the meaning of Health and Safety Code § 116670 and Penal Code § 372. Violators may be subject to civil actions for abatement and/or damages (Civil Procedure Code § 3479 et seq.) and punishment as provided in section 1-10. 
(Code 1957, § 28.24)  
Secs. 94-235—94-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 94-261. - Water service charges. 
The following commodity charge and fixed service charge are established and shall be charged and collected by the city for all water sold, supplied, distributed, or transported to or for consumers situated in the city and shall be applicable to all metered water within the city for which no other rate is specified: 
(1)  Commodity charge. The commodity charge per meter shall be as follows: 
	FY 	FY 	FY 	FY 	FY 
Description 	2012/13 	2013/14 	2014/15 	2015/16 	2016/17 
Residential 
  Block 1 Rate per hcf (0—9 hcf) 	$ 0.89 	$ 1.00 	$ 1.11 	$ 1.20 	$ 1.31 
  Block 2 Rate per hcf (10—18 hcf) 	1.81 	2.04 	2.25 	2.45 	2.67 
  Block 3 Rate per hcf (18+ hcf) 	2.42 	2.72 	3.00 	3.27 	3.56 
Nonresidential 	1.62 	1.82 	2.00 	2.18 	2.38 
 
(2)  Fixed service charge. The commodity charge set forth above shall be added to the fixed service charge set forth below: 
Bimonthly Fixed Charge 
	FY 	FY 	FY 	FY 	FY 
Meter Size 	2012/13 	2013/14 	2014/15 	2015/16 	2016/17 
5/8 ", ¾" 	$ 27.15 	$ 30.22 	$ 32.94 	$ 35.90 	$ 37.37 
1" 	45.58 	50.73 	55.30 	60.27 	63.93 
1½" 	76.30 	84.92 	92.56 	100.89 	108.20 
2" 	113.16 	125.94 	137.27 	149.63 	161.32 
3" 	211.44 	235.33 	256.51 	279.60 	302.99 
4" 	322.02 	358.40 	390.65 	425.81 	462.37 
6" 	629.17 	700.25 	763.27 	831.96 	905.07 
 
(Code 1957, § 28.4.1; Ord. No. 1510, § 1, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1524, § 2, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 1550, § 3, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 1613, § 1, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 7-2-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1613, § 1, adopted May 7, 2012, changed the title of § 94-261 from quantity water charges and service charges by meter size to water service charges.  
Sec. 94-262. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1613, § 2, adopted May 7, 2012, deleted § 94-262 which pertained to lifeline rate and derived from the Code of 1957, § 28.26; Ord. No. 1524, § 3, 8-20-2001.  
Sec. 94-263. - Fees and charges. 
Under this article, the following fees and charges will be collected as required: 
(1)  Security deposit for a new residential applicant (section 94-146) ..... $100.00 
and new commercial applicant (section 94-146) ..... 150.00 
(2)  Security deposit (minimum) for delinquent accounts (section 94-164) ..... 150.00 
(3)  Delivery fee per unit for final disconnection notices (section 94-162) ..... 10.00 
(4)  Administrative/reconnection fee (sections 94-163, 94-167) ..... 40.00 
(5)  Tampering with meter (section 94-166) ..... 75.00 
(6)  Reinstallation fee if meter has been removed (section 94-169) ..... 75.00 
(7)  Reinstallation fee for inactive meter (section 94-168) ..... 75.00 
(8)  Returned check fee (section 94-167) ..... 25.00 
(Code 1957, § 28.27; Ord. No. 1550, § 8, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 1607, § 3, 10-3-2011)  
Sec. 94-264. - Purchased water adjustment. 
(a)  Beginning July 1, 2012 and for each fiscal year through June 30, 2017, the commodity charges specified in section 94-261 shall be subject to an overriding unit adjustment to be applied to each 100 cubic feet of water sales to reflect changes in the cost of purchased water as defined in this section. 
(b)  Determination of the overriding unit adjustment shall be made from city accounting records six times yearly for each of the 12-calendar-month periods ending with January 31, March 31, May 31, July 31, September 30, and November 30 as follows: The annual cost of all water purchased for distribution by the city shall be divided by the division's total water sales (in units of 100 cubic feet HCF) for the same 12-month period. The quotient so obtained shall be expressed to the nearest $0.0001 per HCF of water and shall be multiplied by all units of 100 cubic feet of water sales as shown on customer billings for a period of water use regularly scheduled to end within the second and third billing months following the 12-month period used for the unit adjustment computation. The resultant product in each case shall be expressed to the nearest $0.01 and, unless otherwise provided therein, shall be the total overriding adjustment to be added to each water service billing. 
(c)  Cost of purchased water shall include the total cost to the city of all water delivered to the division's system from the metropolitan water district or other suppliers. Reimbursements received by the city for purchased water costs which are or have been included in the calculation of the overriding unit adjustment shall be included as a credit in the determination of the cost of purchased water for the month in which such reimbursement is received. 
(Code 1957, § 28.28; Ord. No. 1613, § 3, 5-7-2012)  
Sec. 94-265. - Installation and capital facility charges. 
The following installation charges and capital facility charges are hereby established, and shall be charged and collected by the city for making all water connections for consumers situated within the city, and said rates shall be paid before such connections are made. In the case of service connections larger than one inch, the installation charges listed below shall constitute deposits against the actual cost of the labor, materials and equipment plus 35-percent overhead expended by the city in the installation. Upon the completion of such work, said actual cost, including overhead, shall be deducted from the paid deposit, and any excess or the deposit over such cost shall be refunded. In the event the actual cost, including overhead, exceeds such deposit, the applicant for such service connection shall, upon demand, pay the same to the city, and for failure to pay such excess to the city, the city shall have the right to refuse water service through such meter and to turn the water service off and/or disconnect the same. 
(1)  The installation charges and capital facility charges shall be as follows: 
User classification 	Water meter size 
(in inches) 	Capital facility charge 	Installation charge or deposit 	Total connection charge 
Residential (per dwelling unit) 		$ 945.00 	$ 1,821.00 	$ 2,766.00 
Commercial/institutional/industrial (water meter size): 
	¾ 	  945.00 	  1,821.00 	  2,766.00 
	1 	 1,578.00 	 1,885.00 	 3,463.00 
	1½ 	 3,156.00 	 2,732.00 	 5,888.00 
	2 	 5,050.00 	 3,105.00 	 8,155.00 
	3 	 9,444.00 	6,210.00 	15,654.00 
	4 	16,810.00 	9,688.00 	26,498.00 
	6 	22,693.00 	13,165.00 	35,858.00 
	8 and over 	36,309.00 	16,643.00 	52,952.00 
Fire service connection, un-metered (one-third of metered service plus installation): 
	2 	 1,663.00 	 2,870.00 	 4,533.00 
	3 	 3,119.00 	 5,739.00 	 8,858 
	4 	 5,198.00 	 8,954.00 	14,152.00 
	6 	10,395.00 	12,168.00 	22,563.00 
	8 and over 	16,623.00 	15,383.00 	32,006.00 
 
(2)  The fire hydrant installation charges are as follows: 
a.  Change fire hydrant top. Remove single hydrant and install 4-inch by 4-inch or 4-inch by 2 1/2-inch double wet-barrel fire hydrant ..... $1,501.00 
b.  New 6-inch wet-barrel fire hydrant 4-inch by 4-inch or 4-inch by 2 1/2-inch, including 6-inch gate valve, 6-inch lateral and appurtenances, connection to existing main ..... $6,946.00 
For service connections and installations wherein a deposit is required, the actual cost of labor, equipment and materials plus 35-percent overhead shall be computed after completion of the work. The cost shall be deducted from the deposit, and any excess of the deposit over such cost shall be refunded to the person originally making such deposit. If the aggregate cost including city overhead exceeds such deposit, the applicant for such service connection shall, upon demand, pay the additional amount to the city. For failure to pay such excess to the city, the city shall have the right to refuse water service through such meter and turn the water off and/or disconnect the water. 
(Code 1957, § 28.29; Ord. No. 1510, § 2, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1550, § 4, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 94-266. - Eddy valves and meters for construction work. 
(a)  The following charges are hereby fixed and established for the use of water from construction meters furnished by the city: 
(1)  Construction water rate: $1.92 per 100 cubic feet, plus $1.50 per calendar day. 
(2)  Deposit: $1,000.00 for a three-inch meter and eddy valve, or as determined by the director for larger sizes. 
(3)  Administration charge: $110.00 with a signed application by an authorized person. 
(b)  Charges for water usage and the daily fee shall be billed quarterly, or sooner if indicated by usage. 
(c)  The deposit for the construction meter shall be returned to the person making the deposit less charges for water and daily use, upon return of the device in satisfactory condition to the water superintendent. 
(d)  Construction water rates will be charged to all contractors or persons who use the city water system for temporary water, including contractors for city construction and maintenance projects. 
(Code 1957, § 28.30; Ord. No. 1550, § 5, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 94-267. - Private fire protection charge. 
The following rates shall apply to a customer having a private on-site fire service used exclusively for fire protection, whether the lines are connected to an automatic sprinkler system or to a hose attachment, but do not include on-site fire hydrants: 
Size of Service 
in inches 	Bimonthly Charge For Service 
2 or smaller 	$ 32.65 
3 	48.63 
4 	64.61 
6 	97.96 
8 	129.91 
10 	161.87 
12 	194.53 
 
(Code 1957, § 28.31; Ord. No. 1510, § 3, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1550, § 6, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 94-268. - Private on-site fire hydrant charges. 
(a)  Private on-site fire hydrant rates shall be those shown on the following table: 
Size of Hydrant 
(in inches) 	Bimonthly Charge Per Hydrant 
4 	$ 39.71 
6 	  58.53 
8 	 78.04 
 
(b)  Water consumption recorded by the detector checkvalve bypass meter and used for purposes other than for fire sprinkler system testing or extinguishing purposes shall be discontinued immediately. Continued violation will result in the shutting off the fire service or requiring a new meter to be installed at the customer's expense and changing the applicable water rate schedule to that shown under section 94-261. 
(Code 1957, § 28.32; Ord. No. 1510, § 4, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1550, § 7, 7-19-2004)  
Sec. 94-269. - Backflow prevention fee. 
An administrative fee of $5.00 per month per connection shall be charged to all utility accounts that have a backflow prevention device installed on the service connection to cover the cost of the administration of the annual inspection and testing program. 
(Code 1957, § 28.33)  
Sec. 94-270. - Annual increase. 
(a)  On July 1, 1993 and on July 1 of each year thereafter, the then-existing rates imposed under this article, sections 94-265, 94-267 and 94-268, shall automatically increase by the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers for Los Angeles—Anaheim—Riverside (1982-84 equals 100) as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics ("index"), rounded to the nearest cent. The increases shall be cumulative. In determining the percentage increase, the index for the month of May immediately preceding the adjustment date shall be compared with the index for the like month of the previous year. In no event, however, shall the rates imposed be adjusted downward to reflect a percentage decrease in the index. 
(b)  On July 1, 2016, the then-existing rates imposed under this article, section 94-261, shall automatically increase by the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers for Los Angeles—Anaheim—Riverside (1982-84 equals 100) as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics ("index"), rounded to the nearest cent. The increases shall be cumulative. In determining the percentage increase, the index for the month of May immediately preceding the adjustment date shall be compared with the index for the like month of the previous year. In no event, however, shall the rates imposed be adjusted downward to reflect a percentage decrease in the index. 
(Code 1957, § 28.34; Ord. No. 1613, § 4, 5-7-2012)  
Secs. 94-271—94-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WATER CONSERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1638, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 2014, repealed former Div. 4, §§ 94-296—94-303, in its entirety and enacted new provisions numbered as §§ 94-295—94-306. In order to avoid conflicts in section numbering the editor has renumbered the provisions added by Ord. No. 1638 as herein set out. Former Div. 4 pertained to water wastage and derived from the Code of 1957, §§ 28.9—28.15. 
 
Sec. 94-281. - Purpose. 
Upon declaration by the city council that a water shortage emergency exists, this plan shall be implemented to provide a vehicle to protect the public peace, health and safety by significantly and equitably reducing the consumption of potable water over an extended period. The plan shall remain in effect until the city council declares the water shortage emergency has ended. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-282. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, company or organization of any kind. 
Water means water supplied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-283. - Applicability. 
This division shall apply to all persons using water in this city, regardless of whether any person using water shall have a contract for water service. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-284. - Reclamation wastewater system required for carwashes. 
All carwashes shall be constructed with a wastewater reclamation system approved by the public works director. No carwash shall be exempted pursuant to section 94-289 from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-285. - Phase I water shortage (voluntary conservation). 
(a)  A phase I shortage shall be declared when the city determines that a shortage of up to ten percent will occur in water supplies. 
(b)  All elements of section 94-288 (Prohibitions) shall apply in phase I on a voluntary basis only. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-286. - Phase II water shortage (mandatory conservation). 
(a)  A phase II shortage shall be declared when the city determines that a shortage of up to 20 percent will occur in water supplies. 
(b)  All elements of section 94-288 (Prohibitions) shall apply in phase II on a mandatory basis. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-287. - Phase III water shortage (mandatory conservation). 
(a)  A phase III shortage shall be declared when the city determines that a shortage above 20 percent will occur in water supplies. 
(b) All elements of section 94-288 (Prohibitions) shall apply in phase III on a mandatory basis except that: 
(1)  Restrictions on watering lawns, landscaped or other turf areas shall be modified to prohibit watering more often than every third day in a schedule to be set by the public works director, with watering only during the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Commercial nurseries and other water-dependent industries shall be prohibited from watering lawn, landscaped and other turf areas more often than every third day on a schedule to be determined by the public works director, and shall water only during the hours between 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(3)  Water used on a one-time basis for purposes such as construction and dust control, shall be limited to that quantity identified in a plan submitted by the user which describes water use requirements. The plan shall be submitted to the city for approval. Water sources other than potable water shall be utilized where available; 
(4)  The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting and related activities and other uses of water for municipal purposes shall be limited to activities necessary to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-288. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Gutter flooding. No person shall cause or permit any water furnished to any property within the city to run or to escape from any hose, pipe, valve, faucet, sprinkler or irrigation device into any gutter or otherwise to escape from the property if such running or escaping can reasonably be prevented. 
(b)  Washing hard-surfaced areas. No person shall use any water furnished to any property within the city to wash sidewalks, walks, driveways and parking lots by hosing. 
(c)  Irrigation. No person shall water or irrigate any shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers or other vegetation between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. No water users shall cause or allow the water to run off landscaped areas into adjoining streets, sidewalks or other paved areas due to incorrectly directed or maintained sprinklers or excessive watering. 
(d)  Ornamental facilities. No person shall refill any fountain, pool or other facility containing water solely for ornamental purposes emptied during the effectiveness of this division. 
(e)  Leaks. No person shall permit leaks of water which he has the authority to eliminate. 
(f)  Restaurants. Restaurants shall only serve water to customers upon request. 
(g)  Washing vehicles . Washing of motor vehicles, trailers, boats and other types of equipment shall be done only with a hand-held bucket or a hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses, except that washing may be done with reclaimed wastewater, or by a commercial car wash using recycled water. 
(h)  All lawns, landscaped or other turf area shall be watered not more often than every other day and with watering only during the hours between 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., with even-numbered addresses watering on even-numbered days of the month and odd-numbered addresses watering on odd-numbered days of the month. This provision shall apply to residential, commercial, industrial and public agencies but shall not apply to commercial nurseries, golf courses and other water-dependent industries. 
(i)  Wasting generally. No person shall cause or permit water under his control to be wasted. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-289. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Permit. A person may be exempted from application of this division to a certain type of use if the city's public works director issues a permit allowing such use and if such permit issuance is based on a finding that enforcement of the applicable restriction would either: 
(1)  Cause an unnecessary and undue hardship to the applicant or the public; or 
(2)  Cause or threaten an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection or safety of the applicant or the public. 
(b)  Conservation devices. The public works director may require the use of such water conservation devices or practices as he deems appropriate as a condition of the exemption permit. He shall promulgate a list of approved devices. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-290. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The public works director, the fire chief, police chief, water superintendent, or designee have the duty and are authorized to enforce this division and shall have all the powers and authority contained in Penal Code § 836.5, including the power to issue written notice to appear. 
(b)  Each law enforcement officer shall, in connection with his duties imposed by law, diligently enforce this division. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-291. - Remedies; penalties. 
(a)  Notice of violation; procedure upon failure to correct. Prior to enforcement pursuant to section 94-290, any person who is suspected of violating this division shall be given a preliminary notice in writing of such violation, with the description of violation set forth in such preliminary notice. The person shall have 24 hours to correct the violation or terminate the use. If the violation is not corrected or the use terminated, the water division may forthwith either: 
(1)  Disconnect service; 
(2)  Install flow-restricting devices restricting water service; or 
(3)  Order issuance of a second preliminary notice. 
Service disconnected or restricted pursuant to subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section shall be restored only upon payment of the turn-on and other charges fixed by this article or the rules and regulations of the water division. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who has received a preliminary notice of violation of a particular section of this division and against whom the water division has taken action pursuant to this section and who has not corrected or terminated the use or at a subsequent time violates the same section of this division, regardless of whether the type of use was previously specified in any preliminary notice of violation, shall be: 
(1)  Issued an administrative citation as described in the city's comprehensive fee schedule; or 
(2)  Guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-10. Each day any violation of this division is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 94-292. - Conflict with state law. 
This division shall be inoperative to the extent any regulations and restrictions adopted pursuant to Water Code §§ 350—359 conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 10-20-2014)  
Secs. 2-293—2-303. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING 
 
Sec. 94-304. - Purpose and intent. 
Water is a precious commodity of limited supply. In accordance with the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act ("Act"; Article 10.8 of Division 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code, commencing at § 65591), the purpose and intent of this division is to: 
(a)  Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible; 
(b)  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new residential or commercial development projects and when landscape areas are altered by more than 50 percent in total area; 
(c)  Promote water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes; 
(d)  Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; 
(e)  Accomplish all purposes set out by the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, contained at Division 2.7 of Division 2 of Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations, beginning at § 490; and 
(f)  Implement the processes and requirements set out by the Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance. 
This division shall be known as the "Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-305. - Applicability. 
(a)  Except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, this division shall apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
(1)  All new landscaped areas and altered landscaped areas for public agency projects and private development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet. 
(2)  All new landscaped areas and altered landscaped areas which are developer-installed in residential projects (including a single-family project) with a landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet. 
(3)  All new landscaped areas which are homeowner-provided in residential projects (including a single-family project) with a total project landscape area equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet. 
(b)  This division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Landscaping that is part of a property listed on any applicable local, state or national register of historic places. 
(2)  Plant collections as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
(3)  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-306. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions and those set forth in the landscape regulations shall govern the construction of this division: 
Altered landscaped area means landscaped area, including landscape areas of public property or facilities, that is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet and is altered by more than 50 percent of the total landscape area. 
Certificate of completion means the document required under section 94-313. 
Certified landscape irrigation auditor means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by a recognized professional trade organization or other educational organization. 
Community development director means the chief planning official or their designee. 
Developer installed landscaping or landscaped areas which are developer-installed means landscaping installed by a builder in conjunction with the construction of a residential project. "Developer installed landscaping" shall not include landscaping installed by an owner/occupant building in conjunction with the construction of a single-family residence. 
Estimated total water use ("ETWU") means the total water used for the landscape subject to this division determined pursuant to the formula set forth in the landscape regulations. The ETWU is based upon such factors as the local evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, the types of plants and the efficiency of the irrigation system. 
Homeowner-provided landscaping means any landscaped area either installed by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner for purposes of this division is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings. 
Irrigation audit means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. 
Landscape documentation package means the documents required under section 94-308 required to be submitted to the community development director for review and approval, pursuant to the landscape regulations. 
Landscape regulations means rules and regulations adopted by the city engineer for the implementation and enforcement of provisions of this division, and when duly promulgated, such rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect. 
Landscaped area means the entire lot, including water features such as pools, spas, ponds, and fountains. "Landscaped area" shall not include the building footprint, driveways, non-irrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes such as decks and patios, and other nonporous areas. 
Maximum applied water allowance ("MAWA") means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area or altered landscaped area determined pursuant to the formula set forth in the landscape regulations. The MAWA is based upon the local reference evapotranspiration rate, the ET adjustment factor and the size of the landscaped area or altered landscaped area. 
Project applicant means the person or entity submitting a landscape documentation package. A project applicant may include the property owner and/or an agent of the owner. 
Residential project means the construction of one or more homes. 
Water efficient landscape worksheet means the document described in section 94-312. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-307. - Review and approval requirements. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of a discretionary or building permit for any project that involves landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this division, the project applicant must submit a landscape documentation package for review and approval by the community development director. The landscape documentation package shall include the following: 
(1)  Project information as required by the landscape regulations; 
(2)  Landscape design plan as described in section 94-308; 
(3)  Irrigation design plan as described in section 94-309; 
(4)  Water efficient landscape worksheet as described in section 94-312; 
(5)  A soils management report as described in section 94-311; 
(6)  Grading design plan as described in section 94-310; and 
(7)  Payment of the fee as prescribed by city council upon submittal of the landscape documentation package. 
(b)  If the landscaped area or altered landscaped area subject to this division is a stand-alone project or does not otherwise require a building permit or formal planning or other commission approval or review, the landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the community development director for review and approval prior to the commencement of landscape improvements. 
(c)  The documents listed in subsection (a) shall be prepared and signed by a landscape architect, landscape designer, or irrigation designer, as appropriate, except that the soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soil and plant laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-308. - Landscape design plan. 
(a)  Landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this division shall be carefully designed and planned to ensure the efficient use of water. The project applicant shall submit to the community development director a landscape design plan that meets the criteria set forth in this section and the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations. 
(b)  The landscape design plan shall comply with or include the following: 
(1)  A description of the plant material. Any plant may be selected for the landscape provided that the estimated applied water use in the landscaped area or altered landscaped area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
(2)  Landscape design plans for projects in the city shall address fire safety and prevention. The project applicant shall ensure that the defensible space required by the city code is maintained and shall avoid fire-prone plant materials and mulches. 
(3)  The architectural design guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
(4)  Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than 25 percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where 25 percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run × 100 + slope percent). 
(c)  Water features shall be designed as follows: 
(1)  Recirculating water systems shall be used as a source for water features. 
(2)  Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features. 
(3)  The surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
(4)  Pool and spa covers are highly recommended. 
(d)  Mulch and amendments shall be included for use as follows: 
(1)  A minimum two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. 
(2)  Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes. 
(3)  The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
(4)  Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report, if any, and what is appropriate for the plants selected. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-309. - Irrigation design plan. 
An irrigation system and its related components for landscaped areas and altered landscaped areas subject to this division shall be carefully designed and planned to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. The project applicant shall submit to the community development director an irrigation design plan that meets the criteria set forth in this section and the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-310. - Grading design plan. 
(a)  Grading of a project site that contains a landscaped area or altered landscaped area subject to this division, shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff and water waste. The project applicant shall submit to community development director a grading design plan that meets the criteria set forth in this section and the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations. 
(b)  The landscape grading plan shall indicate finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including: (i) height of graded slopes; (ii) drainage patterns; (iii) pad elevations; (iv) finish grade; and (v) stormwater retention improvements, if applicable. 
(c)  To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, grading shall avoid disturbing natural drainage patterns and avoid soil compaction in landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this division. All irrigation and normal rainfall should remain within the property lines so as not to drain onto non-permeable hardscapes. 
(d)  A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for a project which includes landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this division, can satisfy this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-311. - Soil management report. 
The project applicant shall submit to the community development director a soil management plan that meets the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-312. - Water efficient landscape worksheet. 
(a)  The project applicant shall complete and submit to the community development director a water efficient landscape worksheet that meets the criteria set forth in this section and the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations. 
(b)  The water efficient landscape worksheet shall contain two sections: 
(1)  A hydrozone information table; and 
(2)  A water budget calculation for the landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this division. The water budget calculation shall include the maximum applied water allowance and the estimated total water use. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-313. - Certification of completion. 
(a)  Upon completion of the installation of the landscaped areas or altered landscaped area subject to this division, the project applicant shall submit a certificate of completion, in the form provided by the city, for review and approval by the community development director. The certificate of completion shall be executed by either the licensed landscaped architect, licensed landscape contractor or the certified irrigation designer that signed any of the documents submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
(b)  The certificate of completion shall certify and/or include the following: 
(1)  The landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this division have been installed in conformance with the landscaped documentation package, the Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance and the landscape regulations; 
(2)  The automatic controller has been set according to the irrigation schedule described in section 94-314; 
(3)  Documentation that the soil management report recommendations, if any, have been implemented; 
(4)  The irrigation audit report; and 
(5)  The landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule. 
(c)  The community development director shall approve the certificate of completion if it is determined the project conforms to the provisions of this section. If the community development director determines that the certificate of completion is incomplete or does not conform to the provisions of this section, the community development director shall: 
(1)  Notify the project applicant in writing that the certificate of completion has been denied and include a statement of reasons; or 
(2)  Notify the project applicant in writing that the certificate of completion is incomplete with an indication of additional information necessary. The project applicant may re-submit the certificate of completion for review by the community development director. 
(d)  The project applicant shall provide a copy of the approved certificate of completion to the property owner within seven days of its approval. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-314. - Irrigation schedule. 
The project applicant shall prepare an irrigation schedule in accordance with the landscape regulations that evaluates and manages the amount of water required to maintain plant health. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-315. - Landscape and irrigation maintenance. 
The project applicant shall prepare a landscape and irrigation maintenance plan in accordance with the landscape regulations to ensure the efficiency of water use. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-316. - Irrigation audit. 
(a)  For landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this division, the project applicant shall prepare an irrigation audit report as set forth in the landscape regulations. 
(b)  For all existing landscaped areas installed prior to January 1, 2010, irrigation audits shall be prepared as set forth in the landscape regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-317. - Irrigation efficiency. 
(a)  New irrigation systems installed, whether or not part of a landscaped area or altered landscaped areas subject to this division, shall be designed, maintained and managed to meet or exceed the average irrigation efficiency set forth in the landscape regulations. 
(b)  New irrigation systems installed as stand-alone project shall comply with section 94-309, 94-312, 94-313, 94-314, 94-315 and 94-316 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-318. - Alternative water-efficient use. 
Alternative methods of using water efficiently such as the use of potable water, rain water or other alternative water systems are encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-319. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  Landscape and grading design plans shall be developed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the stormwater and urban runoff control provisions set forth in chapter 34, article III of this Code. 
(b)  Rain gardens, cisterns, and other landscape features and practices that increase rainwater capture and create opportunities for infiltration and/or onsite storage are encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-320. - Water waste prevention. 
Water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation, such as runoff, low head drainage, overspray or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots or structures is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-321. - Authority to promulgate rules and regulations. 
The community development director shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation and enforcement of provisions of this division, and when duly promulgated, such rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-322. - Administration and appeal process. 
The community development director shall have the duty and authority to administer and enforce this division. The project applicant or property owner may appeal any other decision made by the community development director pursuant to this division by filing with the city clerk within 15 days of the date of written notification of the action at issue. The appeal shall be held pursuant to chapter 106, article II of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-323. - Penalties. 
The enforcement sections set forth in chapter 1 of this Code shall apply. In addition, the city building official may deny any project subject to this division its permit final or equivalent until the certificate of completion has been submitted, reviewed and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Sec. 94-324. - Fees. 
Fees associated with the implementation and enforcement of this division shall be adopted by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1592, § 1, 12-7-2009)  
Secs. 94-325—94-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UNDERGROUNDING OF FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 94-331. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the state public utilities commission. 
Person means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. 
Underground utility district or district means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited, as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to section 94-335 of this article. 
Utility includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-332. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed § 94-332 which pertained to penalty for violation and derived from Code 1957, § 27A.2.  
Sec. 94-333. - Public hearing by council to determine necessity. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.3)  
Sec. 94-334. - Report by city engineer. 
Prior to holding the public hearing as provided in section 94-333, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and remove overhead facilities. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.4)  
Sec. 94-335. - Designation of underground utility districts. 
If, after any public hearing held pursuant to this article, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising the district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.5)  
Sec. 94-336. - Unlawful acts after creation of underground utility district. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as provided in section 94-335, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except for such overhead facilities as may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for the owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in section 94-341 and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.6)  
Sec. 94-337. - Exception for emergencies or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the sections of this article, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council, in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.7)  
Sec. 94-338. - Other exceptions. 
In any resolution adopted pursuant to section 94-335, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions: 
(1)  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(2)  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting. 
(3)  Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are not prohibited. 
(4)  Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts. 
(5)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
(6)  Antennas, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
(7)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(8)  Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.8)  
Sec. 94-339. - Notice to property owners and utility companies of creation of underground utility district. 
(a)  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to section 94-335, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility at a new location. 
(b)  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 94-335, together with a copy of this article, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.9)  
Sec. 94-340. - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to section 94-335, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.10)  
Sec. 94-341. - Responsibility of property owners and occupants. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within an underground utility district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in section 94-340 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served. If this is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 94-335, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground facilities. The city engineer may also post written notice on the property being served and 30 days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. 
(b)  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. For service by mail, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof, as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address, as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears to general delivery in the city. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if the work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and shall become a lien upon such property. 
(d)  If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
(e)  The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(f)  Upon the date and hour set for hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if any, and then proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment. 
(g)  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid. The assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.11)  
Sec. 94-342. - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this article in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the poles within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 94-335. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.12)  
Sec. 94-343. - Extension of time for compliance. 
If any act required by this article or by a resolution adopted pursuant to section 94-335 cannot be performed within the time provided because of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Code 1957, § 27A.13)  
Chapter 98 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; trees or brush interfering with passage, § 74-186; trimming of trees and brush, § 74-187; vegetation obstructing sidewalk travel, § 74-188; subdivisions, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 106; parkway trees for street dedication and improvement, § 106-763. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 98-1—98-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE TREE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1539, § 2, adopted Nov. 4, 2002, changed the title of art. II from "Trees, Shrubs and Plants on Public Property" to "Comprehensive Tree Management Program". Section 3 of said ordinance amended div. 1 of art. II in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said division as herein set out. The former div. 1 pertained to trees, shrubs and plants of public property generally, and derived from Code 1957, §§ 27.2—27.11. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-26. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is established to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the trimming, pruning, planting, mulching, watering, fertilizing, staking, spraying, maintenance, removal and replacement or any and all treatment and care of trees upon any street, parkway, park, playground, boulevard, alley or public right-of-way within the city, as being governed and interpreted by the standard practices of good arboriculture as commonly accepted in the professional trade by the National Arborist Association (NAA) and the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-27. - Scope. 
This article provides full power and authority over the planting, removing and cutting of trees located within public property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-28. - Defined terms and phrases. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
City-owned tree shall mean any tree on public property. 
Damage shall mean any action undertaken which causes injury, death, mutilation, stapling or disfigurement of a tree. This includes, but is not limited to, cutting, poisoning, over-watering, relocating or transplanting a tree, topping, girdling, trenching, grading or excavating within the drip line of the tree. 
Drip line shall mean a line which may be drawn on the ground around a tree directly under its outermost branch tips and which identifies that location where rainwater tends to drip from the tree. 
Heritage tree shall mean a specifically designated by city council upon recommendation by the city's tree commission as a heritage tree which meets one or more of the following set of criteria: 
(1)  The tree's age and association with a historic building or district gives the tree historical significance; 
(2)  The tree represents a specimen that is particularly rare in the Los Angeles basin and is of considerable size and age; 
(3)  The tree possesses unique characteristics or special horticultural significance; or 
(4)  The tree is of a significant size and/or makes a significant and outstanding aesthetic impact to its setting and is an exceptional specimen in good condition and health. 
Public property shall mean any road, street, avenue, alley, parkway, right-of-way, or property, or any portion thereof, dedicated for or used by the public. 
Removal shall mean the uprooting, cutting or severing of the main trunk, or major branches, of a tree or any act which causes, or may be reasonably expected to cause a tree to die, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Inflicting damage upon the root system of a tree by root pruning, machinery, storage of materials, or soil compaction; 
(2)  Substantially changing the grade above the root system or trunk of a tree; and 
(3)  Excessively or improperly pruning a tree. 
(4)  Damage to trunk, where as the tree would not likely survive. 
Street trees shall mean each of those trees planted or to be planted in the various parkways along city streets, roads, boulevards and alleys. 
Topping shall mean the severe cutting back of limbs within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
Trees shall mean any woody perennial plant, usually having a single main axis or trunk, but including specimens of such plants having multiple trunks. 
Tree master plan shall mean a comprehensive plan approved by the city council, which provides for planting, care, preservation, maintenance, and removal of all trees on public property. 
Trimming shall mean the removal of dead, dying, diseased, life interfering, objectionable and weak branches in accordance with the most current and best practices of the National Arborist Association (NAA) and International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-29. - Duty of the public works director. 
It shall be the duty of the public works director to plant, trim, prune, remove and care for all city-owned trees in accordance with this article. It shall also be the duty of the public works director, in accordance with this article, to designate the kind or variety of trees to be planted upon any street, parkway, park, playground, boulevard, alley or public property in the city as stated in the approved tree master plan. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-30. - Permit required. 
No person shall cut, trim, prune, plant, remove, injure or interfere with any city-owned tree, without a permit from the public works director. The public works director is authorized to grant a permit in accordance with the street encroachment permit procedures, but no such permit shall be valid for a period longer than 20 days after its date of issuance. Before a permit is issued pursuant to this article, a permit fee shall be paid to the city in accordance with the amount set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-31. - Permit issuance to persons maintaining wires, pipes or conduits. 
Any person maintaining any overhead wires, poles or construction or any pipes, conduits or services underground, along or across any public property in the city or owning any property abutting upon any public property in the city desiring to have any city-owned tree cut, trimmed, pruned or removed shall file with the public works director a written request for the applicant to perform such work. Such request shall describe the work to be performed by the applicant. The issuance of any such permit shall be at the discretion of the public works director. It shall be within the discretion of the public works director, as a condition of any such permit, to require a written agreement upon the part of the applicant to perform such work in the way stipulated by the public works director and to pay the cost thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-32. - Permit issuance to persons erecting, altering or removing buildings. 
When the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or structure necessitates the trimming, pruning or removal of any city-owned tree, it shall be within the discretion of the public works director to grant or refuse permission to do such work. The public works director may stipulate the conditions upon which any trimming, pruning or removal may be done and may request the applicant to enter into an agreement whereby the applicant shall agree to pay all costs incurred for any inspection, labor, equipment or service charge deemed necessary by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-33. - Protection during construction. 
Care shall be exercised by all individuals, developers and contractors working near preserved trees so that no damage occurs to such trees. All construction shall preserve and protect the health of trees to remain, relocated trees, and new trees planted to replace those removed in accordance with the following measures: 
(1)  All trees to be saved shall be enclosed/delineated by an appropriate construction barrier, such as fencing or other mechanism, prior to commencement of work. Barriers are to remain in place during all phases of construction and may not be removed without the written consent of the public works director. 
(2)  Such barrier(s) must be located a distance from the trunk base of two times the trunk diameter, up to a maximum of 15 feet, unless otherwise approved in writing by the public works director. 
(3)  No fill material shall be placed within three feet from the outer trunk circumference of any tree. 
(4)  No fill materials shall be placed within the drip line of any tree in excess of 18 inches in depth. This guideline is subject to modification to meet the needs of an individual tree species, as determined by a certified arborist or licensed landscape architect. 
(5)  No substantial compaction of the soil within the drip line of any tree shall be undertaken. 
(6)  No construction, including structures and walls, that disrupts the root system shall be permitted. As a guideline, no cutting of roots should occur within a distance equal to 3½ times the trunk diameter, as measured at ground level. Actual setback may vary to meet the needs of individual tree species as determined by a certified arborist or licensed landscaped architect. When some root removal is necessary, the tree crown may require thinning to prevent wind damage. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-34. - City-owned trees removal. 
Within available resources, the city shall implement practices to prevent the removal of existing public trees whenever possible. The removal of a single tree or groups of trees may be approved pursuant to this article, after one of the following findings has been made: 
(1)  The tree is dead. 
(2)  The tree has reached an over-mature condition for its pre-existing location and will result in the deterioration of surrounding hardscaped areas potentially resulting in a health and safety hazard. 
(3)  The tree which is infected with a disease which cannot be treated successfully, or there is a strong potential that the pathogen could spread to other trees in the immediate vicinity. 
(4)  The tree has a severe void of heartwood due to wood consuming organisms which could potentially cause catastrophic failure (i.e. collapse). 
(5)  A tree has been determined to be a hazard because of its high potential for failure due to considerable dead or dying foliage, branches, roots or trunk. 
(6)  The tree requires extensive root pruning because of excessive hardscape damage resulting in the severe reduction of its capacity to support itself thereby creating a potential safety hazard. 
(7)  A healthy living tree that has caused damage to any underground utility as a result of root blockage. 
(8)  A tree that is causing an immediate threat to the health and safety or general welfare of the public. 
(9)  As part of a master plan approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-35. - Inspection and evaluation process. 
(a)  Prior to the removal of any city-owned tree, it shall be the city's responsibility to evaluate the condition of the tree's root system, trunk, branching system, canopy and foliage. Based upon this evaluation, the public works director in consultation with the city's tree commission shall make a determination as to whether the tree must be removed. However, in the case of a heritage tree the final determination will be made by city council upon recommendation by the tree commission. Public works staff and if necessary the public works director shall initiate the review process. In cases where, following an evaluation by public works staff, a tree is posing an immediate hazard and is considered to be a threat to public safety, the public works director shall have administrative authority to allow the tree to be immediately removed in the interest of public safety. 
(b)  The city council shall have the discretion to identify special situations where a targeted replacement program may be desirable. An example is a comprehensive streetscape project in a commercial district where a primary goal is to unify the area through a newly designed streetscape. Street trees are a significant unifying feature and it may be important to replace all or a portion of the trees in order to create this unity and give a special identity to the particular street. In cases where this is appropriate as determined by the city council, the city shall make relocation of existing healthy trees that are removed a priority. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-36. - Relocation and transplanting. 
In the event a city-owned tree must be removed pursuant to one of the conditions outlined in section 98-34 of this article, all reasonable efforts should be made to conserve these trees through transplanting. The following factors should be considered when attempting to relocate a tree: 
(1)  The appraised value and species of the tree in relation to the cost of relocation. 
(2)  The available size of grow space for the root ball of the relocated tree. 
(3)  How the tree is to be transported. 
(4)  How the tree can be maneuvered into the site once it gets there. 
(5)  Existing underground and overhead utilities. 
(6)  Long-term and short-term maintenance and irrigation requirements of the tree. 
(7)  The mature size of the tree. 
(8)  Chances of surviving relocation. 
(9)  Public concerns. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-37. - Tree plans. 
(a)  The public works department in conjunction with the city's tree commission shall review all plans for new development in the city and may require as a condition of approval of a project that a particular number of street trees of the species desired in section 98-38 be planted in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Specific tree plans/tree focus areas, specifically designed to enhance/revitalize a certain area of the city, where trees are to be planted on public property, may also be adopted and amended by resolution of the city council from time-to-time. Once adopted, these plans shall also be included into this article and comply with all requirements and regulations set forth herein. All street trees shall be planted per the city residential and commercial tree planting standards on file in the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-38. - Tree master plan. 
The tree commission shall prepare, and the city council shall adopt, a master plan which provides for the planting, care, preservation, maintenance, removal and appropriate species for all trees on public property. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-39. - Street tree species. 
All street trees planted shall be in accordance with the city's tree master plan, and/or as directed by the city's tree commission or by standards set forth by the NAA and/or ISA. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-40. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to top any street tree or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other natural causes or trees under utility wires or other obstructions which cannot be removed to provide for proper pruning may be exempted from this section by the public works director or his designee. An application for an exemption from this section must be filed with the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-41. - Requests for parkway trees. 
Requests for a parkway tree shall be submitted in writing to the public works department. A request will be considered once the property owner has demonstrated that the parkway is well maintained, in accordance with division 6 of this Code, and groundcover if applicable is planted and maintained. If a request is approved the tree will be planted in accordance with the residential and commercial tree planting standards on file in the public works department and in accordance with species outlined in section 98-39 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-42. - Enforcement. 
The public works director, through city police officers, building inspectors and members of the public works department, in the course of their duties, when monitoring construction activities, shall check for compliance with the provisions of this article. Any irregularities or suspected violations of this article shall be reported immediately to the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-43. - Violations. 
(a)  It has been determined that street trees within the city are valuable environmental assets to the citizens of the community and as a result of the loss of any trees on public property, the public should be compensated, and penalties applied to assure the primary goal of conservation, protection and preservation of trees as set forth in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article. 
(c)  In addition to or in lieu of penalties provided in chapter 1, any person who violates any provision of this article may be required to make restitution. Such restitution may include, but shall not be limited to the replacement of a tree which has been removed, cut and/or damaged by planting a new tree of comparable size or equivalent footage. 
(d)  The cost for replacement of a street tree, pursuant to this article, shall include the actual cost of a replacement street tree to replace the street tree that has been removed, cut, damaged or destroyed, and shall also include the cost of transporting and planting the replacement street tree. The type, number, size and location of replacement street trees shall be determined by the public works director or his or her designee. 
(e)  The city council hereby directs that all fines imposed for violation of this article be used in reforestation efforts or for the implementation of a component of the tree master plan. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-44. - Appeal of action. 
Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been refused by the public works director or his designee who may consider that the provisions of this article would cause a manifest injury to be done or is aggrieved may appeal to the city tree commission. Any person aggrieved in a similar manner by any action taken by the tree commission may appeal such action the city council. The city council may appeal any action taken by the commission to the city council by majority vote of a quorum. The tree commission, and ultimately the city council if appealed, shall make final determination of the street trees that may be planted in, upon or along any portion thereof and the distances apart at which such street trees shall be planted. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 98-45. - Filing of appeals. 
Appeals made pursuant to this article shall be addressed to the appellate body on a form prescribed by such body, and shall state the basis of the appeal. An appeal of an action by the director shall be filed with the public works department within ten days following the date of action for which an appeal is made. An appeal of a tree commission decision shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within ten days following the date of action accompanied by the filing fees as specified by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 11-4-2002)  
Secs. 98-46—98-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HAZARDS TO TRAVELING PUBLIC 
 
Sec. 98-61. - Authority to inspect. 
The director of public works may inspect any tree, shrub or plant upon any street, parkway, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place in the city or any tree, shrub or plant standing on any private property which overhangs or projects into any street, parkway, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place in the city to determine whether the tree, shrub or plant or any part thereof is in such condition as to constitute a hazard or an impediment to the progress or vision of anyone traveling on the street, parkway, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place. 
(Code 1957, § 27.12)  
Sec. 98-62. - Authority to trim or remove generally. 
If, in the opinion of the director of public works, any tree, shrub or plant is hazardous to the traveling public or impedes the progress or the vision of the public on any street, parkway, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place, he may cause the tree, shrub or plant or such part thereof as is hazardous or an impediment to be trimmed or removed to remedy such condition. 
(Code 1957, § 27.13)  
Sec. 98-63. - Notice of cutting or removal from private property. 
No tree, shrub or plant standing on any private property shall be trimmed or removed as provided in section 98-62 unless ten days' notice in writing of this intention shall be given by the director of public works to the owner, occupant or agent of the property upon which such described condition exists. 
(Code 1957, § 27.14)  
Sec. 98-64. - Objection to cutting or removal from private property. 
If the owner, occupant or agent of any private property, within seven days after receipt of notice under section 98-63, files his objection to such removal with the director of public works, such tree, shrub or plant shall not be cut down or removed unless the director of public works shall give such owner, occupant or agent a reasonable opportunity to be heard in support of such objection. If such objection is not sustained upon review by the city council, the director of public works shall thereafter approve in writing the cutting down or removal of such hazardous or impediment tree, shrub or plant. 
(Code 1957, § 27.15)  
Sec. 98-65. - Liability. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees or to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty of keeping any tree, shrub or plant upon his property or in his control in such a condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel, vision or public safety upon any street, parkway, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 27.16)  
Chapter 102 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90; parking certain commercial vehicles on residential lots, § 90-391 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 102-1—102-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing schedule for taxicab businesses, § 22-174. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 102-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means any person in direct and immediate possession or charge of driving or operating a taxicab. 
Owner means every person having proprietary control or right to proprietary control of any passenger-carrying automobile or motor-propelled vehicle, as defined in this section. 
Person means any natural person, firm, corporation or association of persons. 
Taxicab means a motor-propelled vehicle, which is designed for carrying not more than eight passengers excluding the driver, which is used for the transportation of passengers for hire over and along public streets, not over a defined route, but in accordance with the route and destination or direction of the person hiring such vehicle. 
Taxicab stand means a place upon a public street in the city for the use, while awaiting employment, of the particular taxicabs authorized to utilize the stand. 
Taximeter means a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for the hire of a taxicab is registered, calculated or indicated by figures in accordance with the distance traveled and/or the time elapsed and the number of passengers carried. 
(Code 1957, § 26.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-27. - Enforcing official. 
The police chief or his agent is given the authority and is instructed to watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this article. Upon discovering a violation of any section of this article, the police chief or his agents shall report the violation to the city administrative officer and initiate appropriate action. 
(Code 1957, § 26.62)  
Sec. 102-28. - Additional rules and regulations. 
The chief of police may in his discretion promulgate any rules or regulations pertaining to the operation of taxicabs not inconsistent with this article. 
(Code 1957, § 26.63)  
Sec. 102-29. - Public liability insurance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab unless there shall be filed with the city clerk a liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the state, which policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this section and which shall meet the approval of the city attorney. In lieu of filing the insurance policy, a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance corporation meeting the approval of the city attorney may be filed. The certificate must show that a policy meeting the requirements of this section has been issued and shall set forth the expiration date of such policy. The liability policy required under this section shall insure against loss from the liability imposed by law for injury to or death of any person or damage to any property caused by the operation of any vehicle operated under this article in the amount of $1,000,000.00. 
(b)  The policy of insurance so provided shall contain a provision that such policy may not be canceled or reduced in amount except after 30 days' notice in writing, to be given to the city administrative officer. 
(Code 1957, § 26.10)  
Sec. 102-30. - Taximeters. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to operate any taxicab in the city unless such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter of such type, style and design as may be approved by the city council or such officer or official as may be designated by the council. It shall be the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to keep such taximeter in perfect condition so that the taximeter will, at all times, correctly and accurately indicate the correct charge for the distance traveled and waiting time. The taximeter shall be at all times subject to inspection by the chief of police. The chief of police is authorized, at his instance or upon complaint of any person, to investigate or cause to be investigated such taximeter and, upon the discovery of any inaccuracy in the meter, to remove or cause to be removed such vehicle equipped with such taximeter from the city streets until such time as the taximeter shall have been correctly adjusted. 
(Code 1957, § 26.30)  
Sec. 102-31. - Registration of fares. 
Every taximeter shall register the charge to the nearest $0.10 and shall be equipped with a flag or other mechanical device with the words "for hire" printed or stamped thereon. The flag shall be so attached and connected to the mechanism of the taximeter as to cause the mechanism to operate when the flag is in a position other than upright and indicate that the taxicab is not for hire. The flag shall, when moved forward or downward, start the operation of the taximeter so that the taximeter will operate in the manner described in this section. 
(Code 1957, § 26.31)  
Sec. 102-32. - Unlawful display of flag. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers to display the flag or device attached to such taximeter in such a position as to denote that such vehicle is for hire or is not employed or to have such flag or other attached device in such a position as to prevent the taximeter from operating. It will be unlawful for any driver to throw such flag or other device of a taximeter into a position which causes the taximeter to record when such vehicle is not actually employed or to fail to throw the flag or other device on such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. 
(Code 1957, § 26.32)  
Sec. 102-33. - Charges based on taximeters. 
The charges for transportation of passengers in taxicabs operated in the city must be based on the charges indicated on the taximeters, and it shall be unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of any taxicab to charge any passenger any sum in excess of the sum indicated on the taximeter. 
(Code 1957, § 26.33)  
Sec. 102-34. - Placement of taximeter. 
The taximeter must be placed in the taxicab so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well-lighted and readily discernible by the passenger riding in such taxicab. 
(Code 1957, § 26.34)  
Sec. 102-35. - Posting schedule of fares. 
There shall be displayed in the passenger compartment of each taxicab in full view of the passenger a card not less than four inches by six inches in size which shall have plainly printed thereon the name of the owner or the fictitious name under which the owner operates, the business address and telephone number of the owner, and a correct schedule of the rates to be charged for conveyance in the vehicle, including rates for minimum flag drop, mileage and waiting time. In addition, such rates, including rates for minimum flag drop, mileage and waiting time, shall be displayed on each side of the taxicab on the exterior of the front doors in letters not less than one-half inch in size in a color contrasting with the color of the taxicab. 
(Code 1957, § 26.35)  
Sec. 102-36. - Rates established by council. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab to fix or charge or collect or receive a rate in excess of rates established and set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 26.36)  
Sec. 102-37. - Acceptance of personal property prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab or other vehicle regulated by this article to purchase, accept, receive, acquire, or to agree to purchase, accept, receive or acquire any jewelry, watches, cameras, firearms, clothing, or any article of personal property in payment of or as a pledge for the payment of any fares due and payable for conveyance in any taxicab or vehicle regulated by this article. 
(Code 1957, § 26.37)  
Sec. 102-38. - Direct route of travel. 
Any taxicab driver employed to transport a passenger to a definite point shall take the most direct route that will take the passenger to his destination safely and expeditiously. 
(Code 1957, § 26.38)  
Sec. 102-39. - Receipt for payment; resolution of disputes. 
If requested, every taxicab driver shall give a receipt upon payment of the correct fare. If there is a dispute, the matter shall be determined by the watch commander at the police station. Failure to comply with such determination shall subject the offending party to a charge of misdemeanor. 
(Code 1957, § 26.39)  
Sec. 102-40. - Refusal to pay fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the lawful fare of any of the vehicles regulated by this article after employing or hiring any such vehicle, and any person who shall hire such vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1957, § 26.40)  
Sec. 102-41. - Number of passengers. 
No driver of any taxicab shall accept, take into his vehicle or transport any larger number of passengers than the rated seated capacity of his vehicle. The term "rated capacity" shall mean three passengers in the back seat and two in the front seat of the taxicab unless the rated capacity of a taxicab is otherwise designated in writing by the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 26.41)  
Sec. 102-42. - Additional passengers. 
Whenever any taxicab is occupied by a passenger, the driver shall not permit any other person to occupy or ride in the taxicab, except at the specific request of and originating with the original passenger. 
(Code 1957, § 26.42)  
Sec. 102-43. - Unattended taxicabs. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to remain unattended at any place other than at a duly designated taxicab stand. It shall also be unlawful for any taxicab to remain unattended in a designated taxicab stand for a period of time longer than five minutes, except when the chief of police grants, in his sole discretion upon written request, a temporary waiver which would permit unattended parking in a stand for a longer period of time. 
(Code 1957, § 26.43)  
Sec. 102-44. - Deception of passengers. 
No taxicab driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger who may ride in his taxicab as to his destination or the rate of fare to be charged or shall cause him to be conveyed to a place other than directed by such passenger. 
(Code 1957, § 26.44)  
Sec. 102-45. - Manifests. 
(a)  The driver of every taxicab shall keep a separate manifest of every service rendered as such driver, which manifest shall include the following information: 
(1)  Location where passengers entered the vehicle. 
(2)  Time of entry. 
(3)  Location where passengers were discharged. 
(4)  Number of passengers. 
(5)  Amount of the fare collected. 
(b)  The owner of every such taxicab shall keep the manifests in his office files for a period of one year after the date of the service rendered, and the manifests shall at all convenient times be open to examination by any authorized representative of the city administrative officer. The falsifying of any manifest by an owner or by a driver shall be grounds for revocation of the owner's certificate. 
(Code 1957, § 26.45)  
Sec. 102-46. - Acceptance of qualified passengers. 
It shall be the duty of the driver of every unoccupied taxicab to receive and carry in such taxicab all persons who apply for passage therein along its route and tender the proper fare therefor, except persons who are intoxicated or who are conducting themselves in a boisterous or disorderly manner. 
(Code 1957, § 26.46)  
Sec. 102-47. - Availability; solicitation of passengers. 
The services of a taxicab operating pursuant to any certificate granted under this article shall be available only upon telephone call, engagement of the taxicab when parked at a regular stand or when hailed from the street, sidewalk or curb, but not otherwise. No taxicab driver, owner or his agent shall solicit passengers. 
(Code 1957, § 26.47)  
Sec. 102-48. - Hours of service. 
The number of taxicabs authorized by a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be based on 24-hour service unless otherwise specified by the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 26.48)  
Sec. 102-49. - Substitution of vehicles. 
If a taxicab owner desires to substitute one vehicle in place of another and if such vehicle to be substituted complies with all requirements of the city and the owner provides proof of satisfactory insurance carried for the substituted vehicle, the city administrative officer is authorized to approve the substitution. 
(Code 1957, § 26.19)  
Secs. 102-50—102-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 102-76. - Required; application. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating any taxicab in the city without first having obtained from the city council a certificate of public convenience and necessity. All persons applying for such a certificate shall file with the city council a sworn application which shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The names and residence addresses of the owner, the person applying and the person financially interested in the operation of the taxicabs. 
(2)  The fictitious name, if any, under which such applicant does business or proposes to do business. 
(3)  The business addresses of all persons, directors, officers, trustees and/or other individuals connected or professed to be connected, directly or indirectly, with the business. 
(4)  The number of vehicles actually owned and the number of vehicles actually operated by such owner on the date of the application. 
(5)  The number of vehicles for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity is desired. 
(6)  A description of each vehicle for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity is requested, giving the name, type, make, year of manufacture and passenger seating capacity. 
(7)  The color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics proposed to be used on each vehicle. 
(8)  The make and type of taximeter intended to be installed in each taxicab. 
(9)  The street number and exact location of each taxicab stand which the applicant proposes to use. 
(10)  The proposed schedule of rates to be charged, which shall not exceed those established and set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(11)  A statement of the applicant's estimate of the need for taxicab service, supported by factual data. 
(12)  A financial report of the applicant. 
(13)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(14)  Any facts which the applicant believes would show that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate. 
(15)  Such other information as the city council or city administrative officer may require. 
(Code 1957, § 26.2)  
Sec. 102-77. - Application fee. 
Each application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be accompanied by an application fee of $50.00 plus $15.00 for each taxicab covered by the initial application. Each person obtaining a certificate shall pay, in addition to any fees required under this article, the annual license fee required by section 22-174 of this Code. 
(Code 1957, § 26.3)  
Sec. 102-78. - Scheduling of public hearing. 
Upon receipt of the fully completed application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity to engage in the business of operating a taxicab, the city clerk shall set a time not sooner than ten and not more than 30 days thereafter for the hearing of the application before the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 26.4)  
Sec. 102-79. - Notice of public hearing. 
Seven days' written notice of each hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity for operation of a taxicab have been issued. Due notice of the time and place of the public hearing before the city council shall be given to the general public by causing a notice of such hearing to be posted in at least three public places within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 26.5)  
Sec. 102-80. - Necessity of proposed service declared by resolution; conditions. 
No certificate of public convenience and necessity for operating a taxicab shall be granted until the council shall, after the hearing, declare by resolution that the public convenience and necessity requires the proposed service and that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant is financially responsible and the officers of the applicant are of good moral character. 
(2)  The applicant shall own and operate the vehicles described in the application, and the applicant shall not lease the vehicles or enter any similar agreement under which another person shall pay the applicant for the use of such vehicles. 
(3)  The persons holding permits or licenses for the operation of motor vehicles for hire are under an experienced and efficient management earning a fair and reasonable return on the capital devoted to such service. 
(4)  The applicant has complied with the provisions of all city, state and federal laws applicable to the proposed operations. 
(5)  The service requested will not result in a greater hazard to the public and will not create traffic congestion or parking problems. 
(6)  The vehicles described in the application and proposed to be used are adequate and safe for the purpose intended. 
(7)  The color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristic proposed to be used on such vehicle is not in conflict with and does not imitate any color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristic used by any other person in such manner as to mislead or tend to mislead, deceive or defraud the public, and no other color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristic has been designated for such applicant. 
(8)  Existing transportation is inadequate to meet the public need. 
(9)  All the information contained in the application has been verified as true and sufficient. 
(10)  The location of any proposed taxicab stand is such that it will not congest or interfere with travel on any street or use thereof by the public, and the proposed stand is not within 300 feet of any other stand on the same street, except that at and across any intersection, stands may be permitted within 200 feet of one another. 
(Code 1957, § 26.6)  
Sec. 102-81. - Issuance; designation of number authorized. 
If the council finds that the taxicab service applied for is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to this Code and all rules promulgated by the city administrative officer, the city shall by resolution declare that the certificate of public convenience and necessity be issued by the city administrative officer. Such certificate shall specifically designate the number of taxicabs authorized by the certificate. 
(Code 1957, § 26.7)  
Sec. 102-82. - Denial. 
If the council finds that the public convenience and necessity does not justify the granting of the certificate of public convenience and necessity for operation of a taxicab, it shall deny the application and forthwith notify the applicant of the finding. 
(Code 1957, § 26.8)  
Sec. 102-83. - Modification. 
The council may, upon a showing at a public hearing as provided in section 102-78 that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of additional taxicabs, amend an existing certificate of public convenience and necessity to authorize such additional taxicabs. Each application for a modification of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be accompanied by an application fee of $25.00 plus $15.00 for each additional taxicab requested. 
(Code 1957, § 26.9)  
Sec. 102-84. - Transferability. 
No certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to this division may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 26.11)  
Sec. 102-85. - Duration, renewal, revocation. 
(a)  The certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this division to any applicant shall be for a period of one year, at the end of which time the certificate holder may reapply for a new certificate. 
(b)  The holder of a certificate shall apply to the city administrative officer for a certificate renewal. The application shall include a renewal fee of $25.00, plus $15.00 per taxicab authorized in the certificate. 
(c)  All certificates are subject to revocation in the manner prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1957, § 26.12)  
Sec. 102-86. - Effect of discontinuance of service. 
After the service for which a certificate is granted under this division is discontinued or if the person sells his business or discontinues his business for a period of 45 days, the certificate granted under this division shall be automatically null and void and shall be reissued only in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1957, § 26.13)  
Sec. 102-87. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
A certificate issued under this division may be suspended or revoked at any time by the city council if the holder thereof has: 
(1)  Violated any of the applicable sections of this Code. 
(2)  Discontinued operations for more than 30 days. 
(3)  Violated any laws of the city or of the state or of the United States, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. 
(4)  Operated the taxicab at a rate of fare in excess of that established and set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1957, § 26.14)  
Sec. 102-88. - Suspension or revocation hearing. 
Upon being informed that sufficient justification exists to suspend or revoke a certificate issued under this division, the city council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. At least five days' written notice, setting forth the grounds for suspension or revocation and information regarding the time and place where such hearing will be held, shall be given the holder of the certificate in question and to all persons holding valid certificates. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing before the city council shall be posted in at least three public places within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 26.15)  
Sec. 102-89. - Surrender after suspension or revocation. 
If the city council finds that sufficient justification does exist for the suspension or revocation of a certificate issued pursuant to this division, the city council shall by resolution demand that such certificate be surrendered to the city administrative officer. Certificates which shall have been suspended or revoked by the city council shall forthwith be surrendered to the city administrative officer, and the operation of any taxicab covered by such certificate shall cease and shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1957, § 26.16)  
Sec. 102-90. - Sale or transfer of business. 
If an owner to whom a certificate of convenience and necessity has been issued pursuant to this division desires to sell or transfer his business, the intended buyer must make application to the city for a certificate of convenience and necessity as required by section 102-76. The seller and holder of the certificate must file an affidavit of intention to surrender and cancel the existing certificate and licenses conditionally upon and concurrently with the consummation of sale and issuance of a new certificate and licenses in the name of the buyer. If the buyer applicant meets the requirements as set forth in section 102-81 for the issuance of a certificate of convenience and necessity, the council shall issue a new certificate to the buyer and concurrently therewith shall cancel the seller's certificate. 
(Code 1957, § 26.17)  
Secs. 102-91—102-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVERS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 102-116—102-140. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permit 
 
Sec. 102-141. - Required; application. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a taxicab in the city without first having obtained a driver's permit from the chief of police. All persons applying for such a permit shall file with the chief of police a sworn application which shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers. 
(2)  A concise history of his employment. 
(3)  The educational background of the applicant. 
(4)  Two recent photographs, size 1½ inches by 1½ inches. 
(5)  The names and addresses of four city residents who have known the applicant for a period of at least one year and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant. 
(6)  A copy of the certificate obtained in compliance with Government Code § 53075.5. 
(b)  An application fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council shall accompany each application for a driver's permit. 
(Code 1957, § 26.20)  
Sec. 102-142. - Driver requirements. 
The chief of police shall not issue a taxicab driver's permit to any person: 
(1)  Under the age of 21 years. 
(2)  Not a citizen of the United States or who has not filed a petition for naturalization or who does not possess a valid green card. 
(3)  Not possessing a valid driver's license issued by the state. 
(4)  Who has been convicted of driving a vehicle recklessly or while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics. 
(5)  Who has been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  Who has violated any section of this Code which in the chief of police's opinion affects the applicant's qualifications as a driver. 
(7)  Who is not employed as, or does not have an offer of employment as, a taxicab driver in the city. 
(Code 1957, § 26.21)  
Sec. 102-143. - Issuance. 
Upon completion of his investigation, which shall include a complete review of a police report on the applicant, if the chief of police finds the applicant for a taxicab driver's permit is a fit and proper person to be a taxicab driver in the city, he shall issue or cause to be issued to the applicant a taxicab driver's permit. Such permit shall have affixed thereto a photograph as required by section 102-141 of this subdivision. 
(Code 1957, § 26.22)  
Sec. 102-144. - Denial. 
If, upon completion of his investigation, the chief of police finds the applicant is not a fit and proper person to be a taxicab driver, he shall refuse to issue a taxicab driver's permit to the applicant. 
(Code 1957, § 26.23)  
Sec. 102-145. - Display. 
Every taxicab driver issued a permit under section 102-143 of this subdivision shall post his driver's permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1957, § 26.24)  
Sec. 102-146. - Change of employment. 
(a)  The taxicab driver's permit shall become void upon termination of employment. 
(b)  The employer shall notify the city upon termination of employment. 
(c)  The driver shall return the permit to the city upon termination of employment. 
(Code 1957, § 26.25) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 53075.5(b)(1)(B), (D) and (E).  
Sec. 102-147. - Change of address. 
If a taxicab driver changes his residential address, he shall, within ten days thereafter, notify the chief of police for the purpose of having his driver's permit changed so as to properly designate his residential address. 
(Code 1957, § 26.26)  
Sec. 102-148. - Suspension or revocation. 
A driver's permit issued under this subdivision may be suspended or revoked at any time by the chief of police if the holder thereof has: 
(1)  Been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude; using, possessing, selling or transporting narcotics; or imparting information for obtaining narcotics. 
(2)  Been convicted of driving recklessly or while under the influence of liquor or narcotics. 
(3)  Had his state driver's license revoked or suspended. 
(4)  Been convicted of any of the, offenses set forth in Vehicle Code §§ 20001, 22350, 22351, 23152 and 23103 and amendments thereto, or any combination of either or any of such offenses. 
(5)  Charged or received a fare in excess of the rates provided for in this article or violated any of the other sections of this article. 
(6)  Been determined by the chief of police, for any reason, including but not limited to those reasons set forth in section 102-142 of this subdivision, whether specifically set forth in this section or not, after due investigation, to be an unfit person to drive a taxicab. 
(Code 1957, § 26.27)  
Sec. 102-149. - Revocation hearing. 
Revocation of a taxicab driver's permit shall be made only after a hearing granted to the holder of such permit before the chief of police, after five days' notice to the permit holder setting forth the grounds of the complaint against him and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. Upon revocation of any driver's permit, such permit shall be surrendered forthwith to the chief of police. The decision of the chief of police shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1957, § 26.28)  
Sec. 102-150. - Term; renewal, fee. 
Each taxicab driver's permit approved by the city administrative officer shall be an annual permit and shall be automatically renewable by the chief of police if, in the opinion of the chief of police, the driver should receive a subsequent permit. A permit fee shall be required for renewals. 
(Code 1957, § 26.29)  
Secs. 102-151—102-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 102-176. - Replacement of broken or faulty taximeters. 
Taximeters placed upon taxicabs to replace broken or faulty meters shall under no conditions be operated more than 24 hours prior to being inspected, tested, approved and sealed by an authorized representative of the chief of police. 
(Code 1957, § 26.49)  
Sec. 102-177. - Conformance to color scheme. 
All taxicabs must conform to the color scheme, insignia, or any other distinguishing characteristics approved by the city council at the same time as the certificate of public convenience and necessity is approved. 
(Code 1957, § 26.50)  
Sec. 102-178. - Semiannual inspection. 
To ensure continued maintenance of safe operating conditions, taxicabs, their equipment and taximeters operating or used pursuant to this article shall be inspected semiannually at a garage approved by the chief of police. The garage shall, after such semiannual inspection, issue a certificate of safety certifying that the vehicle, its equipment and taximeter comply with the safety requirements of this Code. The cost of the inspections shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 26.51)  
Sec. 102-179. - Authority to inspect. 
The chief of police shall have the right at any time, after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the sections of this article is being violated. 
(Code 1957, § 26.52)  
Sec. 102-180. - Unsafe or unsuitable taxicabs. 
Any taxicab which is found, in the opinion of the city administrative officer or the police chief or their agents, after inspection, to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service shall be immediately ordered out of service. Before again being placed in service, the owner shall obtain a certificate of safety for the vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 26.53)  
Sec. 102-181. - Determination of unsafe or unsuitable taxicabs. 
For the purposes of this article, the existence of the following named things, but not to the exclusion of other things, shall be deemed to make a taxicab unsafe or unsuitable for taxicab service: 
(1)  Excessive leakage of oil, grease, gas or any other substances from any part of the taxicab. 
(2)  The existence of any defects in the frame of the taxicab. 
(3)  The failure of any moveable parts of the car, including doors, windows, hoods, trunk, lights, etc., to function in the proper working order. 
(4)  Failure to maintain the tires, lights, turning signals or brakes in good and safe operating condition. 
(5)  Failure to maintain the motor and other mechanical parts of the car in good and safe operating condition. 
(6)  Failure to have an adequate exhaust system that complies with state law properly installed and in good working condition. 
(7)  The existence of large or excessive dents or scratches in the body of the taxicab. 
(8)  Improper maintenance of the exterior paint in the proper color scheme. 
(9)  The existence of excessive wear and tear on the upholstery, floor mats and other parts of the interior of the taxicab. 
(10)  Failure to have adequate interior lighting in proper working condition. 
(11)  Failure to have a speedometer, in good working order, in full view of any person sitting on the front seat of the vehicle. 
(Code 1957, § 26.54)  
Sec. 102-182. - Cleaning of interior. 
The interior of every taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in every 24 hours. 
(Code 1957, § 26.55)  
Sec. 102-183. - Cleaning of exterior. 
The exterior of every taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in every seven days. 
(Code 1957, § 26.56)  
Secs. 102-184—102-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STANDS 
 
Sec. 102-211. - Standing or parking in other places. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab or vehicle for hire to stand or park the taxicab or vehicle upon any public street or other public place or on any private property within the city while awaiting employment except in spaces or stands set apart for that purpose. However, nothing contained in this section shall prevent any taxicab or vehicle for hire from parking on private property if the owner of the private property gives permission in writing and a copy of such written permission is filed with the chief of police. Further, nothing contained in this section shall prevent any taxicab or vehicle for hire from parking in spaces legally available for other passenger vehicles or on any private property when the taxicab or vehicle for hire is out of service. No owner or driver may allow a taxicab to remain unattended in a stand for longer than five minutes. 
(Code 1957, § 26.57)  
Sec. 102-212. - Permit. 
Jurisdiction to issue permits for taxicab stands or places shall be vested in the city council. All permits shall be revocable at the pleasure of the city council, and all applications therefor shall be referred to the administrative officer for his recommendation. The city council shall not grant a taxicab stand permit without taking into consideration the need for such stand by the applicant and the convenience of the general public and shall not grant such stand where it would tend to create a traffic hazard. Such permits shall not be transferable. Each holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to this article shall maintain at least one public street taxicab stand. The city council may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing to consider the location of and number of taxicab stand permits to be granted within the city. 
(Code 1957, § 26.58)  
Sec. 102-213. - Change of location. 
The location of a taxicab stand may not be changed unless a written application for such a change is submitted to the council with a fee of $15.00 and a transfer permit is issued by the council. 
(Code 1957, § 26.59)  
Sec. 102-214. - Permit fee. 
For each permit for a taxicab stand or parking space or place upon any public street or other public place, the owner of the taxicab company using the space shall pay to the city an annual fee of $40.00. 
(Code 1957, § 26.60)  
Sec. 102-215. - Parking of other vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any other vehicle to park in a taxicab or vehicle for hire space or stand. 
(Code 1957, § 26.61)  
Chapter 106 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; telecommunications, ch. 86; vegetation, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 106-1. - Title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "San Fernando Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.001, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-2. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the California Planning and Zoning Law, title 7, division 1, chapter 4 (Government Code §§ 65800—65912). 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.002, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to serve the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare by establishing land use districts designed to obtain the physical, environmental, economic and social advantages resulting from planned use of land in accordance with the general plan of the city and by establishing those regulations for the development and use of land and improvements within the various districts which will ensure that the growth and development of the city shall be orderly, attractive and efficient for the maximum benefit of its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.005, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-4. - Division of city into zones; official zoning map. 
(a)  In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the city is divided into ten zones known as: 
R-1 	Single-family residential zone 
R-2 	Multiple-family dwelling zone 
R-3 	Multiple-family zone 
RPD 	Residential planned development zone 
C-1 	Limited commercial zone 
C-2 	Commercial zone 
SC 	Service commercial zone 
M-1 	Limited industrial zone 
M-2 	Light industrial zone 
PD 	Precise development zone 
 
(b)  The zones listed in subsection (a) of this section and the boundaries of such zones are shown upon the official zoning map of the city, and the map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth by the map were all fully described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.006, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  Property affected. The sections of this chapter shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to all property within the city, whether such property is in public or private ownership, except streets, alleys and walkways which are dedicated for public use. 
(b)  Persons affected. The sections of this chapter shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to all persons, agencies and organizations, both public and private, except that in circumstances where an overriding public interest is found to be served by an action or development undertaken by a public agency, the commission or council may waive the requirements of this chapter to the extent deemed necessary. 
(c)  Activities affected by new or changed development or use. Each section of this chapter shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to all actions, activities or development initiated subsequent to the effective date of such section, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The division or leasing of land. 
(2)  Construction, alteration, remodeling, expansion, replacement or relocation of any building, structure or other facility or portion thereof. 
(3)  The use and occupancy of land, buildings, structures or other facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.810, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-6. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abut or abutting means two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line or two or more objects in contact with one another. 
Access means a place or way by which pedestrians or vehicles are physically and legally permitted to have ingress to and/or egress from a property or use. 
Accessory means a use, building or facility incidental, related, and clearly subordinate to a principal use, building or facility established on the same lot. 
Accessory dwelling unit or ADU mean an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. It shall include the following: (i) an efficiency unit, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1; and (ii) a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007. 
Editor's note— Municipal Code provisions relating to the regulation of "accessory dwelling units" are set forth under section 106-358 (Regulation of Accessory Dwelling Units) of division 2 (R-1 single family, residential zone) of article III (Zones) of chapter 106 (Zoning) of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
Adult bookstore shall have the meaning set out in section 106-1022. 
Adult theater shall have the meaning set out in section 106-1022. 
Alley means a public or private right-of-way which affords a means of vehicular access to abutting property. 
Amusement device means a mechanical or electrical device simulating the playing of basketball, boxing, soccer or other games; video games; pinball machines; skee-ball or shooting gallery; or other similar devices and equipment. 
Authorized agent or representative of the owner means anyone who has authority to make a request or applications, speak for or make presentations on behalf of the owner of any property. 
Automobile means a self-propelled free-moving vehicle primarily for conveyance on a street or roadway. The term also encompasses other types of motor vehicles such as trucks, tractors, farm machines, motorcycles, scooters, mopeds, all-terrain vehicles, boats, boat motors, aircraft, RVs, and go-cart vehicles. 
Automobile repair, major means activity consisting of general repair requiring the removal of cylinder heads and crankcase pans or radiators from the vehicle to make the repair; engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of the automobile; collision services, such as body frame or fender straightening and repair; and overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. It excludes auto wrecking and "parting out" autos. 
Automobile repair, minor means activity generally consisting of routine periodic preventive maintenance to operable vehicles, and simple repair and replacement of parts on disabled vehicles. Activity includes items such as servicing of sparkplugs, batteries, distributors and distributor parts; replacing mufflers, tailpipes, generators and/or alternators, water hoses, fan belts, brakes, brake fluids, lightbulbs, fuses, windshield wipers, wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like; tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving; radiator cleaning and flushing; fuel pump, fuel injection, oil pump and line repairs and minor servicing and repair of carburetors; emergency wiring repairs; minor motor adjustment. It excludes engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles and collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair. 
Automobile sales means the use of any building, land area or other premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles and including any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Automobile service station means any building, land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sale of vehicular fuels, including, as an accessory use, the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories, but excluding minor repair. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor below finished grade level, and having more than half of its height above the average finished grade. A basement shall be considered a story. 
Boardinghouse means a building where lodging and meals are provided for compensation for five or more persons, not including a retirement home. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure or persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. 
Building coverage means the percentage of the lot area which may be covered by all buildings and structures on the lot. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade of the structure to the highest point of the roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
Building, main means a building in which is conducted a principal use of the lot upon which it is situated as provided by this chapter. 
Carport means an accessory building having none, one, two or three walls; having a roof; having no vehicle entrance door; and designed to be used primarily for the shelter and storage of motor vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the principal building. 
Cellar means that portion of a building having its floor below finished grade level, and having half or more of its height below the average finished grade. 
Child means a person under 18 years of age. 
Child day care means the part-time care of children who are not residents of the premises. Community day care facilities are not included in this definition. 
Child day care facility means a facility that provides nonmedical care to children under 18 years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of individuals on a less than a 24-hour basis. Child day care facility includes day care centers, employer-sponsored child day centers, and family day care centers. 
Church means a building, including a temple or other place of religious worship, together with its accessory building and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by an organized religious body. Rescue missions, tent revivals and other temporary assemblies are not included in this definition. 
City engineer means the city engineer or his duly authorized representative. 
Clinic, dental or medical means a health facility providing diagnosis, treatment or care to patients not confined to the facility as inpatients. Care may include but is not limited to the provision of medical, surgical, dental, mental health, rehabilitation, podiatric, optometric or chiropractic services. 
Club, private means any building or premises used by an association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose such as the promotion of literature, science, politics or good fellowship, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
Commission means the city planning and preservation commission. 
Common area means an entire project area excepting all lots or units granted to or reserved for individual owners or tenants. 
Community center means a noncommercial facility established primarily for the benefit and enjoyment of the population of the community. 
Community care facility/large means any facility as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 1502(a), which provides nonmedical care on a 24-hour a day basis to seven or more persons including, but not limited to persons with substance abuse illnesses, physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children. Large community care facility shall be considered a conditionally permitted use within all residential zoned districts. 
Community care facility/small means any facility as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 1502(a), which provides nonmedical care on a 24-hour a day basis to six or less persons including, but not limited to persons with substance abuse illnesses, physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children. Small community care facility shall be considered a permitted use within all residential zoned districts. 
Condominium project means the entire parcel of real property divided or to be divided into condominiums and common area including all structures located or to be located on such real property. 
Condominium, residential means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a complex devoted to residential purposes located on such real property. 
Condominium unit means the elements of a condominium project which are not owned in common with the owners of other condominiums in the project. 
Development means the activity of preparing land and constructing facilities in order to establish a land use. A development also means a lot or project area together with the completed facilities and improvements thereon. 
Director means the planning director or his duly authorized representative. 
Director of public works means the public works director or his duly authorized representative. 
Driveway means a private roadway, which provides vehicular access from a street to a structure or site on adjacent grounds for the purpose of vehicle parking or loading or unloading of passengers or material. 
Duplex means an apartment building containing two dwelling units. 
Dwelling means a building containing one or more dwelling units. A group quarters or other building or portion thereof devoted primarily to rooming units shall not be considered to be a dwelling. 
Dwelling, multiple-family means a dwelling consisting of three or more dwelling units per lot, including townhouses, condominiums, apartments. 
Dwelling, single-family means a dwelling consisting of one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling unit means one or more habitable rooms constituting a permanent, self-contained unit with a separate entrance and used or intended to be used continuously for living and sleeping purposes for not more than one family and containing one, but not more than one, kitchen or kitchenette. 
Easement means an area on a lot, and so indicated on a subdivision map or in a deed restriction or other recorded document, reserved for or used for utilities, access or public purposes. 
Emergency homeless shelter means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months per calendar year or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. (Health and Safety Code Section 50801(e)). Supportive services may include, but are not limited to, meal preparation, an activities center, day care for homeless person's children, vocational rehabilitation and other similar activities. 
Family means any number of persons living together in a room comprising a single dwelling unit and related by blood, marriage or adoption or bearing the generic character of a family unit as a relatively permanent single household, including servants and other live-in employees, who reside therein as though members of the family. Any group of persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption but inhabiting a dwelling unit shall for the purpose of this chapter be considered to constitute one family if a bona fide single household, including servants and other live-in employees, is contained in such group. 
Family day care home (large) means a home which provides family day care to seven to 14 children, inclusive, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home, as set forth in Health and Safety Code § 1597.465, as defined in departmental regulations. 
Family day care home (small) means a home which provides family day care to eight or fewer children, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home, as set forth in Health and Safety Code § 1597.44, as defined in departmental regulations. 
Finished grade means the elevation of the ground surface at any point after completion of development. 
Finished grade, average means the average of the finished grades at the midpoints of each wall of a building or side of a structure. If a building wall is parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the finished grade for that wall shall be measured at the sidewalk and opposite the midpoint of the wall. 
Floor means any structure which divides a building horizontally and includes the horizontal members, floor coverings and ceiling. 
Floor area, gross means the sum of the horizontal areas of all floors within a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings. 
Floor area, net means the gross floor area minus the area of permanent walls, elevator shafts, stairwells, housings for mechanical equipment and vent shafts. 
Fortunetelling means the act of fortunetelling or prophesying future events or happenings affecting the personal life of another by resorting to any occult or psychic power, faculty or force; clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind reading, telepathy or other similar activity; cards, talisman, charm, potion; spirit photography, spirit writing, spirit voices, spirit materialization, etherealization; crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic of any kind or nature; when such fortunetelling is carried on as a business activity for compensation or consideration of any kind or nature. 
Frontage means the line along which a lot abuts a public street. 
Garage means a building, or portion of a building, enclosed on four sides, designed or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles. 
General plan means the long-range, comprehensive general plan adopted by the city in accordance with the provisions of the state Planning and Zoning Law. 
Guesthouse means detached living quarters on the same premises as a single-family residence for the use of family members, guests or employees of the occupants of such residence, containing no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Health care facility means a facility which maintains and operates 24-hour skilled nursing services for the care and treatment of chronically ill or convalescent patients, or provides supportive, restorative and preventive health services in conjunction with a socially oriented program for its residents and which maintains and operates 24-hour services including board, room, personal care and intermittent nursing care. 
Helistop means any helicopter landing area used, designed or intended to be used for the receiving and discharging of passengers or cargo on an occasional or intermittent basis, but not including appurtenant facilities permitted at a heliport other than a shelter for passengers. 
Home occupation means any occupation, hobby or profession conducted or carried on entirely within a dwelling which does not change the character thereof and does not adversely affect other uses in the zone of which it is a part. See division 9 of article VI of this chapter. 
Hospital means a facility having a duly constituted governing body with overall administrative and professional responsibility and an organized medical staff which provides 24-hour, inpatient care. This definition includes general acute care hospital and acute psychiatric hospital. 
Hotel means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants and meeting rooms. 
Kennel means a place where four or more dogs or cats, aged four months or more, are kept, boarded or trained, whether by the owners of the dogs or cats or by persons providing facilities and care, with or without compensation. 
Kitchen means any space within a building used, designed or intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food. 
Landscaping means a designed or natural arrangement of growing plant material such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers or lawn. In addition, features such as rocks, fountains, pools and benches may be included. 
Livestock means any large, live domestic animal, including but not limited to horses, cows, sheep, goats, pigs, hogs and fowl such as chickens, turkeys, peacocks, guineas, geese or ducks. 
Loading area means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, designed or used for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
Lot area means the total area within the lot lines of a lot excluding any street, highway or alley right-of-way, except that in the case of lots in the R-1 single family residential zone, that area up to the midpoint of all immediately abutting streets, alleys or highways which would revert to the lot if the street, highway or alley were vacated may be assumed to be a portion of the lot. The foregoing notwithstanding, the alternative methodology for calculating lot area in the R-1 single family residential zone as set forth in the preceding sentence shall not be used for purposes of (i) any application or request to establish an accessory dwelling unit within the meaning of Section 106-358 (Regulation of Accessory Dwelling Units) of Division 2 (R-1 Single family, Residential Zone) of Article III (Zones) of Chapter 106 (Zoning) of the San Fernando Municipal Code; or (ii) calculating maximum lot coverage within the meaning of subdivision (6)(a) of Section 106-967 (Residential zoned property) of the San Fernando Municipal Code or any other provision of the same requiring the calculation of maximum lot coverage. 
Lot, corner means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets having an angle of intersections of not more than 135 degrees. 
Lot depth means the horizontal distance measured from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line. 
Lot, interior is defined as a lot that shares both rear and side lot lines with adjoining lots and is not defined as a corner, reverse corner or through lot. 
Lot, key is defined as a lot that has a side lot line that abuts the rear lot line of a reverse corner lot. 
Lot line means any line bounding a lot as defined in this section. 
Lot line, front means the lot line separating a lot from a public right-of-way. If a lot has more than one street frontage, the front lot line shall extend across the narrowest portion of the lot. 
Lot line, interior means a lot line which is common to two abutting lots. 
Lot line, rear means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For an irregular or a triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be an assumed line parallel to and passing through the point of the lot which is at the greatest distance from the front lot line. 
Lot line, side means any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot, reverse corner is defined as a corner lot that has a rear lot line which abuts the side lot line of an adjoining lot. 
Lot, through means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance measured from the midpoints of the side lot lines. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed or used for human habitation by one family. 
Mobile home park means any area or tract of land intended, maintained or designed for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for two or more mobile homes including all buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment of such facility regardless of whether a charge is made for such use. Not included in this definition are trailer camp, trailer park and similar terms. 
Mobile home site means that portion of a mobile home park designated for use or occupancy of one mobile home, including all appurtenant facilities thereon, for the exclusive use of the occupants of the mobile home. 
Motel means a building or group of buildings containing rooming units or dwelling units with automobile parking space provided in conjunction therewith, and designed, intended to be used or used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers. 
Nonconformity means any use or characteristic of land or property, or portion thereof, or activity or circumstance, which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter, but which was lawfully established under the regulations which prevailed at the time of such establishment. 
Occupancy means the purpose for which land or a structure is used or intended to be used. Change of occupancy does not include a mere change of owners, tenants or proprietors. 
Open space means the area of a lot which is not occupied by building coverage, parking lot, driveway or trash areas. 
Open space, usable means open space, excluding required yards, which has an average gradient of not more than five percent. Usable open space may include such features as balconies, terraces and roof gardens, which are not ground areas included in the definition of open space. No area shall be considered as usable open space unless it has a minimum contiguous area of 75 square feet and a minimum dimension of seven feet in each direction. 
Outdoor festival means any music festival, dance festival, rock festival or similar musical activity to which both of the following apply: 
(1)  Attendance by more than 500 persons is desired or may reasonably be expected; and 
(2)  The festival will be held at any place other than in a permanent building or permanent installation which has been constructed for the purpose of or is so constructed that it can be used for conducting such activities. 
Park or playground, public means a publicly owned recreation area and appurtenant facilities. 
Parking area means an area, other than a street or alley, available for temporary storage of vehicles in active use regardless of whether such vehicle storage is for remuneration. 
Parking space means a readily accessible usable off-street area, not including aisles, driveways, walkways, ramps, loading, maneuvering or work areas, maintained exclusively for the parking of one motor vehicle. 
Parking structure means a structure, or portion thereof, within or upon which parking area is located. 
Planned development means the planning, construction or implementation and operation of any use or structure, or combination of uses and structures, based upon a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, structures and uses as a single project. 
Planning department means the city planning department. 
Primary single-family dwelling unit means a detached residential dwelling unit constructed on a permanent foundation on a lot zoned for residential uses, which is designed for occupancy as the primary living quarters by one person or one family with independent living facilities that provide for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. The lot on which the primary single-family dwelling unit is located may or may not include a accessory dwelling unit. 
Project area means a lot or combination of contiguous lots, whether or not held in the same ownership, which are used or intended to be used for a planned development. 
Project grading means any excavation or fill, or combination thereof, necessary and incidental to building construction or other lawful development of the premises. 
Public utility distribution substation means a facility whereby a public utility company distributes the utility for consumer use. 
Quasipublic use means a use operated by a private nonprofit educational, religious, recreational, charitable or medical institution, the use having the purpose primarily of serving the general public, and including uses such as churches, private schools, universities, private hospitals and youth centers. 
Recreational vehicle means a camp car, camper, motor home, travel trailer or similar vehicles, with or without motive power, but not a mobile home. 
Residence or residential means a dwelling, group quarters, mobile home or other permanent living accommodations, or features pertaining thereto. 
Retail means the purchase, sale, distribution, delivery or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance, commodity or service, for profit or livelihood, direct to the ultimate consumer. 
Retirement home means a facility, which offers or provides lodging, with or without meals, primarily for aged persons but does not include any facility defined as a community care facility. 
Rummage sale means a sale of donated articles by a church, synagogue, charitable, fraternal or patriotic organization, or public or parochial school. 
Satellite receiving antenna means any dish-shaped antenna designed to receive direct satellite signals. 
Satellite receiving antenna diameter means the diameter of a satellite receiving antenna which shall be measured by the line bisecting the dish-shaped antenna extending from the outer edge on one side to the outer edge on the opposite side. 
School, private means a private institution of learning which is generally supported by tuition, fee, or donation and which offers instruction in areas of academic, vocational and avocational pursuits, but not including a trade school. 
School, public means a publicly owned institution of learning supported primarily by public funds. 
School, trade means a school primarily offering instruction in the technical and/or trade skills such as electronic schools, automotive and aircraft technician's schools and similar establishments. 
(1)  An efficiency dwelling unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(2)  A new manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Secondhand store means any business offering merchandise for sale, where the greater portion of the merchandise is secondhand or used. 
Service means an act or any result of useful labor which does not in itself produce a tangible product. 
Setback means the shortest horizontal distance, measured at ground level and above, between a building or structure and a lot line or other specified line. (For requirements, see the building lines chart in article IV of this chapter.) 
Setback, front yard is defined as the area extending across the full width of the lot between its front lot line and a parallel line 20 feet away from the front lot line. 
Sign means any device used for visual communication or attraction including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, illustration, insignia, symbol, name, figure, painting, character, outline, spectacle, delineation, advertising, billboard, signboard, device, appliance or any other thing of similar nature to advertise or promote the interest of any person or thing, either outdoors or on the face, wall or window of any building, and includes all parts, portions, units and materials composing such, together with the frame, background, support and anchorage therefor. 
Sign, business means any structure, housing, sign, device, figure, statuary, painting, display, message placard, or other contrivance or any part thereof which has been designed, constructed, created, intended or engineered to have a useful life of 15 years or more, and intended or used to advertise, or to provide data or information in the nature of advertising for any purpose to: 
(1)  Designate, identify or indicate the name or business of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is located. 
(2)  Advertise the business conducted, services available or rendered or the goods produced, sold, or available for sale, upon the property where the advertising display has been lawfully erected. 
Sign, canopy means a sign attached to the underside of an awning or canopy. 
Sign, electronic message center means any sign which is controlled by electronic process or remote control in such a manner that different copy changes are instantaneously displayed on the same lamp bank. 
Sign face area means the total surface area computed by drawing intersecting straight lines which form the boundary of the area within which words, letters, figures, symbols or pictures could be placed. 
Sign, flashing or scintillating means any sign which by any method or manner of illumination either flashes on or off, winks or blinks with varying light intensity; shows motion or creates the illusion of motion; or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off. Automatic changing signs such as public service time and temperature signs or electronic message center signs shall not be considered a flashing or scintillating sign. 
Sign, freestanding means any sign supported directly on the ground. This definition includes pole signs, ground signs and other signs detached from a building. 
Sign, identification means a sign in a residential zone, directing attention to the principal use located upon the premises where the sign is displayed. 
Sign, illuminated means any sign designed to emit or brightly reflect artificial light. 
Sign, outdoor advertising (billboard) means any sign directing public attention to a business, profession, product or service that is not a principal business, profession, product or service which is sold, manufactured, conducted or offered on the premises where such a sign is erected or maintained. 
Sign, painted means a sign painted directly on a building and does not include those signs which are painted onto a piece of wood or other material which is then attached to a building. 
Sign, political means a sign stating the name and/or picture of an individual seeking election or appointment of a public office, or pertaining to a forthcoming public election or referendum, or pertaining to or advocating political views or policies. 
Sign, real estate advertising means an on-site sign offering property for sale, lease or rent which may contain the name, address and/or telephone number of a real estate broker or property owner. 
Sign, roof means any sign erected, constructed or placed upon or over a roof of a building and which is wholly or partly supported by any structure located on the roof of such building. 
Sign, revolving means a sign or portion thereof which rotates, moves or appears to move in some manner by mechanical, electrical, natural or other means. 
Sign, seasonal or special event means a sign used for the purpose of promoting a national or state holiday, Fiesta Days, or County Fair. Other special events may be defined by resolution of the city council. 
Sign, supergraphics means a painted design which covers an area greater than ten percent of a wall, building facade, or other structure. A supergraphics is a sign only if it displays or suggests information which identifies or advertises by name or symbol. Otherwise, supergraphics shall be considered an architectural embellishment subject to approval of the planning commission. 
Sign, structure means a structure existing, erected or maintained to serve as a stand, frame or other background for the support or display of signs. This definition is limited to freestanding structures which have the primary purpose of supporting a sign, except that a building or other structure upon which a sign is mounted shall be counted as a sign structure for the purpose of regulating the number of sign structures permitted. 
Sign, subdivision directional means an off-site sign used for the purpose of providing travel directions to a subdivision development. 
Sign, temporary advertising means a sign displayed for a period not exceeding 45 days directing attention to a business, profession, product or service that is a principal business, profession, product or service on the premises where such sign is erected or maintained. 
Sign, wall means any sign posted, painted on, suspended from or otherwise affixed to the wall, parapet wall or roof fascia of any building or structure in an essentially flat position or with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of such wall, parapet wall or roof fascia, provided that the sign shall not extend more than three feet above the roofline or parapet wall of the building. 
Sign, window means a sign, exposed to public view, that is attached to or is intended to be seen in, on or through a window. The display of merchandise shall not be considered a sign. 
Single room occupancy unit (SRO) means any building containing five or more guestrooms or units intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out, to be occupied, or which are occupied, for sleeping purposes by residents, which is also the primary residence of those residents. The individual units shall lack either cooking facilities or individual sanitary facilities, or both. However, for purposes of this definition, an SRO does not include residential care homes, senior housing projects, rooming and boarding houses, hotels and motels, bed and breakfast lodging, extended care facilities or hospitals. 
Site means a project area or lot or portion thereof used or intended to be used for a land use or group of interrelated land uses. 
Site plan means a rendition of a plan to scale, showing all of the uses, yard areas, parking, landscaping, structures and other features existing or proposed on a site. 
Special use permit means an approval of a land use granted and referred to as a special use permit under previous zoning regulations. 
Specified anatomical area shall have the meaning as set out in section 106-1022. 
Specified sexual activities shall have the meaning as set out in section 106-1022. 
Storage means the use of land or structures for the accumulation or holding of goods, merchandise, equipment or material. 
Storage, outdoor means the storage outside of an enclosed building for any purpose other than display. 
Street means a right-of-way open to or intended to be opened to the public primarily for the movement of vehicles and access to adjacent property. This definition does not include an alley or walkway. 
Street, arterial means a street designated as a major or secondary highway on the master plan of highways of the city's general plan. 
Street, collector means a street designated as a collector street on the master plan of highways of the city's general plan. 
Street, primary means a street designated as a primary street on the master plan of highways of the city's general plan. 
Street, private means a street not dedicated for public use. 
Street, public means a street dedicated for public use. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground, except outdoor areas such as walks, paved areas, tennis courts, and similar open recreation areas. This definition includes buildings. 
Structure height means the vertical distance from the average finished grade to the highest part of the structure. 
Supportive housing means housing with no limit on the length of stay and that is occupied by a target population as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 53260(d), as the same may be amended from time to time, and that provides a significant level of onsite and offsite services that assist the supportive housing residents in retaining the housing, improving their health status, maximizing their ability to live, and when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing shall be treated under this chapter as a residential use and shall be allowed as a permitted use in all residential zoning districts. 
Swap meet means the use, rental, or lease of stalls or areas inside or outside of an enclosed building by vendors offering goods or materials for sale or exchange, not including public fairs, or art exhibits. 
Townhouse means attached or semidetached buildings, each containing a single dwelling unit and each located or capable of being located on a separate lot. 
Trailer means a vehicle without motive power which is designed to be drawn by an automotive vehicle to be used for human habitation or for the transporting of personal property. 
Transient means a person who receives lodging at a given location, with or without meals, for a period of not more than 180 days. 
Transitional housing means housing operated under program requirements that call for 1) the termination of any assistance to an existing program recipient and 2) the subsequent recirculation of the assisted residential unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which point in time shall be no less than six months into the future (Health and Safety Code Section 50675.2(h)). Transitional housing may provide, but not be limited to, meals, counseling, and other services as well as common areas for residents. Transitional housing may be provided under all residential housing types. In all cases, Transitional housing shall be treated as a residential use under this chapter and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same residential housing type located in the same zoning district. 
Truck terminal or truck yard means a principal use of land for parking, servicing, repairing or storage of trucks in active use. 
Use means the type of activity, occupancy or purpose for which land, buildings, or facilities are arranged, designed or intended to be occupied or maintained. 
Use, principal means a use which is not subordinate, incidental or accessory to some other use on the same lot or project area. 
Variance means a waiver or conditional waiver of specific regulations of this chapter as applied to a specific case and granted by the city in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter for variances (see division 7 of article II of this chapter). 
Veterinary clinic means any facility providing medical or surgical treatment, clipping, bathing and similar services to dogs, cats and other small animals, but excluding a kennel, animal hospital or other overnight care on a regular basis. 
Veterinary hospital means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. The use of the premises as a kennel or a place where animals or pets are boarded for remuneration may be permitted only when incidental to the principal use. 
Warehouse means a building or portion of a building used primarily for the deposit, storage or safekeeping of goods, regardless of whether the goods are offered for sale. 
Wholesale means sale for resale and not for direct consumption. 
Yard means any open space on the same lot with a building, provided that the open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for encroachments permitted by this chapter. 
Yard, front means the space extending the full width of the lot between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto, and having a distance between them equal to the required front yard depth as prescribed in each zone. 
Yard, rear means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between a building and the rear lot line. 
Yard, required means that portion of a yard which meets the minimum requirements of the zone in which located, and which is in compliance with all other sections of this chapter. 
Yard sale means a yard, garage, patio or similar type sale for the purpose of disposing of used personal property. 
Yard, side means a yard between a building and the nearest side lot line, extending from the rear of the required front yard to the front of the required rear yard. 
Zone means a designation or classification of land as shown on the zoning map within which uniform regulations as provided in this chapter shall apply to the use and development of land. 
Zoning map means that map specifically referred to in this chapter as the zoning map, which shows the locations of all zones. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.010, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1532, §§ 3, 4, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 1547, § 2, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 1486, § 1, 12-15-1997; Ord. No. 1586, § 2, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 1625, § 3, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. U-1666, §§ 5—7, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 1675, § 1, 5-7-2018) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-7. - Continuity of regulations. 
The sections of this chapter, insofar as they are substantially the same as previous provisions of the San Fernando Municipal Code or any other ordinance repealed, amended or superseded upon the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, shall be construed as restatements and continuations of the previous provisions, and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.1, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-8. - Pending proceedings. 
Proceedings initiated under provisions repealed, amended or modified by this chapter, and any vested right, shall not be affected by the enactment of this chapter, except that subsequent proceedings shall conform to the sections of this chapter insofar as possible. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.2, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-9. - Rights under previous approvals. 
(a)  A special use permit or other approval previously granted by the city and which would be eligible for consideration as a variance, conditional use permit or other approval under this chapter shall be deemed to be an approved variance, conditional use permit or other approval, respectively, under this chapter, subject to the terms of such approval. 
(b)  All other special use permits and other approvals or conditions thereof, not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to be nonconforming privileges subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) or (b) of this section, if a special use permit or other approval deemed to be approved pursuant to this section, or any condition thereof, has resulted in a nonconformity, such nonconformity shall be subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.3, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-10. - Previous violation or conviction. 
Any violation of and/or conviction under any provision repealed, amended or modified by this chapter shall be considered as a violation of and/or conviction under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.4, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-11. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter, and the application thereof, to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.5, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-12. - Conflicting regulations. 
Whenever any section of this chapter covers the same subject matter, overlaps, conflicts with or is contradictory to any other law or regulation, that section, law or regulation which is more restrictive or imposes the higher standard shall control, except as otherwise expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.6, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-13. - Private agreements. 
The sections of this chapter are not intended to abrogate, annul or impair any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties, except, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction or higher standard than that required by private agreement, this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.7, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-14. - Nuisances. 
Neither the sections of this chapter nor any approval pursuant thereto authorizes the establishment or maintenance of any use or circumstances which constitutes a public or private nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.8, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-15, 106-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1537, § 12, adopted Oct. 21, 2002, repealed §§ 106-15 and 106-16 which pertained to violations and penalties and continuing violations, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 1270, §§ 30.900.09, 30.900.10, adopted Sept. 30, 1985; Ord. No. 1305, adopted June 15, 1987; and Ord. No. 1497, § 2, adopted Jan. 4, 1999.  
Sec. 106-17. - Citation for infraction. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of state law, the city officers or employees designated by resolution of the city council may issue a citation without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to whom the citation is issued has committed an infraction in such officer's or employee's presence which is a violation of any section of this chapter designated as an infraction. 
(b)  Citations for infractions shall be processed, issued and handled as provided by state law. 
(c)  Any officer or employee making an arrest under the authority of this section shall follow the citation release procedures prescribed in Penal Code §§ 853.5—853.85, or such procedures enacted by the state. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.11, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-18. - Violation as nuisance. 
(a)  Any building set up, erected, built, moved or maintained and/or any use of property contrary to this chapter shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or use of any property contrary to this chapter. 
(b)  All remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.900.12, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-19. - Zoning text amendments. 
(a)  Purpose. The city council may amend this chapter whenever required by public necessity, convenience and general welfare. 
(b)  Initiation. An amendment to this chapter may be initiated in the following manner: 
(1)  A resolution of intention of the planning commission; or 
(2)  A resolution of intention of the city council. 
(c)  Findings. An amendment to this chapter may be adopted by the city council only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner: 
(1)  The proposed amendment is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs of the city's general plan; and 
(2)  The adoption of the proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare. 
(d)  Hearing and notice. Upon initiation of a resolution of intention, and following an investigation, public hearings shall be set and notice of such hearings given in a manner consistent with the requirements contained in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.780, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-20. - Zoning map amendments. 
(a)  Purpose. The city council may amend the city's official zoning map whenever required by public necessity, convenience and general welfare. 
(b)  Initiation. An amendment to the official zoning map may be initiated in the following manner: 
(1)  A resolution of intention of the planning commission; 
(2)  A resolution of intention of the city council; or 
(3)  An application from any other person or agency pursuant to division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Findings. An amendment to the official zoning map may be adopted by the city council only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner: 
(1)  The proposed amendment is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs of the city's general plan; and 
(2)  The adoption of the proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare. 
(d)  Hearing and notice. Upon receipt in proper form of a zoning map amendment application or initiation of a resolution of intention and following an investigation, public hearings shall be set and notice of such hearings given in a manner consistent with the requirements contained in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.770, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-21—106-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 106-46—106-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 106-71. - Purpose. 
This division is intended to specify procedures for public hearings and to provide recourse if any person is aggrieved by any requirement, decision or determination made by the director or the planning commission in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.790, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-72. - Notice of hearing. 
Not less than ten days before the date of a public hearing held pursuant to this chapter, public notice shall be given of such hearing in the following manner: 
(1)  A public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Such notice shall state the identity of the hearing body or officer; the nature of the request; the location of the property; and the date, time and place of the scheduled hearing. 
(2)  A public notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the owners of the property within a radius of 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the latest assessment roll of the county assessor. Such notice shall state the nature of the request, the location of the property, and the time and place of the scheduled hearing. 
(3)  If the number of owners to whom notice would be sent pursuant to subsection (2) of this section is greater than 1,000, notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in the newspaper having the greatest circulation within the area affected by the proposed action. Such advertisement or mailing insert shall state the nature of the request, the location of the property, and the time and place of the scheduled hearing. 
(4)  The property which is the subject of a public hearing shall be posted with a sign containing notice of such hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing, of a design prescribed by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.791, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 3-18-2002)  
Sec. 106-73. - Hearing procedure. 
Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held at the time and place for which notice has been given as required in this chapter. A brief summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent file of the case. Any such hearings may be continued provided that, prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the chairperson announces the time and place to which such hearings will be continued. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.792, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-74. - Notice of decision. 
Within 21 days after a decision has been made regarding an application for which a public hearing is required pursuant to this chapter, notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.793, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-75. - Effective dates. 
Under this chapter, variances, modifications, conditional use permits, and planned development permits shall become effective ten days following the approval by the appropriate review authority. Zoning map amendments and zoning text amendments shall become effective 30 days following adoption by the city council. No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for approval of a permit until and unless the approval shall have become final. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.796, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-76. - Appeal of action. 
Any person aggrieved by any determination, interpretation, decision, judgment or similar action taken by the director or department staff under this chapter may appeal such action to the planning commission. Any person aggrieved in a similar manner by any action taken by the commission may appeal such action to the city council. The city council may appeal any action taken by the commission to the city council by majority vote of a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.797, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-77. - Filing of appeals. 
Appeals made pursuant to this chapter shall be addressed to the appellate body on a form prescribed by such body, and shall state the basis of the appeal. An appeal of an action by the director shall be filed with the planning department within ten days following the date of action for which an appeal is made. An appeal of a planning commission decision shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within ten days following the date of action for which an appeal is made. Appeals shall be accompanied by the filing fee as specified by city council. The filing fee shall be waived for an appeal by the city council of the commission action pursuant to section 106-76. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.798, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-78. - Notice of appeal hearings. 
Public notice of an appeal hearing held pursuant to this chapter shall conform to the manner in which the original notice was given. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.799, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-79. - Action of council after hearing. 
The council may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the application and shall render its decision by resolution within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing held pursuant to this chapter. The resolution shall contain the council's findings and shall require the affirmative votes of at least three councilmembers if the planning commission's recommendation or deci sion is modified or reversed. The resolution shall require a simple majority vote of a quorum if the planning commission recommendation or decision is upheld in its entirety. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.800, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-80. - Effective date of appealed actions. 
Under this chapter, an action of the director appealed to the commission shall not become effective unless and until approved by the commission. An action of the commission appealed to the council shall not become effective unless and until approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.801, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-81. - Reapplication. 
Under this chapter, an application or appeal may be denied with prejudice. If such denial becomes final, no further application for the denial request shall be filed in the ensuing 12 months, except as otherwise specified at the time of denial. An application may be denied with prejudice on the grounds that two or more similar applications have been denied in the past two years, or that another good cause exists for limiting the refiling of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.802, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-82—106-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 106-111. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the site plan review procedure is to enable the director to check development proposals for conformity with the sections of this chapter in a manner that is also consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plans, and adopted design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.745, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1585, §§ 1, 2, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 106-112. - Procedure. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit copies of the site plan to the director. The number of copies required shall be as determined by the director. The applicant shall be required to pay appropriate fees as determined by city council resolution for processing site plan review applications. 
(b)  The site plan shall be reviewed by the director for conformity with sections of this chapter, the general plan, any applicable specific plans, and adopted design guidelines. The plans may be approved and signed by the director which approval stipulates that the development as shown, with any changes noted by the director, conforms to the development regulations of the zone. 
(c)  Certain development regulations in the various zones are subject to commission review and approval. In these instances the site plan review application shall be submitted to the commission and the items in question shall be placed on the agenda. The commission may approve, disapprove or approve the proposed development with conditions on the site plan review application. The commission's findings shall be noted on the plans and recorded in the commission minutes. 
(d)  No building permit shall be issued until the site plan review application has been approved in accordance with this section, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the development complies with the approved site plan review and all conditions attached thereto. 
(e)  The applicant may appeal the decision of the director or the planning commission pursuant to section 106-76. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.745.1, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1585, §§ 1, 2, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 106-113. - Contents of site plan. 
The site plan shall indicate clearly and with full dimensions the following information, except insofar as waived by the director: 
(1)  Lot dimensions, including lot size, setbacks, buildings and structures. 
(2)  All buildings and structures, including location, size, height, proposed use, and location of doors. 
(3)  Yards and space between buildings, including required setbacks, common area, and usable open space. 
(4)  Walls, fences and landscaping, including location, height, and materials. 
(5)  Off-street parking, including location, dimensions of parking area, number of spaces, arrangement of spaces, and internal circulation pattern. 
(6)  Access, including pedestrian, vehicular, service; and definitions of all points of ingress and egress. 
(7)  Signs, including location, size, height, and method of illumination. 
(8)  Loading areas, including location, dimensions, number of spaces, internal circulation and access from public streets. 
(9)  Lighting, including general nature, location and hooding devices. 
(10)  Proposed street dedications and improvements. 
(11)  Landscaping, if required by this chapter. 
(12)  Outdoor storage and activities if permitted in the zone, including type, location and height of screening devices. 
(13)  Drainage and grading plan. 
(14)  Waste disposal facilities. 
(15)  Location of utility poles, including method of undergrounding utilities, when applicable. 
(16)  Such other data as may be required to assist the director to act on the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.745.2, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1585, §§ 1, 2, 12-1-2008)  
Secs. 106-114—106-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 106-141. - Purpose. 
Under this chapter, conditional uses are those uses which have a special impact or uniqueness such that their effect on the surrounding environment cannot be determined in advance of the use being proposed for a particular location. At the time of application, a review of the location, design, configuration and impact of the proposed use shall be conducted by comparing such use to fixed and established standards. This review shall determine whether the proposed use should be permitted by weighing the public need for and the benefit to be derived from the use against the impact which it may cause. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.750, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-142. - Application. 
Application for a conditional use permit shall be filed according to division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.752, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-143. - Hearing and notice. 
Upon receipt in proper form of a conditional use permit application, a public hearing shall be set, and notice of such hearing given in a manner consistent with the requirements contained in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.753, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-144. - Investigation. 
An investigation of the facts for each conditional use permit application shall be made by members of the planning and preservation commission or by its staff to ensure that the action on each application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.754, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1595, § 4, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-145. - Findings. 
(a)  Following a public hearing on the conditional use permit application, the planning and preservation commission shall record its decision in writing and shall recite therein the findings of fact upon which it bases its decision. 
(b)  The commission may approve and/or modify a conditional use permit application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only after it makes all of the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The proposed use is one conditionally permitted within the subject zone and complies with all of the applicable sections of this chapter. 
(2)  The proposed use would not impair the integrity and character of the zone in which it is to be located. 
(3)  The subject site is physically suitable for the type of land use being proposed. 
(4)  The proposed use is compatible with the land uses presently on the subject property. 
(5)  The proposed use would be compatible with existing and future land uses within the zone and the general area in which the proposed use is to be located. 
(6)  There would be adequate provisions for water, sanitation, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed use would not be detrimental to public health and safety. 
(7)  There would be adequate provisions for public access to serve the subject proposal. 
(8)  The proposed use would be appropriate in light of an established need for the use at the proposed location. 
(9)  The proposed use is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs of the city's general plan. 
(10)  The proposed use would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.755, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1595, § 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-146. - Use of property before final decision. 
No permits shall be issued for any use involved in an application for approval of a conditional use permit unless and until the conditional use permit shall have become final, which includes payment of applicable fees for development and signing a statement accepting the conditions of approval included in the approved conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.756, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1595, § 6, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-147. - Compliance with conditions of approval. 
To ensure continued compliance with this chapter, each approved conditional use permit shall include conditions of project approval that must be complied with in their entirety for the life of the project or until the use approved under the conditional use permit is amended or revoked pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.757, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1595, § 7, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-148. - Revocation. 
(a)  The planning and preservation commission may, on its own motion, or shall, upon direction of the city council, hear matters pertaining to revocation of conditional use permits granted under or pursuant to this chapter. The planning and preservation commission shall hold a public hearing regarding such matters. Notice of such hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall be served in writing either in person or by registered mail on the owner of the property for which such conditional use permit was granted at least ten days prior to such public hearing. 
(b)  A conditional use permit may be revoked if the planning and preservation commission finds that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Circumstances have changed to such a degree that one or more of the findings of fact contained in section 106-145 or, if applicable, section 106-178, can no longer be made. 
(2)  The conditional use permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner. 
(3)  The use for which the conditional use permit was granted has ceased or was suspended for six or more successive calendar months. 
(4)  One or more of the conditions of the conditional use permit have not been complied with. 
(5)  The use has become detrimental to health, public welfare or safety and has been deemed to be a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.758, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1595, § 8, 1-19-2010)  
Secs. 106-149—106-175. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - On-Site and Off-Site Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 
 
Sec. 106-176. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this subdivision is to preserve a healthy environment for residents and businesses by establishing a set of consistent standards for the safe operation of business establishments that include the sale of alcoholic beverages. The city recognizes the need to revitalize the city's commercial districts by promoting hospitality, entertainment, recreation and related business that may include the sale of alcoholic beverages as an important part of their business operation. The city also recognizes that alcohol abuse can have an adverse impact on the environment that not only jeopardizes the city's long term redevelopment strategies for revitalization of the commercial districts but can also seriously affect the public health, safety, and general welfare in the surrounding areas, including the residential neighborhoods. 
The intent of this subdivision is to address and prevent alcohol-related impacts, including drunk driving, public inebriation, littering, loitering, obstruction of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, harassment of passerbys, encouragement of crime, defacement of buildings or structures, graffiti, excessive noise and other similar zoning problems and public nuisance activity. 
The following provisions shall apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages for onsite or offsite consumption, as applicable, and are in addition to the provisions set forth in sections 106-141 through 106-148. 
(Ord. No. 1595, §§ 9, 10, 1-19-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1595, §§ 9, 10, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed the former § 106-176 and enacted a new § 106-176 as set out herein. The former § 106-176 pertained to supplemental provisions and derived from Ord. No. 1270, § 30.759.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 4-19-1993.  
Sec. 106-177. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms, and phrases set forth in the following sections shall have the following meanings and constructions, except where used in a context which clearly indicates a different meaning or construction: 
Alcoholic beverage means a fermented or distilled beverage including alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances, and the sale of which would require a license from the department of alcoholic beverage control. 
Alcoholic license means that license granted by the state which authorizes the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Bona fide public eating place means a place which is regularly and in a bona fide manner used and kept open for the serving of meals to guests for compensation and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, containing conveniences for cooking an assortment of foods which may be required for ordinary meals, the kitchen of which must be kept in a sanitary condition with the proper amount of refrigeration for keeping of food on the premises and must comply with all the regulations of the local department of health. Bona fide public eating places shall maintain incidental sale of alcoholic beverages only, and at least one full time cook engaged by the business enterprise to prepare meals for guests on the premises during all permitted hours of operation. "Meals" means the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day; the service of such food and victuals only as sandwiches or salads shall not be deemed a compliance with this requirement. "Guests" shall mean persons who, during the hours when meals are regularly served therein, come to a bona fide public eating place for the purpose of obtaining, and actually ordering and obtaining at such time, in good faith, a meal therein. 
Department of alcoholic beverage control or ABC means the California State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
Drug store means any business establishment that is characterized primarily by the filing of prescription drugs and the sale of drugs, medical devices and supplies and non-prescriptive medicine, but where non-medical products such as cards, candy and cosmetics are also sold, with no more than ten percent of the gross floor area devoted to the display and storage of alcoholic beverages. 
Fast food restaurant means a restaurant that specializes in food that can be prepared and served quickly and that is designed for ready availability, use, or consumption, with guests ordering food from a menu board, and without the serving of food to tables by restaurant employees. A fast food restaurant may also have a walk-up or drive-through window. A fast food restaurant is not considered a "bona fide public eating place" for the purposes of this chapter. 
Grocery store or supermarket means any business establishment primarily selling food products, including meats, produce, and dairy products for home preparation and consumption, household merchandise, and/or prescription drugs to the public, with no more than ten percent of the gross floor area devoted to the display and storage of alcoholic beverages. 
Incidental sale of alcoholic beverages means the sale of non-alcoholic beverages and other products make up no less than 51 percent of the total sales on an annual basis, measured by gross receipts. 
Liquor store means any business establishment selling alcoholic beverages including beer, wine, liquor, and distilled spirits, for offsite consumption, which is regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC), and which is not a grocery store, specialty food store, supermarket or drug store. 
On-sale general license means that alcoholic license which authorizes the sale of beer, wine, and distilled spirits for consumption on the premises where sold. 
On-sale beer and wine license means that alcoholic license which authorizes the sale of beer or wine for consumption on the premises where sold. 
On-sale beer license means that alcoholic license which authorizes the sale of beer for consumption on the premises where sold. 
On-sale CUP means a conditional use permit issued to allow a use which operates under an on-sale general license, an on-sale beer and wine license, or an on-sale beer license; it shall not include operations under club licenses. 
On-sale outlet means a retail business operating under an on-sale alcoholic license including, but not limited to, restaurants (excluding fast food restaurants), banquet halls, ballrooms, piano bars, billiard and/or game parlors, night clubs, and clubs, including veteran clubs or other clubs from a nationally recognized fraternal order. 
Off-sale general license means that alcoholic license which authorizes the sale of beer, wine, and distilled spirits for consumption off the premises where sold. 
Off-sale beer and wine license means that alcoholic license which authorizes the sale of beer and wine for consumption off the premises where sold. 
Off-sale CUP means a conditional use permit issued to allow a use which operates under an off-sale general or off-sale beer and wine license. 
Off-sale outlet means a retail business operating under an off-sale alcoholic license including, but not limited to, grocery stores, specialty food stores, supermarkets, drugstores, and liquor stores. 
Club license means that alcoholic license issued to a bona fide club which authorizes the sale of alcoholic beverages to club members and their guests only for consumption on club premises. "Club" means any chapter, lodge, or other local unit of an American National Fraternal Organization which has as the owner, lessee, or occupant thereof operated an establishment for fraternal purposes. An American National Fraternal Organization as used in this subdivision shall actively operate in not less than 20 states of the union and have not less than 175 local units in those 20 states, and shall have been in active continuous existence for not less than 20 years. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages is incidental to the sale of other products when the sale of products other than alcoholic beverages on an annual basis, measured by gross receipts, constitutes no less than 80 percent of the total sales. 
Self- service checkout system means a point-of-sale system with limited or no assistance from an employee or agent of the establishment. A "point of sale" system means any computer or electronic system used by a retail establishment such as, but not limited to, universal product code scanners, price lookup codes, or an electronic price lookup system as a means for determining the price of the item being purchased by a consumer. 
Specialty food store means any business establishment selling ethnic, imported, and/or gourmet food products including such things as cheeses, meats, baked goods, condiments, seasoning and novelty food and beverages, with no more than ten percent of the gross floor area devoted to the display and storage of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.759.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 4-19-1993; Ord. No. 1595, §§ 11—13, 1-19-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-178. - Supplemental findings for off-sale and on-sale CUPs. 
(a)  In addition to those findings set forth in section 106-145, applications for conditional use permits involving any use that involves the sale, serving, and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall require the planning and preservation commission to make the following findings: 
(1)  That the existing or proposed use does not or will not encourage or intensify crime within the reporting district that it is located; 
(2)  That the existing or proposed use does not or will not adversely impact any residential use, church, hospital, educational institution, day care facility, park, or library within the surrounding area; 
(3)  That the distance separation requirements in section 106-179 are met; 
(4)  If required by section 106-180, that the existing or proposed use will serve a public convenience or necessity, as defined in section 106-180. 
(Ord. No. 1595, §§ 14, 15, 1-19-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1595, §§ 14, 15, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed the former § 106-178 and enacted a new § 106-178 as set out herein. The former § 106-178 pertained to off-sale CUPs and derived from Ord. No. 1270, § 30.759.03, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 4-19-1993.  
Sec. 106-179. - Conditional use permit distance separation. 
(a)  The planning and preservation commission may approve an application for a conditional use permit to allow for the sale of alcoholic beverages only if it finds that the proposed use meets the following applicable distance separation requirements: 
(1)  A minimum 600 feet from any residential use, church or other place of worship, hospital, educational institution, nursery school, day camp, day care center, public park, or playground, as measured from the closest property line of each use; 
(2)  A minimum 600 feet from similar off-sale or on-sale outlets, as applicable. 
(b)  In addition, the planning and preservation commission may approve an application for a conditional use permit to allow for the sale of alcoholic beverages at a liquor store only if it finds that the proposed use meets the following applicable distance separation requirements: 
(1)  A minimum 1,000 feet from any residential use, church or other place of worship, hospital educational institution, nursery school, day camp, day care center, public park, or playground as measured from the closest property line of each use; 
(2)  A minimum 1,000 feet from another liquor store. 
(c)  Exceptions. The following uses have no distance separation requirements: 
(1)  Bona fide public eating places. 
(2)  Drug stores, grocery stores, supermarkets, or specialty food stores. 
(3)  Businesses manufacturing or wholesaling alcoholic beverages where permitted or conditionally permitted within the industrial zones. 
(Ord. No. 1595, §§ 16, 17, 1-19-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1595, §§ 16, 17, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed the former § 106-179 and enacted a new § 106-179 as set out herein. The former § 106-179 pertained to exemptions for new major retail commercial centers and derived from Ord. No. 1270, § 30.759.04, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 4-19-1993.  
Sec. 106-180. - Factors for determining public convenience or necessity. 
(a)  Whenever a request for a determination of public convenience or necessity in connection with the issuance of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the ABC is submitted to the city as allowed under Business and Professions Code § 23958.4, as the same may be amended from time to time, the planning and preservation commission, in making that determination, shall consider the following: 
(1)  Whether the sale of alcoholic beverages as part of the proposed use would serve a niche market in the city that would not otherwise be filled by other existing businesses with alcoholic beverage licenses in the surrounding area; 
(2)  The extent to which the proposed use enhances the convenience of purchasing alcoholic beverages in conjunction with other specialty food sales or services; 
(3)  The extent to which the proposed use in conjunction with the redevelopment of an existing or proposed building or structure will enhance the architectural character at the location of the proposed use and the surrounding area; 
(4)  The manner in which the proposed use is to be conducted (special or unique features), including the extent to which the proposed use will include training of employees through ABC or an authorized third party to assure well-trained staff knowledgeable in the serving of alcoholic beverages safely, responsibly, and legally as well as in order to prevent illicit drug activity at the location of the proposed use; 
(5)  The extent to which the proposed use compliments uses in the surrounding area; 
(6)  The extent to which the proposed use, location, and/or operator has a history or law enforcement problems; 
(7)  The crime rate in the reporting district as compared to neighboring districts in the city and/or adjacent cities; 
(8)  The number of alcohol-related police calls for service, crimes or arrests in the reporting district and adjacent districts within the city. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed or construed as requiring the planning and preservation commission to issue a determination of public convenience or necessity under this subsection, or as conferring upon the applicant a right to have a determination of public convenience or necessity. 
(Ord. No. 1595, §§ 18, 19, 1-19-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1595, §§ 18, 19, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed the former § 106-180 and enacted a new § 106-180 as set out herein. The former § 106-180 pertained to On-sale CUPs and derived from Ord. No. 1270, § 30.759.05, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 4-19-1993.  
Sec. 106-181. - Exempted uses. 
The following uses are exempt from the requirements of section 106-178: 
(1)  Florist shops, provided the sale of alcoholic beverages in the premises are an incidental part of floral arrangements; 
(2)  Catering businesses with a required license from ABC that is maintained in good standing; 
(3)  Temporary alcohol sales as part of a special event that is catered by an ABC-licensed business not otherwise associated with an on-sale or off-sale CUP, subject to approval by the chief planning official or his or her designee; 
(4)  Clubs with a club license, except that rental of halls or other onsite facilities for private events are not exempt and would require approval of an on-sale CUP; and 
(5)  Use that is a legally non-conforming use for the sale of alcoholic beverages prior to the enactment of this section, so long as it maintains an ABC license in good standing and is in compliance with all prior conditions of approval required as part of any city issued permits. 
(Ord. No. 1595, §§ 20, 21, 1-19-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1595, §§ 21, 22, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed the former § 106-181 and enacted a new § 106-181 as set out herein. The former § 106-181 pertained to findings for club license CUPs and derived from Ord. No. 1270, § 30.759.06, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 4-19-1993.  
Sec. 106-182. - Standard conditions. 
(a)  In addition to those conditions of approval which the planning and preservation commission may otherwise impose, all off-sale CUPs shall be subject to the following standard conditions: 
(1)  No beer or wine shall be displayed within five feet of the cash register or the front door unless such item is in a permanently affixed cooler. 
(2)  No display or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from an ice tub. An "ice tub" is a vessel filed with ice that displays single servings of alcoholic beverages for customer self-service. 
(3)  No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a walk-up or drive-in window. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages and non-alcoholic beverages shall be stocked and displayed separately. 
(5)  The sales area shall be located so that the clerk and customer are fully visible from the street at the time of the sales transaction. 
(6)  The cash register and sales area shall be illuminated so as to provide clear observation for law enforcement surveillance. 
(7)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be consumed on the premises. 
(8)  No off-sale outlet selling alcohol may use a self-service checkout system. 
(9)  Interior and exterior signs stating the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises is prohibited by law shall be conspicuously posted onsite. 
(b)  In addition to those conditions of approval which the planning and preservation commission may otherwise impose, all on-sale CUPs shall be subject to the following standard conditions: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted to be consumed in the parking area or other exterior areas of the premises, except for designated outdoor areas approved as part of the CUP application; 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption off the premises; 
(3)  The hours of operation, including deliveries to the proposed establishment, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission as part of the CUP application in order to ensure compatibility with the surrounding area; 
(4)  All employees who serve or sell alcoholic beverages shall successfully complete a responsible beverage service training program that meets the requirements of ABC. Records of such training shall be maintained on the premises and made available to the police department personnel upon request; 
(c)  In addition to those conditions of approval which the planning and preservation commission may otherwise impose, both off-sale and on-sale CUPs shall be subject to all of the following standard conditions: 
(1)  Loitering in the public right-of-way, parking area and in front of adjacent properties is prohibited. 
(2)  Windows shall comply with the city's sign regulations in order to provide clear and unobstructed view of the cash register and sales area from the parking lot and street. Exceptions for on-sale outlets may be reviewed and approved by the chief planning official. 
(3)  The following signs shall be conspicuously posted onsite: 
Exterior signs referencing Penal Code § 602.1. Such signs shall be clearly visible from the establishment's parking area and shall include the police department's phone number. 
An interior sign in English and Spanish stating: "We ID everyone under 26 years of age for alcohol sales" with minimum dimensions of eight inches by 11 inches. 
(4)  Exterior public telephones that permit incoming calls shall not be located on the premises. 
(5)  Electronic games, including video games, shall not be located on the premises. 
(6)  Exterior lighting of the parking area shall provide adequate lighting for patrons while not producing glare or light spillover disturbing surrounding residential or commercial areas. 
(7)  A security camera system approved by the police department shall be installed on the premises and shall be maintained in proper working order at all times. The security camera system shall be subject to inspection by the police department. The system must be capable of producing retrievable images on film or tape that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. The video or digital recordings generated by the system shall be maintained for a period of 30 days. 
(8)  The establishment shall implement preventive architectural design features as approved by the chief of police and the chief planning official in order to maintain a secure site by controlling access to the facility, open sight lines, adequate lighting levels, ambient noise levels and circulation patterns. 
(9)  Special security measures such as security guards, door monitors, and burglar alarms systems may be required as a condition of approval with final determination made by the chief of police and the chief planning official on a case-by-case basis. 
(10)  Litter and trash receptacles shall be located at convenient locations both inside and outside the establishment, and trash and debris shall be removed on a daily basis. 
(11)  The exterior of the establishment, including all signs, accessory buildings and structures shall be maintained free of litter and graffiti at all times. All graffiti shall be removed from the premises within 24 hours of its discovery. 
(12)  With regard to those CUP applications that are approved based in part upon the fact that alcohol sales on the premises are incidental to the sale of other products, proof satisfactory to the chief planning official shall be annually submitted to show that the sale of alcohol has remained incidental to the sale of other products. 
(13)  Within 30 days of approval of the CUP, applicant shall certify his or her acceptance of the conditions placed on the approval by signing a statement that he or she accepts and shall be bound by all of the conditions. 
(14)  Violation of, or noncompliance with, any of the conditions shall constitute grounds for revocation of the CUP. 
(15)  Expansion or enlargement of the business premises over the life of the structure or the use shall be subject to the CUP approval process. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.759.07, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 4-19-1993; Ord. No. 1595, §§ 22, 23, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-183. - CUP revocation. 
In addition to the conditions justifying revocation under section 106-148, an off-sale or on-sale CUP may be revoked under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  Upon the issuance of, and conviction for, three zoning violation citations; 
(b)  Upon the revocation of the alcoholic license by ABC; 
(c)  Upon any two disciplinary actions by ABC in the form of a fine or suspension of the alcoholic license, during the term of the CUP; or 
(d)  Where conditions and activities on and/or adjacent to an off-sale or on-sale outlet, as defined herein, interfere with the quiet enjoyment of life and property in the neighborhood, or are or tend to be, injurious to health and safety of persons in the neighborhood. These include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Excessive noise, noxious smells or fumes, loitering, littering, curfew violations, disturbing the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, public urination, public vandalism, graffiti, lewd conduct, gambling, harassment of passersby, prostitution, sale of stolen merchandise, illegal parking, traffic violations, theft, assaults, batteries; 
(2)  Illegal sale, manufacture, storing, possession, distribution of alcoholic beverages; or 
(3)  Police detention, citation, and/or arrests for these or any other unlawful activity attributed to the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages declared by the city to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1595, § 24, 1-19-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1595, § 24, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed the former § 106-183 and enacted a new § 106-183 as set out herein. The former § 106-183 pertained to CUP administration and derived from Ord. No. 1270, § 30.759.08, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 4-19-1993.  
Secs. 106-184—106-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MODIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 106-211. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minor accommodations to prescribed development standards, and to establish procedure that may permit the granting of a requested modification. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.760A, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-212. - Development standards subject to modification. 
Upon application by a property owner, modifications to the following development standards may be granted as provided within this chapter. They are as follows: 
(1)  Sections 106-696, 106-697 and 106-698 regarding minimum setback dimensions. The director may reduce front and rear setback requirements a maximum of ten percent for lots having a depth greater than 100 feet and a maximum of two feet (minimum setback three feet) for side yards for lots having a width greater than 50 feet if the director finds that the impact of the setback reduction will be in keeping with the general overall surrounding environment. 
(2)  Subsection 106-700(c) regarding exceptions to setback depths. The director may use the average setback depth of the closest conforming use when determining the building line setback depth for a vacant parcel situated between conforming and nonconforming uses abutting the same street if the director finds that the proposed development activity furthers the goals of the land use element of the general plan and does not adversely affect the air, light and fire safety of the adjoining nonconforming use. 
(3)  Subsection 106-829(1) regarding minimum parking stall dimensions for covered parking space for residential uses. The director may reduce the minimum parking stall length and width size for residential use by ten percent if the director finds that reduction in dimensional size allows adequate area for ingress and egress circulation movement to the covered space. 
(4)  Section 106-966 regarding landscaping standards for property zoned residential. The director may reduce the front yard landscaping requirement, which requires 50 percent front yard coverage with live landscaping, if the director finds that the dimensions of the site do not provide adequate space to accommodate circulation access to the covered off-street parking facility and if all unpaved surface areas will be adequately landscape maintained. 
(5)  Sections 106-968 and 106-969 regarding commercial and industrial development standards pertaining to lot coverage, landscaping, parking and loading, and signs. The director may make the following accommodations if alternative project design solutions demonstrate the need for minor adjustments and if the solution proposal will be compatible to the character of the surrounding development. Allowable accommodations are as follows: 
a.  Lot coverage: a maximum increase of five percent. 
b.  Landscaping: a maximum one-percent reduction from landscaping requirement permitting nine percent in commercial zones and 14 percent in industrial zones. 
c.  Parking and loading: a maximum five-percent reduction from parking space requirements and from dimensional area requirements for off-street loading space provided that the reduction will result in an enhanced level of vehicular circulation and safety. 
d.  Signs: a maximum increase of one linear foot in height pertaining to sign height requirements and a maximum increase of five square feet pertaining to sign area requirements. 
(6)  Section 106-252 pertaining to construction or reconstruction of nonconforming structures. The director, notwithstanding sections 106-247 and 106-252, may permit replacement of an existing structure along the same building footprint as the then-existing structure if the director finds the replacement construction or reconstruction proposal will be substantially similar to the structure being replaced, furthers the development requirements of the zone, restores the structure to a safe condition and not detrimental to the character of the surrounding properties, and is the only feasible means to achieve a workable solution. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.761A, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-213. - Approval and referral authority. 
Unless otherwise specified, the approval authority for a modification from this chapter shall be the director. If, in the opinion of the director, an application requires review by a superior body, the director may refer such application to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.762A, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-214. - Notice. 
(a)  A notice of application for a modification from this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject site within three days after application for a modification has been deemed complete and accepted by the director. Such notice shall be readable from a distance of 60 feet. Within five days of posting, the applicant for a modification shall submit an affidavit with the city certifying such notice has been posted in compliance with the section. 
(b)  A notice of intended decision regarding an application for a modification shall be mailed to all property owners abutting the exterior boundaries of the project site at least ten days prior to any decision rendered by the director. 
(c)  Upon rendering a decision on a proposed modification, the deciding authority shall cause a notice of decision to be mailed in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The director shall notify the city council and planning commission, in writing, on a monthly basis of the modification granted during that period. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.763A, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-215. - Restrictions and conditions. 
In granting a modification to this chapter, the deciding authority may impose such restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary or proper to benefit the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.764A, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-216. - Appeals from decisions. 
Under this chapter, the applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision on a modification made by the director may appeal such decision to the planning commission. The applicant or any person aggrieved in a similar matter by any action taken by the commission may appeal such decision to the city council. Appeals shall be filed as provided in section 106-77. If appealed, the decision by the deciding authority shall be stayed pending the outcome of such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.765A, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-217—106-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 
 
Sec. 106-246. - Intent and purpose. 
Within the zones established by this chapter or amendments that may be adopted, there exist or will exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or amendment of this chapter, but which no longer comply. The intent of this division is to permit those nonconformities to continue until they are removed or required to be terminated, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses and structures are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses, structures and standards in the zones involved, and it is intended that they shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone, except as may be expressly permitted in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-247. - Adding new uses and structures. 
When a nonconforming use or structure exists on any lot or parcel of land, no new use or structure may be established or built on such land unless the required lot area, dimensions, yards and open spaces are provided for each existing and proposed use, structure and improvement. These uses shall be so located on the lot or parcel of land that, if it is divided into smaller lots or parcels, each of the parcels will contain the area, dimensions, yards and open space required and the number and location of structures on each will comply with the requirements of this chapter when considered as a separate lot or parcel. When there is the intent to divide or subdivide, additional conforming structures shall not be permitted until after the parcel has been divided or subdivided in accordance with law. Access acceptable to the city shall be provided to all lots where such division is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.1, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-248. - Change to another nonconforming use. 
The nonconforming use of a structure or land shall not be changed to another nonconforming use except as expressly permitted in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.2, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-249. - Development of nonconforming land. 
In any residential zone a dwelling and accessory buildings of the type permitted in such zone may be erected on any single lot lawfully created and of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or amendment of this chapter, notwithstanding limitations on lot area, width or depth imposed by other sections of this chapter or the ordinance. Yard and outdoor living and open space requirements shall be complied with unless waived by variance. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.3, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-250. - Continuation of nonconforming use of land. 
A lawful use of land made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as adopted or amended may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following: 
(1)  Such use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or applicable amendment. 
(2)  Such use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or applicable amendment. 
(3)  If such use ceases for any reason for a period of more than six consecutive calendar months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the requirements of this chapter for the zone in which it is located. 
(4)  If provision is made for the termination of such use, any use of such land after termination shall conform to the requirements of this chapter for the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.4, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-251. - Continuation of nonconforming use of structure. 
A lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination, under the terms of this chapter as adopted or amended may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the zone in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zone in which it is located and except as specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or at the time of amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the planning commission, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is no more detrimental to the zone than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the commission may require appropriate conditions and safeguards. 
(4)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(5)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive calendar months, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
(6)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall thereafter compel the discontinuance of the nonconforming use of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection means damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure immediately prior to destruction. 
(7)  When a nonconforming use of a structure is replaced by a more restrictive nonconforming use, the occupancy may not thereafter revert to a less restrictive use. 
(8)  If provision is made for the termination date of such use, any use of such land after termination shall conform to the requirements of this chapter for the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.5, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-252. - Continuation of nonconforming structures. 
(a)  Any structure made nonconforming by this chapter as adopted or amended may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following: 
(1)  Such structure may not be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, except as specifically provided for by this chapter. 
(2)  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost immediately prior to destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with this chapter. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is located. 
(4)  Such structure may be repaired provided: 
a.  The work consists only of the repair and replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing; 
b.  Where the aggregate costs do not exceed the current assessed value of the improvements; and 
c.  Where the cubic space within the structure as it existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter is not increased. 
(5)  If provision is made for the termination of such structure or its nonconforming characteristics, any use of such land after the termination date shall conform to the requirements of this chapter for the zone in which it is located. 
(6)  An existing nonconforming dwelling in a C-1 or C-2 zone destroyed more than 50 percent of its replacement cost immediately prior to destruction may be rebuilt on the same building footprint, provided that: 
a.  The property is 5,000 square feet or less in size, and could not feasibly be developed separately as a commercial facility. 
b.  The property fronts on a residential street, and not along a commercial thoroughfare. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this section or any other subsection of this section, a nonconforming structure shall not be changed in its utilization to another use in any land use zone until the structure meets all applicable requirements for new construction for the use under the various ordinances and Code provisions of this city then in effect, including but not limited to building and fire code provisions and property development standards for the particular zone. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any city or state official charged with protecting the public health or safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.6, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-253. - Cost of replacement. 
In the absence of proof to the contrary, replacement cost as used in this division shall mean the assessed value of the structure at the time of the destruction. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.7, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-254. - Completion of building. 
(a)  Any structure for which a valid building permit has been granted prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or amendment to this chapter, as the case may be, and the actual construction of which has been started prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or amendment to this chapter may be completed in accordance with the plans and specifications on file in the building department, even though not conforming with this chapter or amendments thereto, as the case may be, provided: 
(1)  The construction of proposed use of the structure is not in violation of any other ordinance or law; and 
(2)  Work on construction of the structure is diligently carried on and completed within a reasonable time. 
(b)  Actual construction shall be deemed to have started when construction materials have been placed in permanent position and have been permanently fastened. Excavation which has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding shall be deemed to be actual construction if carried on diligently to and including rebuilding. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.8, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-255. - Additions and alterations to nonconforming public use. 
Under this chapter, additions, extensions and alterations may be made to any nonconforming public use, including but not limited to schools, parks, libraries and fire stations, if the addition, extension or alteration does not: 
(1)  Extend beyond the boundaries of the site in existence when the use became nonconforming; and 
(2)  Infringe upon any off-street parking required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.9, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-256. - Nonconforming off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(a)  Existing conforming buildings whose off-street parking and loading facilities do not conform to this chapter may be expanded or facilities added, provided the requirements for off-street parking and loading space shall have been complied with for those facilities which are added and enlarged. In the central business district, as defined in the city's general plan, any legal conforming use may occupy a vacant or partially vacant building without regard to the amount of parking available, except that banks, savings and loans and other lending institutions must obtain conditional use permit approval by the planning commission to occupy a building with less parking than required by section 106-822, pertaining to parking spaces required. In addition, any existing commercial building may be utilized to the fullest extent feasible within existing footprints and building walls to accommodate any legal conforming use without regard to the parking available on site. 
(b)  Existing nonconforming single-family dwellings whose off-street parking and loading facilities do not conform to this chapter may be expanded or facilities added to a maximum of 20 percent of the existing facilities without meeting current requirements for off-street parking. If the expansion or addition or facilities exceeds 20 percent, the off-street parking and loading space requirements shall have to be complied with for those facilities to be constructed. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.10, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 8-21-1995)  
Sec. 106-257. - Uses under variance or conditional use permit. 
Uses and buildings which are existing under a variance or a conditional use permit granted under this chapter or any previous ordinance shall not be considered as nonconforming and shall be permitted to continue under the conditions and regulations imposed in the permit or variance and may be expanded or enlarged upon first obtaining a conditional use permit under division 4 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.11, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-258. - Conduct terminating nonconforming use. 
Under this chapter, the right to continue a nonconforming use shall terminate as follows: 
(1)  Changing such use to another use not permitted in the zone, except as expressly permitted in this division. 
(2)  Increasing or enlarging the area, space or volume occupied or devoted to such use, except as expressly permitted in this division. 
(3)  Adding a conforming or nonconforming use, except as permitted in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.12, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-259. - Termination of existing nonconforming use. 
Under this chapter, a lawfully established use which becomes a nonconforming use, including any buildings, structures or facilities designed or intended only for uses which are nonconforming, shall be terminated and such buildings, structures or facilities shall be removed or made conforming in all respects within the time period specified in subsection (1) or (3)c. of this section, whichever is applicable and results in the later termination date. 
(1)  The time period indicated in the following table measured from the date of becoming a nonconforming use: 
Use 	Allowable Life 
Use of land without buildings or structures 	1 year 
Use involving only buildings or structures which would not require a building permit to replace such buildings or structures, but not including a mobile home park 	3 years 
Mobile home park; mobile homes on individual lots 	35 years 
Use involving buildings or structures which would require a building permit to replace such buildings or structures 	20 years 
Outdoor advertising signs in areas zoned residential 	7 years after giving notice of removal requirement 
All other signs 	All nonconforming signs not previously removed pursuant to previous existing portions of this chapter shall be permitted to continue past August 6, 1988, only if a conditional use permit is granted by the planning commission. 
 
(2)  All nonconforming signs shall be made to conform or be removed within 30 days of: a change of ownership of the business, or a building is renovated more than 50 percent of its valuation within any one-year period, or a nonconforming sign is destroyed more than 50 percent of its valuation. Furthermore, such nonconforming signs shall be permitted to continue past the amortization period only if a conditional use permit is granted by the planning commission. 
(3)  The time period indicated in the following table measured from the date of construction of the most recently constructed main building or other major facilities which are designed or intended for the nonconforming use: 
STRUCTURE TYPE ACCORDING TO BUILDING CODE 
Type of Structure 	Old Classification 	New Classification 	Allowable Use 	Life 
Light metal or wood frame 	IV, V, II-N, V 	II (1-hour) II-N, V 	Nonresidential 	25 years 
Light metal or wood frame 	IV, V 	II (1-hour), II-N, V 	Residential, except single-family dwellings 	30 years 
Light metal or wood frame 	IV, V 	II (1-hour), II-N, V 	Single-family dwellings 	35 years 
Heavy timber, masonry, concrete 	II, III 	II (fire resistive), III, IV 	All 	40 years 
Fire resistive heavy steel and/or concrete 	I 	I 	All 	50 years 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.13, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-260. - Termination of existing nonconforming use for business signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming business signs may be abated at any time subsequent to the date such signs become nonconforming, provided that no business sign shall be compelled to be removed or abated, and its customary maintenance, use, or repair shall not be limited, without the payment of fair and just compensation. 
(b)  For purposes of compliance with this section, fair and just compensation will be calculated pursuant to Business and Professions Code §§ 5492 and 5493. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the city may remove, without compensation, the following business signs: 
(1)  A nonconforming business sign located in the city's R-1, R-2, R-3 or RPD zones or in an area zoned for agricultural use which has been in existence for a period of 15 years from August 6, 1983. For purposes of this subsection only, every business sign has a useful life of 15 years. Fair and just compensation for business signs described in this subsection required to be removed during the 15-year period and before the amortization period has lapsed shall be entitled to fair and just compensation which is equal to 1/15 of the duplication cost of construction of the business sign being removed multiplied by the number of years of useful life remaining for the sign as determined by this subsection. 
(2)  Any business sign erected without first complying with all of this chapter at the time of its construction, erection or use. 
(3)  Any business sign which was lawfully erected, but whose use has ceased, or the structure upon which the display has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of not less than 90 days. Costs incurred in removing an abandoned sign shall be charged to the legal owner. 
(4)  Any business sign which has been more than 50 percent destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the display cannot be repaired within 30 days of the date of its destruction. 
(5)  Any business sign whose owner, outside of a change of copy, requests permission to remodel and remodels that sign, or expand or enlarge the building or land use upon which the sign is located, and the sign is affected by the construction, enlargement or remodeling, or the cost of construction, enlargement, or remodeling of the sign exceeds 50 percent of the cost of reconstruction of the building. 
(6)  Any business sign whose owner seeks relocation thereof and relocates the sign. 
(7)  Any business sign for which there has been an agreement between the sign owner and the city for its removal as of any given date. 
(8)  Any business sign which is temporary. 
(9)  Any business sign which is or may become a danger to the public or is unsafe. 
(10)  Any business sign which constitutes a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the city. 
(11)  Any business sign located in a redevelopment project area created pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law (part 1 of division 24 of the Health and Safety Code, Health and Safety Code § 33000 et seq.), or an area listed or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, or an area registered by the department of parks and recreation as a state historical landmark or point of historical interest pursuant to Public Resources Code § 5021 or an area created as a historic zone or individually designated property by the city, pursuant to article 12 of chapter 1 of division 1 of title 5 of the Government Code (Government Code § 50280 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.14, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-261. - Revocation of nonconforming use or structure. 
The council may, after notice and public hearing, revoke the right to continue a nonconforming use or structure as follows: 
(1)  Notice. Notice shall be mailed to the recorded owner of the property not less than 20 days before the date of the public hearing. The notice shall state the facts concerning the impending action and shall request appearance by the owner at the time and place specified for the hearing to show cause why the permit should not be revoked. 
(2)  Council action. Within 30 days after the public hearing, the council may by resolution revoke or modify the nonconforming status of the use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.15, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-262. - Exemption for religious, educational, charitable, public utility uses. 
Nothing in this chapter pertaining to nonconforming structures and uses shall be construed or applied so as to require the termination, discontinuance, or removal or so as to prevent the expansion, modernization, replacement, repair, maintenance, alteration, reconstruction, or rebuilding and continued use of nonprofit, public or private religious, educational, charitable or public utility buildings, structures, equipment, and facilities. However, any expansion or rebuilding beyond the original building footprint or internal reconstruction resulting in additional capacity shall be subject to conditional use permit approval. For this purpose, the term "expansion" means enlargement or moving into another portion of the same property or into immediately adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.820.16, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-263—106-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 106-291. - Purpose. 
This division is intended to relieve the owner of property from any inability to make reasonable use of his property in the same manner that other property of like character in the same vicinity and zone can be used. A variance which may be granted only by the planning commission shall not be granted which confers a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the same vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated or which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning regulations governing the parcel of property. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.760, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-292. - Application. 
Application for a variance from this chapter shall be filed in a manner consistent with the requirements contained in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.761, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-293. - Hearings and notices. 
Upon receipt in proper form of a variance application, a public hearing shall be set and notice of such hearing given in a manner consistent with division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.762, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-294. - Investigation. 
An investigation of facts for each variance application shall be made by the planning commission, the director, or their staffs to ensure that the action on each application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.763, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-295. - Findings. 
Following a public hearing on a variance application, the planning commission shall record the decision in writing and shall recite therein the findings of fact upon which such decision is based. The commission may approve and/or modify an application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only after it makes all of the following findings of fact in a positive manner: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the property involved, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings such that strict application of this chapter deprives such property of privileges, enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under the identical zoning classification. 
(2)  The granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the public interest, safety, health or welfare, and will not be detrimental or injurious to the property or improvements in the same vicinity and zone in which the property is located. 
(3)  The granting of such variance will not be contrary to or in conflict with the general purposes and intent of this chapter, nor to the goals and programs of the general plan. 
(4)  The variance request is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zone in which the site is located. 
(5)  The subject site is physically suitable for the proposed variance. 
(6)  There are adequate provisions for water, sanitation and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed variance would not be detrimental to public health and safety. 
(7)  There will be adequate provisions for public access to service the property which is the subject of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.764, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-296. - Use of property before final decision. 
No permits shall be issued for any use involved in an application for approval of a variance until and unless the variance shall have become final. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.765, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-297—106-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1625, § 4, adopted March 18, 2013, repealed former Div. 8, § 106-311, in its entirety which pertained to transitional housing and derived from Ord. No. 1486, § 3, adopted Dec. 15, 1997. 
 
Secs. 106-312—106-325. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 106-326—106-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
 
Sec. 106-351. - Purpose. 
The R-1 single-family residential zone is intended to provide for the development, protection and stability of single-family detached dwellings within relatively low density residential neighborhoods of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.050, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-352. - Permitted uses. 
In the R-1 single family residential zone, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and structures such as a garage, workroom, storage shed, recreation room or cabana located on the same lot as the principal residential use. No bathroom, kitchen plumbing or fixtures or cooking facilities shall be permitted in conjunction with accessory buildings. A garage, workroom, storage shed, and recreation room shall not be divided into smaller size rooms and shall be maintained as a single open building. 
(2)  Community care facilities/small. 
(3)  Home occupations in accordance with division 9 of article VI of this chapter. 
(4)  Large family day care home in accordance with division 10 of article VI of this chapter. 
(5)  Manufactured home as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007. 
(6)  Parks and playgrounds or community centers owned and operated by a government agency, including business conducted within the facilities, subject to the approval of the director. 
(7)  Private noncommercial greenhouses, horticulture collections, flower gardens, vegetable gardens and fruit trees. 
(8)  Primary single-family dwelling units, one per lot, in a permanent location. 
(9)  Accessory dwelling units in accordance with section 106-358. 
(10)  Supportive housing. 
(11)  Temporary tract sales offices, temporary contractors' equipment offices and storage, subject to approval by the director for a period not to exceed one year with two one-year extensions available, if requested for good cause. 
(12)  Transitional housing. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.051, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1547, § 3, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 1625, § 5, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. U-1666, § 9, 7-17-2017)  
Sec. 106-353. - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
In the R-1 single-family residential zone, uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit are as follows: 
(1)  Churches, temples or other places of religious worship, with not temporary structures permitted. 
(2)  One guesthouse with a minimum lot area of 8,000 square feet. 
(3)  Schools. 
(4)  Hospitals or sanitariums. 
(5)  Community care facilities/large. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.052, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1625, § 6, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 106-354. - Prohibited uses. 
All uses are prohibited in the R-1 single-family residential zone, except those expressly permitted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.053, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-355. - Density. 
Density in the R-1 single-family residential zone shall be one primary single-family dwelling unit per lot. A accessory dwelling unit in accordance with section 106-358 shall not be counted as a primary single-family dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.054, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1547, § 4, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. U-1666, § 9, 7-17-2017)  
Sec. 106-356. - Minimum lot size. 
Minimum lot size in the R-1 single-family residential zone shall be 7,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.055, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-357. - Applicable regulations. 
In the R-1 single-family residential zone, all uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division, including the following standards: 
(1)  Division 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking and loading standards. 
(2)  Division 5 of article V of this chapter pertaining to sign standards. 
(3)  Division 6 of article V of this chapter pertaining to property development standards. 
(4)  Division 9 of article VI of this chapter pertaining to home occupation permits. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.056, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-358. - Applicable regulations for second dwelling units. 
(a)  Definition. The terms "accessory dwelling unit" and "ADU", as used in this section, shall have the same meaning as the same terms are defined under section 106-6 (definitions) of article I (in general) of chapter 106 (zoning) of the San Fernando Municipal Code. 
(b)  Requirements applicable to all accessory dwelling units. The city shall not approve an application for a new ADU unless the ADU satisfies all of the standards below. An application for a new ADU that satisfies each of the below standards shall be approved by the community development director, or his or her designee, following a ministerial review for compliance. The following conditions and restrictions shall apply to any proposed ADU: 
(1)  Number of units allowed. The lot on which an ADU is constructed shall contain no more than one lawful and pre-existing single-family residence, and not more than one ADU. Upon the addition of an ADU to an R-2 or R-3 zoned parcel developed with a single-family residence, the development of any additional units on the parcel is prohibited. 
(2)  Location. Attached and detached ADUs shall be a permitted use in within the following zones: R-1 (single-family residential) zone; R-2 (multiple family dwelling) zone; or R-3 (multiple family) zone. 
(3)  Owner occupancy and restrictive covenant. One of the dwelling units on the site (either the primary dwelling unit or the ADU) shall be owner-occupied at all times. The ADU shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling unit. If, at any time, the owner of the property upon which the primary dwelling unit and the ADU are located ceases to reside in either the primary dwelling unit or the ADU as his or her primary place of residence, then any tenancy or other occupancy of the ADU shall be prohibited. In the case where an ADU is occupied by a non-owner occupant, the owner shall terminate the occupancy of the ADU by or before the date upon which the owner ceases to reside in the primary dwelling unit. Any ongoing tenancy or occupancy of the ADU shall thereafter be an unlawful tenancy. The property owner shall enter into a restrictive covenant with the city that applies to the owner and all successors in interest, in a form acceptable to the city attorney that will be recorded on the subject property. The restrictive covenant shall: 
(i)  Specify that the property owner must reside in either the primary dwelling unit or the ADU; 
(ii)  Expressly prohibit the rental of both units at the same time and further provide that the owner shall prohibit any future tenancy or occupancy of the ADU once the owner ceases to reside in either the primary dwelling unit or the ADU and, in the case where the owner resides in the primary dwelling unit, also terminate any existing tenancy or occupancy of the ADU by a non-owner occupant by or before the date upon which the owner ceases to reside in the primary dwelling unit; 
(iii)  The ADU may be rented only for terms longer than 30 consecutive calendar days; 
(iv)  The ADU may not to be sold or conveyed separately from the primary residence; 
(v)  The property owner and all successors in interest shall maintain the ADU and the property in accordance with all applicable ADU requirements and standards; 
(vi)  Any violation will be subject to penalties as provided article II (general penalties) and article III (administrative penalties—Citations) of chapter 1 (general provisions and penalties of the San Fernando City Code; and 
(vii)  An future sale of residential lots with ADUs shall require, prior to the close of escrow, an inspection by the building and safety supervisor or his or her designee to assure that all on-site residential structures have been maintained in compliance with applicable zoning and building code requirements. 
(4)  Rental restrictions. The unit may be rented but may not be rented for a period of less than 31 consecutive days. ADUs which are used as rental units will be required to obtain a rental permit from the city. 
(5)  Exterior access. To maintain the single-family residential character of the neighborhood and to the extent reasonably feasible in the reasonable judgment of the community development director, an ADU shall not have its exterior entrance visible from the street. Additionally, no exterior stairway shall be located on the front or on any street-facing side of the ADU. No passageway shall be required in conjunction with construction of an ADU. 
(6)  Separate bathroom and kitchen. The ADU shall include one full bathroom and one kitchen, and shall not include any additional bathrooms or kitchens. The ADU shall also be limited to a maximum of one bedroom. 
(7)  Health and safety standards/pre-building inspection. The ADU shall comply with all building, safety, fire and health codes, and all other applicable laws and regulations. Prior to receiving a building permit for an ADU, the city will conduct a pre-building inspection of the property for compliance with health and safety codes and verification of permitted structures. Pursuant to state law, ADUs are not required to provide fire sprinklers if sprinklers are not required for the primary dwelling unit. 
(8)  Historic properties. The architectural treatment of an ADU constructed on a lot that has an identified historical resource listed on the federal, state, and/or local register of historic places shall be reviewed to ensure compliance with the city's historic preservation ordinance. 
(9)  Utility Fee Requirements. ADUs shall not be considered new residential uses for the purposes of calculating local agency connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. 
a.  For ADUs created entirely within existing space, including the primary structure, attached or detached garage or other accessory structure, the city will not require the applicant to install a separate utility connection between the ADU and the utility, or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge. 
b.  For ADUs involving new construction (detached and attached additions), the city will not require a separate utility connection but will impose a capacity charge. Said charge will be proportionate to the burden of the proposed ADU upon the water or sewer system based upon either its size or the number of its plumbing fixtures, and will not exceed the reasonable cost of providing the water or sewer service. 
(10)  Standards for accessory dwelling unit structures created within existing space. An ADU that is developed entirely within an existing space, including the primary structure, attached or detached garage or other accessory structure, shall be permitted ministerially with a building permit subject to the following standards: 
a.  Zones: The unit shall be located in a single-family zone. 
b.  Separate entry required: The unit shall provide independent exterior access from the primary unit. 
c.  Setbacks: The unit shall have sufficient side and rear setbacks to meet fire safety requirements. Pursuant to state law, no setback shall be required for a lawfully constructed garage in existence prior to January 1, 2017 that is converted to an ADU 
d.  Parking: No additional off-street parking is required, however, any parking spaces lost as a result of the conversion of existing space to an ADU shall be required to be replaced. More specifically, when a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an ADU, the lost parking spaces must be replaced with an equal number of spaces, which may be covered, uncovered, tandem within a garage or driveway, or provided by the use of a mechanical automotive parking lift within a garage structure. To the extent locations are available on the site which minimize the visibility of parking from the street, the director of community development, or his or her designee, can require parking to be located in these less invasive locations. In addition, the main single-family dwelling must meet the current number of off-street parking spaces required at the time the ADU is approved. 
(11)  Standards for accessory dwelling unit structures involving new construction (detached and attached additions). ADU developments that adhere to the following standards shall be permitted ministerially, except as explicitly set forth herein. 
a.  Development and design standards: All ADU developments, whether attached or detached, shall comply with all applicable zoning and development standards of the zoning district in which it will be located, including, but not limited to, standards regarding setbacks, floor area ratio standards, height, lot coverage, architectural design review, including compatibility with existing structures on the same property and in the surrounding neighborhood, except as explicitly set forth herein. 
1.  The ADU shall incorporate the same or similar architectural features, building materials and colors as the primary dwelling located on the property, and shall be designed to reasonably minimize privacy impacts. Compatibility with the existing primary structure includes coordination of colors, materials, roofing and other architectural features, and landscaping designed so that the appearance of the site remains that of a single-family residence. 
b.  Size: 
1.  The total area of habitable floor space for a detached ADU shall be no less than an efficiency unit, as defined by the California Building Code, and shall not exceed 640 square feet. 
2.  The total area of habitable floor space for an attached ADU shall not exceed the lesser of 640 square feet, or 50 percent of the primary residence's living area. 
c.  Height: For purposes of protecting the privacy of neighboring properties, detached ADUs shall be limited to a single story located to the rear of the primary structure. In instances where the primary structure is located on the rear of the parcel, a single story ADU may be located on the front of the parcel. Second story attached ADUs shall be limited to the rear of existing two story single-family homes. 
d.  Manufactured housing: Manufactured housing is allowed in compliance with the provisions herein. A trailer, motor vehicle or other recreational vehicle, as defined in the section 106-6 (definitions) of chapter 106 (zoning) of the San Fernando City Code, may not be used as an ADU and stored or maintained as a habitable unit or livable area on a residential lot. 
e.  Parking: One off-street parking space shall be provided for the ADU, which may be provided as tandem parking on an existing driveway and shall be permitted in paved setback areas unless the director of community development, or his or her designee, makes specific findings that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site, regional topographical, or fire and life safety conditions. To the extent locations are available on the site which minimize the visibility of parking from the street, the director of community development, or his or her designee, can require parking to be located in these less invasive locations. In addition, the main single-family dwelling must meet the current number of off-street parking spaces required at the time the ADU is approved. 
Pursuant to state law, no parking shall be required for an ADU in any of the following instances: 
1.  The ADU is located within one-half mile of public transit. 
2.  The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district. 
3.  The ADU is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure. 
4.  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU. 
5.  When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the ADU. 
f.  Replacement parking: When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, the lost parking spaces must be replaced with an equal number of spaces, which may be covered, uncovered, tandem within a garage or driveway, or provided by the use of a mechanical automotive parking lift within a garage structure. To the extent locations are available on the site which minimize the visibility of parking from the street, the director of community development, or his or her designee, can require parking to be located in these less invasive locations. 
(Ord. No. U-1666, § 3, 7-17-2017) 
Editor's note— At its regular meeting of July 17 th 2017, the City Council approved Urgency Ordinance No. 1666 which amended the provisions of this Section 106-358 which related to the regulation of so-called "second dwelling units". The amendments were adopted to harmonize the San Fernando Municipal Code with changes in state law relating to the regulation of so-called "accessory dwelling units." The reference to "accessory dwelling units" in this new section 106-358 are intended to replace references to "second dwelling units" under prior sections 106-358 and 106-359. Section 106-359 has been deleted as its text was made unnecessary in light of the amendments to section 106-358. Former § 106-358 was derived from Ord. No. 1547, adopted January 20, 2004.  
Sec. 106-359. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. U-1666, § 4, adopted July 17, 2017, repealed § 106-359. Former § 106-359 pertained to request for exceptions to applicable regulations for second dwelling units and derived from Ord. No. 1547, adopted January 20, 2004.  
Secs. 106-360—106-385. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING ZONE 
 
Sec. 106-386. - Purpose. 
The R-2 multiple-family dwelling zone is intended to provide an area for medium density residential development within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.100, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-387. - Uses permitted. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 multiple-family dwelling zone: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the R-1 zone. 
(2)  Duplexes. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.101, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-388. - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
In the R-2 multiple-family dwelling zone, the following uses are permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Any conditional use permitted in the R-1 zone subject to all the provisions therein. 
(2)  Electric distribution substation, pumping station, water well, water reservoir. 
(3)  Mobile home park. 
(4)  Residential condominium. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.102, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-389. - Prohibited uses. 
All uses are prohibited in the R-2 multiple-family dwelling zone, except those expressly permitted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.103, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-390. - Density. 
Density in the R-2 multiple-family dwelling zone shall be one dwelling unit for each 2,562 square feet of lot area. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.104, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1547, § 7, 1-20-2004)  
Sec. 106-391. - Minimum lot size. 
In the R-2 multiple-family dwelling zone, the minimum lot size shall be 7,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.105, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-392. - Applicable regulations. 
In the R-2 multiple-family dwelling zone, all uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division, including the following standards: 
(1)  Division 3 of article II of this chapter pertaining to site plan review. 
(2)  Division 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to street parking and loading standards. 
(3)  Division 5 of article V of this chapter pertaining to sign standards. 
(4)  Division 6 of article V of this chapter pertaining to property development standards. 
(5)  Division 9 of article VI of this chapter pertaining to home occupation permits. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.106, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-393—106-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY ZONE 
 
Sec. 106-421. - Purpose. 
The R-3 multiple-family zone is intended to provide an area for high density residential development within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.150, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-422. - Uses permitted. 
In the R-3 multiple-family zone, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 zones. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.151, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-423. - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
In the R-3 multiple-family zone, the following uses are permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Any conditional use permitted in the R-1 and R-2 zones subject to the provisions therein. 
(2)  Boardinghouses. 
(3)  Hospitals or sanitariums. 
(4)  Museums or libraries. 
(5)  Nursery schools. 
(6)  Nonresidential off-street automobile parking lot subject to division 3 of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.152, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-424. - Prohibited uses. 
In the R-3 multiple-family zone, all uses are prohibited except those expressly permitted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.153, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-425. - Density. 
Density in the R-3 multiple-family residential zone shall be one dwelling unit for each 1,013 square feet of lot area. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.154, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1547, § 8, 1-20-2004)  
Sec. 106-426. - Minimum lot size. 
In the R-3 multiple-family zone, the minimum lot size shall be 7,500 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.155, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-427. - Applicable regulations. 
In the R-3 multiple-family zone, all uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division, including the following standards: 
(1)  Division 3 of article II of this chapter pertaining to site plan review. 
(2)  Division 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking and loading standards. 
(3)  Division 5 of article V of this chapter pertaining to sign standards. 
(4)  Division 6 of article V of this chapter pertaining to property development standards. 
(5)  Division 9 of article VI of this chapter pertaining to home occupation permits. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.156, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-428—106-455. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RPD RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE 
 
Sec. 106-456. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent of this division is to: 
(1)  Encourage within the density standards of the general plan and zoning ordinance the development of a more desirable living environment by application of modern site planning techniques and building groupings or arrangements that are not permitted through strict application of the present zoning and subdivision ordinances. 
(2)  Encourage the preservation of greater open space for visual enjoyment and recreational use. 
(3)  Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of land. 
(4)  Encourage variety in the physical development patterns of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.200, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-457. - Uses permitted. 
Only uses permitted in the residential zone to which this RPD residential planned development overlay zone is added shall be permitted conditions of this division and subject to a conditional use permit (i.e., application of this zone to an R-1 zone is limited to the one single-family detached dwelling per lot in a permanent location). 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.201, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-458. - Development regulations. 
Any project developed pursuant to this division shall comply with the following, and any permit issued shall be subject to such provisions established as conditions of approval: 
(1)  Area of project. Residential planned development projects shall not be less than two acres in total area. 
(2)  Density. The total number of dwelling units in any residential planned development shall not exceed the number of which would be allowed through development under the applicable land use designation in the general plan. Consideration shall be given to compatibility with surrounding land uses relative to proposed densities, housing types, and buffering. 
(3)  Minimum area and dimensions of lot. The minimum area and dimensions of a lot shall be as follows: 
a.  Building site area. The minimum residential building site shall not be less than 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Building site width. The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet for interior lots and 55 feet for corner lots. 
c.  Building site depth. The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet. 
(4)  Yards and setbacks. Standards for yards and setbacks shall be as follows: 
a.  Front yard. The front yard setback may vary from 15 to 25 feet with an average setback of 20 feet, except that all garage entrances shall be set back not less than 20 feet from the front property line. 
b.  Side yard. Standards for side yards shall be as follows: 
1.  The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet from interior property lines. An additional 2½ feet shall be required for side yards adjacent to a main building 20 feet or more in height. 
2.  A side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall not be less than ten feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
d.  Projections into required yards. Standards for projections into required yards shall be as follows: 
1.  Balconies, decks, porches, terraces, and exterior steps in excess of 30 inches in height may project five feet into the minimum rear yard setback. 
2.  Architectural projections such as eaves, cornices, canopies or cantilevered roofs shall maintain at least a 7½-foot clearance with the ground. Such architectural projections may project into minimum yard setback as follows: 
i.  Three feet into the minimum side yard setback provided that the minimum distance between the eave line or other projection shall not be less than six feet between any projection on an adjacent lot. 
ii.  Three feet into the minimum rear yard setback. 
iii.  Three feet into the minimum front yard setback. 
3.  Chimneys, fireplaces, wing walls and other minor architectural features may project into the minimum setback a maximum of two feet. 
(5)  Maximum building height. No building shall exceed two stories in height or 35 feet. 
(6)  Building site coverage. Site coverage by buildings or structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area. 
(7)  Access. Each building site shall abut and have vehicular access from a dedicated public street. 
(8)  Off-street parking. There shall be not less than two covered off-street parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage for each dwelling unit. 
(9)  Walls, fences and landscaping. Walls, fences and landscaping shall conform to the following: 
a.  The commission may require appropriate walls, fencing and landscaping around the project. 
b.  A landscaping plan for all common open areas shall be submitted with the other plans. Approval of the landscape element shall include approval of an acceptable watering system, and assurance of continued maintenance. 
(10)  Signs. For signs, the provisions of the zone in which the project is located shall apply. 
(11)  Minimum dwelling unit floor area. The minimum floor area for each dwelling unit shall not be less than the requirements established by the zone. 
(12)  Common open space elements. The planning commission shall review and approve the location, intent, landscape treatment and method of maintaining each common open space or recreational elements proposed. The commission may require as a condition of approval such improvements, fencing, walls or landscaping necessary to protect abutting residential development. 
(13)  Other conditions. The planning commission may require other conditions of approval in keeping with the intent and purpose of this division and the principles of residential planned development. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.202, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-459. - Procedure. 
(a)  Concept plan review. Prior to the submission of an application for a conditional use permit for an RPD residential planned development, the applicant shall submit, for preliminary review by the director, a concept plan. The concept plan should include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A schematic plan showing in general terms the uses proposed, densities, types of housing units, open spaces, streets, extent of grading, and landscaping. 
(2)  Calculations of the site area, number of dwelling units, and open space area. 
No decision will be made; however, the comments and suggestions of the director may assist the applicant in developing more precise plans. 
(b)  Conditional use permit application. An application for a conditional use permit to allow a residential planned development shall be filed by the applicant and acted upon by the commission, pursuant to division 4 of article II of this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by 15 copies of the general development proposal, including the following: 
(1)  Architectural and topographical survey map of the site and the area within 100 feet of the site, including all existing structures, improvements, trees, natural features, waterways, elevations, and contour lines (intervals not more than five feet, except where authorized by the director). An aerial photograph may, with approval of the director, be accepted in lieu of the map. 
(2)  General development plan showing the general location of all proposed structures and uses, types of housing, location and widths of streets, parking areas, pedestrian and bicycle circulation, recreation facilities, dedicated and commonly owned open space areas, extent of landscaping and grading (including two section drawings of the site, one generally north-south and one east-west, showing the existing contour and proposed graded contour of the site); geological and soil survey reports; method of drainage; an indication of the phasing of the development with each workable phase (see subsection (e) of this section) delineated; and a time schedule for the completion of each workable phase. 
(3)  Computations of gross site area, number and sizes of units in various housing types, common open space area and number of covered and uncovered parking spaces. Where the development is to be completed in phases, these computations shall also be shown for each workable phase of the development. 
(4)  Any of the requirements in subsections (b)(1) through (3) of this section may be modified or waived by the director, upon the finding that such requirement is unreasonable or unnecessary for the particular proposal, and the director shall inform the commission of any such modification or waiver prior to the hearing of the application. 
(5)  Three copies of rough drafts of proposed legal agreements and documents, including homeowners' association, deed restrictions, covenants, dedication of development rights, easements, and proposed method of maintenance and perpetuation of open space areas. 
(6)  Full disclosure of governmental programs, if any, under which the housing will be developed. 
(7)  Such other data or plans as may reasonably be required by the commission for a proper and complete consideration of the proposed development. 
(8)  Where subdivision of land is intended, tentative maps may be processed concurrently with the conditional use permit application; such tentative maps shall be drawn and submitted pursuant to chapter 78 of this Code. 
(c)  Revisions to plan. If, at the request of the applicant, revisions to the general development plans are desired, the following guidelines will be used by the director in determining the proper course of action: 
(1)  For minor revisions not involving a change in use, increase in density or extent or general location of buildings, or reduction in area of open space, the plans need not be returned to the commission; however, approval of the director is required. 
(2)  For revisions involving an increase in density, traffic flow or reduction of open space of no more than ten percent, and/or major change in location of building and open space, the revised plans must be reviewed by the commission and the conditional use permit amended as required. 
(3)  For major revisions involving a change in use or a decrease in the area of open space exceeding ten percent, a new conditional use permit application must be filed, a new filing fee paid, and public hearing scheduled. 
(d)  Bond for all common area and off-site improvements. Prior to issuance of a building or grading permit, and prior to approval of a final map where subdivision is involved, a bond or other acceptable security shall be posted to ensure the completion of all common area and off-site improvements within any phase of the development, including landscaping, recreational facilities, and other site features pursuant to approved plans. 
(e)  Phase. No occupancy permit shall be granted for any structure and no parcels, lots or portion of a residential planned development site shall be separately sold or encumbered, until approval of the director, upon the finding that all of the common area and off-site improvements in the phase of which such structure, parcel, lot or portion is a part are completed to the extent that the dwelling units are accessible and livable, and all dwelling units in the workable phase are substantially developed (all building walls covered), pursuant to the approved plans. A bond or other guarantee of substantial completion of all dwelling units in a phase may be accepted by the city in lieu of substantial completion. The commission may waive this requirement for substantial completion of all dwelling units in a phase upon the finding that, in the particular residential planned development, it is unnecessary for the protection of the city's residents' interest. A workable phase shall consist of either an entire residential planned development or a portion of a residential planned development which, in itself, is functional and meets the density and open space requirements of this chapter. The division of any residential planned development into workable phases shall be approved by the commission during the general development plan review. 
(f)  Time limit. If construction has not been completed to the point of foundation inspection for a unit within one year, or if the phase has not been completed within two years from the date of final approval of the final development proposal for the phase, the conditional use permit shall expire and be of no further effect, and any final map for the subdivision thereof shall become null and void, and the city, at its option, may cause the owner of the property to process, through the city, a subdivision to revert the property to acreage. A one-year extension may be granted by the commission for good cause and where conditions of the surrounding area have not changed to the extent that the general development proposal for the residential planned development or the final development proposal for any phase thereof no longer meets the conditional use permit or plan review criteria. 
(g)  Review criteria. Developments constructed under this division shall be of a superior design and quality and may include common recreation facilities not normally provided in a standard residential development which would occur under the applicable development standards of this chapter. During the review of the general development plans at the conditional use permit hearing, the commission shall use the following criteria in evaluating the proposed development: 
(1)  The proposed residential planned development conforms to the intent of the general plan and any specific plans adopted by the city. 
(2)  The site and grading plans indicate proper consideration for the preservation of existing trees and native plant growth, watercourses and other natural features, and natural topography. 
(3)  The plans for the proposed development show that proper and adequate consideration has been given to privacy at the individual, family and neighborhood levels, including visual and acoustical privacy, in terms of the separation and orientation of dwelling units and private outdoor living areas. 
(4)  The plans indicate that proper consideration has been given to auto and pedestrian circulation discouraging through traffic on local streets, speed control, access, convenience, safety, and the recreational aspects of pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and that the design of any proposed streets that vary from city standards indicates that they will perform the function required and that the off-site improvements will not create maintenance costs to the city which greatly exceed the costs for standard off-site improvements. 
(5)  The plans indicate that the common open space areas will be usable for recreation and/or valuable for views, conservation and/or separation of dwelling units. 
(6)  The plans indicate that proper consideration has been given to the provision of common recreation areas and facilities, in relation to the size of the private lots and reduced recreation opportunities in private yards. 
(7)  The plans indicate proper consideration for adjacent existing and future developments, and the extension of the circulation, open space, drainage and utility systems from one development to another. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.203, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-460—106-485. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - C-1 LIMITED COMMERCIAL ZONE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 106-486. - Purpose. 
The C-1 limited commercial zone is established to provide areas for limited commercial uses which offer retail and service facilities operative under development standards designed to create a compatible and harmonious setting. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.250, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-487. - Permitted uses. 
In the C-1 limited commercial zone, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Administrative and professional offices. 
(2)  Government buildings and related facilities. 
(3)  Parks and playgrounds (public and private). 
(4)  Public utility substations (masonry-walled and landscaped). 
(5)  Retail businesses. 
(6)  Service businesses (excluding repair businesses). 
(7)  Any use which in the judgment of the commission, as evidenced by resolution in writing, are similar to and no more objectionable than any of those enumerated in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. 
(8)  Any and all amusement devices shall be subject to approval of an amusement device permit. The permit may be approved by the director subject to conditions and limitations stated in division 3 of article VI of this chapter. Any violations of the conditions and/or limitations shall result in the revocation of the amusement device permit, subject to the provisions of section 106-148. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.251, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-488. - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
In the C-1 limited commercial zone, the following uses are permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Clubs, lodges and halls. 
(2)  Commercial recreation. 
(3)  Hotels and motels including single room occupancy unit (SRO) subject to the development standards noted in section 106-971 of this chapter. 
(4)  New automobile sales and display and sales room or lot (used car sales only in conjunction with a new car agency). 
(5)  Off-street parking lot. 
(6)  On-site and off-site sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  Parking lot sales. 
(8)  Schools. 
(9)  Secondhand stores. 
(10)  Museums, art galleries, botanical gardens. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.252, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1625, § 7, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 106-489. - Prohibited uses. 
In the C-1 limited commercial zone, all uses are prohibited except those expressly permitted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.253, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-490. - Applicable regulations. 
In the C-1 limited commercial zone, all uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division, including the following standards: 
(1)  Division 3 of article II of this chapter pertaining to site plan review. 
(2)  Division 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to street parking and loading standards. 
(3)  Division 5 of article V of this chapter pertaining to sign standards. 
(4)  Division 6 of article V of this chapter pertaining to property development standards. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.254, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-491—106-515. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - C-2 COMMERCIAL ZONE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 106-516. - Purpose. 
The C-2 commercial zone is established to provide areas for commercial uses which offer a wide range of goods and services including facilities for shopping, convenience goods and services, professional offices and recreation for the community. It is intended to promote an environment which will encourage maximum efficiency of the commercial area with maximum protection for nearby property and property values by permitting only those uses which are necessary for the city and excluding those uses which are incompatible with this goal and which should be located elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.300, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-517. - Permitted uses. 
In the C-2 commercial zone, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the C-1 zone, subject to the restrictions and/or prohibitions imposed in this section. 
(2)  Automobile service stations. 
(3)  Bus stations. 
(4)  Fortunetelling, subject to the following: 
a.  The establishment shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any other such use. 
b.  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed in the establishment. 
(5)  Hospitals. 
(6)  Mortuaries. 
(7)  New automobile sales and display and sales room or lot (used car sales only in conjunction with a new car agency). 
(8)  Nurseries (flower, plant or tree). 
(9)  Pet stores. 
(10)  Radio and television stations without transmitting tower antennas. 
(11)  Repair shops, bicycle and motorcycle. 
(12)  Rummage sales (refer to article III of chapter 66 of this Code). 
(13)  Veterinary clinics. 
(14)  Other businesses which in the judgment of the commission, as evidenced by resolution in writing, are similar to and no more objectionable than any of those enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.301, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-518. - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
In the C-2 commercial zone, the following uses are permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 
(1)  All those uses permitted by conditional use permit in the C-1 zone. 
(2)  Ambulance service. 
(3)  Automobile repair, minor, shall be permitted subject to division 11 of article VI of this chapter. 
(4)  Bail bondsman. 
(5)  Billiards and pool parlor. 
(6)  Carwashes. 
(7)  Dating and escort services. 
(8)  Fruit and vegetable stands (outdoor only). 
(9)  Live entertainment. 
(10)  Theater/bowling alley. 
(11)  Adult entertainment business (refer to division 2 of article VI of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.302, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-519. - Prohibited uses. 
In the C-2 commercial zone, all uses are prohibited except those expressly permitted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.303, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-520. - Applicable regulations. 
In the C-2 commercial zone, all uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division including the following standards: 
(1)  Division 3 of article II of this chapter pertaining to site plan review. 
(2)  Division 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to street parking and loading standards. 
(3)  Division 5 of article V of this chapter pertaining to sign standards. 
(4)  Division 6 of article V of this chapter pertaining to property development standards. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.304, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-521—106-545. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - SC SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 106-546. - Purpose. 
The SC service commercial zone is established to permit selected limited industrial (M-1) use activity along with commercial uses that reflect and complement existing development use pattern and yield no unacceptable impacts on noise, air quality, traffic and visual appearance. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.350, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-547. - Permitted uses. 
Premises in the SC service commercial zone may be used for the following: 
(1)  The following commercial uses: 
a.  Sales: 
1.  Antique shops. 
2.  Appliance stores, household. 
3.  Art galleries. 
4.  Art supply stores. 
5.  Automobile sales, sale of new and used motor vehicles. 
6.  Automobile storage yard for new cars limited to inventory to be sold as new cars only by the dealership. 
7.  Automobile supply stores, provided all repair activities are conducted within an enclosed building. 
8.  Bakery shops. 
9.  Bicycle shops. 
10.  Bookstores. 
11.  Christmas tree sale activities pursuant to section 106-1111. 
12.  Clothing stores. 
13.  Confectionery or candy stores. 
14.  Delicatessens. 
15.  Dress shops. 
16.  Drugstores. 
17.  Electrical supply stores. 
18.  Florist shops. 
19.  Furniture stores. 
20.  Gift shops. 
21.  Glass and mirror sales, including automobile glass installation only when conducted within an enclosed building. 
22.  Grocery stores. 
23.  Hardware stores, including the sale of lumber and other building supplies, but excluding woodcutting other than incidental cutting of lumber to size. 
24.  Ice cream shops. 
25.  Ice sales, excluding ice plants. 
26.  Jewelry stores. 
27.  Leather goods stores. 
28.  Mail order houses. 
29.  Meat markets, excluding slaughtering. 
30.  Motorcycle, motor scooter, and trail bike sales. 
31.  Music stores. 
32.  Newsstands. 
33.  Notions or novelty stores. 
34.  Nurseries, not including growing of nursery stock. 
35.  Office machines and equipment sales. 
36.  Paint and wallpaper stores. 
37.  Pawnshops. 
38.  Pet stores, within an enclosed building only. 
39.  Pet supply stores. 
40.  Plumbing, heating, air condition equipment and supply store. 
41.  Photographic equipment and supply stores. 
42.  Recreational vehicle sales. 
43.  Retail stores. 
44.  Secondhand stores. 
45.  Shoe stores. 
46.  Sporting goods stores. 
47.  Stationery stores. 
48.  Tobacco shops. 
49.  Toy stores. 
50.  Yarn and yardage stores. 
b.  Services: 
1.  Automobile tire, battery and accessory services, provide all activities are conducted within an enclosed building. 
2.  Automobile brake repair shops, provided all repair activities are conducted within an enclosed building. 
3.  Automobile muffler shops, provided all repair activities are conducted within an enclosed building. 
4.  Automobile repair shops, including painting, upholstering, and body fender work pursuant to division 11 of article VI of this chapter. 
5.  Automobile laundry with wash racks constructed or arranged so that entrances and exists and any other openings therein shall not face any residential property within 100 feet. 
6.  Automobile service stations. 
7.  Automobile rentals without drivers 
8.  Banks, savings and loans, credit unions and finance companies. 
9.  Barbershops. 
10.  Beauty shops. 
11.  Blueprint shops. 
12.  Communication equipment buildings. 
13.  Costume rentals. 
14.  Dental clinics. 
15.  Dental laboratories. 
16.  Dwelling and building services, pest control, window cleaning, disinfecting, termite control. 
17.  Electric distribution substation with masonry-wall and landscaping. 
18.  Electrician shops. 
19.  Employment agencies. 
20.  Film laboratories. 
21.  Furniture and appliance rentals. 
22.  Hospital equipment and supply rentals. 
23.  Interior decorating studios. 
24.  Libraries. 
25.  Locksmith shops. 
26.  Medical clinics. 
27.  Mimeograph and addressograph services. 
28.  Mortuaries. 
29.  Motion picture processing, reconstruction and synchronizing film with sound tracks. 
30.  Motorcycle, motor scooter, and trail bike repair shops. 
31.  Museums. 
32.  Offices, business or professional. 
33.  Parking lots and parking buildings. 
34.  Pet grooming, excluding boarding. 
35.  Photocopying and duplicating services. 
36.  Photography studios. 
37.  Plumbing shops. 
38.  Public utility service centers. 
39.  Radio and television broadcasting studios. 
40.  Real estate offices. 
41.  Recording studios. 
42.  Repair shops, household and fix-it. 
43.  Restaurants and other eating establishments, including food takeout. 
44.  Reupholsterers, furniture. 
45.  Schools, business and professional, including art, barber, beauty, dance, drama and music. 
46.  Shoe repair shops. 
47.  Sign shops within an enclosed building. 
48.  Stations: bus and taxi. 
49.  Tailor shops. 
50.  Telephone repeater stations. 
51.  Tool rentals, including rototillers, power mowers, sanders and saws, cement mixers and other equipment, but excluding heavy machinery or trucks. 
52.  Watch repair shops. 
53.  Welding/blacksmith shops. 
(2)  The following manufacturing and industrial establishments and uses when conducted in accordance with limitations specified: 
a.  Type of uses. 
1.  Equipment assembly, electrical, electronic and electromechanical. 
2.  Instrument assembly, electrical, electronic and electromechanical. 
3.  Jewelry manufacturing. 
4.  Optical equipment. 
5.  Photographic products and equipment. 
b.  Limitations. 
1.  All activities other than incidental storage shall be conducted within an enclosed building and shall not be obnoxious or offensive because of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or other similar causes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
2.  Assembly and manufacture from previously prepared materials and use of the following devices in such assembly and manufacture is prohibited: drop hammers, automatic screw machines, punch presses exceeding five tons' capacity and motors exceeding one-horsepower capacity that are used to operate lathes, drill presses, grinders, or metal cutters. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.351, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-548. - Use permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
Premises in the SC service commercial zone may be used for the following uses provided a conditional use permit has first been obtained and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with the conditions of such permit for: 
(1)  Adult businesses pursuant to division 2 of article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Ambulance services. 
(3)  Businesses engage in sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site or off-site consumption. 
(4)  Billiard halls. 
(5)  Bowling alleys. 
(6)  Dating and escort bureaus. 
(7)  Health clubs or centers. 
(8)  Helistops. 
(9)  Hotels. 
(10)  Live entertainment, accessory, in a legally established bar, cocktail lounge or restaurant having an occupant load of less than 100 people. 
(11)  Motels. 
(12)  Nightclubs. 
(13)  Outdoor dining with no amplified sound of music. 
(14)  Pool halls. 
(15)  Skating rinks, ice or roller. 
(16)  Theaters and other auditoriums. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.352, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-549. - Accessory uses. 
Premises in the SC service commercial zone may be used for the following accessory uses: 
(1)  Accessory building and structures customarily used in conjunction therewith. 
(2)  Rental, leasing and repair of articles sold on the premises incidental to retail sales. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.353, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-550. - Limitations. 
(a)  In the SC service commercial zone, any of the stores, shops or businesses listed in section 106-547 may be operated as a retail business; i.e., where the majority of the merchandise sold during each calendar month is sold at retail. An integral part of such retail business, manufacturing of products, or assembling, processing or treating of materials may take place, provided that the majority of such products and materials sold during each calendar month are also sold at retail; that not more than five persons are engaged in such manufacturing of products and assembling, processing or treating of materials; and that such products, materials and all activities in connection therewith are not objectionable due to odor, dust, noise, smoke, vibration or other causes and will not result in annoyance or injury to persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Any of the stores, shops or business listed in section 106-547 may be operated as a wholesale business; i.e., where the majority of the merchandise sold during each calendar month is sold at wholesale. The total area of all space used for storage on the premises in connection with any one such business shall not exceed 4,500 square feet. Such limitation shall include all storage space within a building, and all open storage space as provided for in subsection 106-551(14) of this division. No manufacturing of products and no processing or treating of materials shall be conducted in connection therewith. Pickup and/or delivery service activities associated with wholesale businesses shall be confined generally to delivery type vans. 
(c)  In connection with the stores, shops or businesses listed in section 106-547, all activities, other than incidental storage screened from public view, shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
(d)  In connection with businesses listed in section 106-547, any of those businesses may be operated as a combination wholesale/retail business. The majority nature of business activity conducted per month shall determine the predominant business activity and shall be used as the basis for determining applicable application of subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.354, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-551. - Development standards. 
Premises in the SC service commercial zone shall be subject to the following development standards: 
(1)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall be as provided in section 106-968. 
(2)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be the same as for the C-2 zone as provided in article IV of this chapter. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be as provided in section 106-968. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage shall be 70 percent. 
(5)  Utilities. Utilities shall be as provided in section 106-968. 
(6)  Walls and fences. Walls and fences shall be as provided in sections 106-969 and 106-970. 
(7)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be as provided in section 106-968. 
(8)  Parking, loading, trash. Parking, loading and trash shall be as provided in divisions 3 and 4 of article V of this chapter. 
(9)  Signs. Signs shall be as provided in division 5 of article V of this chapter. 
(10)  Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be as provided in section 106-968. 
(11)  Exterior building colors. Exterior building colors shall be as provided in section 106-968. 
(12)  Outside display. All display in SC zone shall be located within an enclosed building except for the following: 
a.  Automobile sales, limited to automobiles and trucks under two tons held for sale or rental only. 
b.  Christmas trees and wreaths, the sale of. 
c.  Electric distribution substations. 
d.  Gas metering and control stations, public utility. 
e.  Nurseries. 
f.  Parking lots. 
g.  Restaurants and other eating establishments. 
(13)  Open storage. Outside storage of materials and equipment shall only be permitted when incidental to the use of an office, store or other commercial building located on the front portion of the same lot, and provided that: 
a.  Such storage is located on the rear one-half of the lot and is confined to an area of not to exceed 3,000 square feet. 
b.  No power-driven excavating or road building equipment is stored on the premises. 
c.  The storage area is completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with necessary gates, not less than six feet in height. 
d.  No material or equipment is stored to a height greater than the wall or fence enclosing the storage area. 
e.  There shall be no rentals, storage or storage for rental purposes of a commercial vehicle which exceeds a registered net weight of 5,600 pounds. 
(14)  Site plan review. Site plan review shall be as provided in division 3 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.355, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-552. - Prohibited uses. 
In the SC service commercial zone, all uses are prohibited except those expressly permitted by this division and those additional uses which in the judgment of the planning commission, as evidenced by resolution in writing, are similar to or not more objectionable than any of those enumerated in section 106-547. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.356, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-553—106-580. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - M-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL ZONE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 106-581. - Purpose. 
The M-1 limited industrial zone is established to provide areas for the location and operation of light manufacturing and related services and uses. This division is designed to promote the effective operation of light manufacturing uses and to increase their compatibility within this district and with adjacent land uses. It is also intended to provide for those uses which are supportive of or provide a direct service to the permitted industrial uses. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.400, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-582. - Permitted uses. 
In the M-1 limited industrial zone, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Agricultural. 
(2)  Manufacturing. Subject to the conditions of this zone, manufacturing, assembling, repairing, testing, processing, packaging, warehousing, wholesaling, research or treatment of products may be conducted (other than those which may be obnoxious or offensive because of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or other similar causes detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare) including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Animal hospitals. 
b.  Assembly plants. 
c.  Automobile laundry. 
d.  Automotive repair major and minor. 
e.  Building materials and hardware sales. 
f.  Cabinet shops and woodworking. 
g.  Computer manufacturing, maintenance and service. 
h.  Cosmetics (no soap). 
i.  Electric and gas appliances. 
j.  Food products (excluding fish meat, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and rendering or refining of fats and oils). 
k.  Jewelry. 
l.  Laundry, cleaning and dry cleaning plants. 
m.  Lumberyard, building materials, contractor storage. 
n.  Machine shop. 
o.  Motion picture studio or television studio. 
p.  Optical equipment. 
q.  Pharmaceutical. 
r.  Photographic products and equipment. 
s.  Product service center. 
t.  Signs. 
u.  Telephone, communication exchange or equipment building. 
v.  Welding shop. 
w.  Wholesale business. 
x.  Other uses. The following accessory uses are permitted only where they are integrated with and clearly incidental to a primary permitted use: 
1.  Employee's cafeteria or coffeeshop. 
2.  Exhibition of products, produced on the premises or available for wholesale distribution. 
3.  Offices. 
y.  Additional uses which in the judgment of the commission, as evidenced by resolution in writing, are similar to or not more objectionable than any of those enumerated in this subsection. 
(3)  Commercial uses which are customarily and incidental to industrial uses permitted in subsection (2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.401, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-583. - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
In the M-1 limited industrial zone, the following uses are permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Animal shelter. 
(2)  Commercial antennas. 
(3)  Engine manufacture. 
(4)  Helistop. 
(5)  Laboratory: chemical, biological, anatomical. 
(6)  Outdoor storage. 
(7)  Outdoor advertising signs, provided that no outdoor advertising sign shall be located within a 500-foot radius of any other such sign; each outdoor advertising sign shall have, at most, two sign faces, and each sign face shall have a maximum area of 100 square feet; the maximum height shall be 24 feet; and no outdoor advertising sign shall be located within 300 feet of a residential zone. 
(8)  Paint or related manufacture. 
(9)  Research and development. 
(10)  Service station. 
(11)  Swap meets or flea markets, auctions indoor or outdoor. 
(12)  Truck terminal or yard. 
(13)  New and used car sales. 
(14)  Storage and distribution. 
(15)  Warehousing. 
(16)  Extermination business. 
(17)  Heliports. 
(18)  House moving businesses. 
(19)  Contractors' storage and fabrication yards. 
(20)  Lumberyards and outside storage of building materials. 
(21)  Boat building and repair businesses. 
(22)  Landscaping and gardening service and supply businesses. 
(23)  Machine shops and tool and die making. 
(24)  Metal welding and plating business. 
(25)  Rental yards, maintenance yards and storage yards for construction and agricultural related equipment, machinery and vehicles. 
(26)  Restaurants. 
(27)  Roofing businesses. 
(28)  Salvage and recycling businesses. 
(29)  Recreation vehicle storage yards. 
(30)  Electric distribution and transmission substations, gas metering and regulation stations, and other similar public utility structures and uses. 
(31)  Research and development facilities for the creation of prototypes. 
(32)  Pharmaceutical laboratory. 
(33)  Administrative, professional and business offices accessory to use permitted in this district. 
(34)  Blueprinting and photostating. 
(35)  Assembly of plastic products. 
(36)  Manufacture of ceramic products using only previous pulverized clay and using kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
(37)  Parcel service delivery depot. 
(38)  Photoengraving. 
(39)  Manufacture of control devices and gauges. 
(40)  Glass edging, beveling and silvering. 
(41)  Studio or office or quarters for industrial designing, model making, sculpture, architecture, engineering, planning, drafting, editorial and general designing and ceramic arts. 
(42)  Recreation area or facility accessory to any use permitted in this district. 
(43)  Hazardous waste facility which includes off-site facility, on-site facility, regional facility, transfer facility/station, transportable treatment units, and treatment facility and which is subject to division 12 of article VI of this chapter. 
(44)  Transitional housing, in accordance with section 106-311. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.402, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1486, § 2, 12-15-1997)  
Sec. 106-584. - Uses prohibited. 
In the M-1 limited industrial zone, all uses are prohibited except those expressly permitted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.403, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-585. - Applicable regulations. 
In the M-1 limited industrial zone, all uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division, including the following standards: 
(1)  Division 3 of article II of this chapter pertaining to site plan review. 
(2)  Division 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking and loading standards. 
(3)  Division 5 of article V of this chapter pertaining to sign standards. 
(4)  Division 6 of article V of this chapter pertaining to property development standards. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.404, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-586—106-610. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - M-2 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 106-611. - Purpose. 
The M-2 light industrial zone is intended to provide an area for a variety of industrial activities operating under development standards designed to limit impacts on surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.450, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-612. - Uses permitted. 
In the M-2 light industrial zone, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the M-1 zone. 
(2)  Emergency homeless shelters subject to the development standards noted in section 106-972 of this chapter. 
(3)  Manufacturing. Subject to the conditions of this zone, manufacturing, assembling, repairing, testing, processing, warehousing, wholesaling, research or treatment of products may be conducted (other than those which may be obnoxious or offensive because of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or other similar causes detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare) including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Animal shelter. 
b.  Assaying. 
c.  Automobiles, trailers, boats, recreational vehicles. 
d.  Ceramics, pottery, statuary. 
e.  Heavy equipment sales and rental. 
f.  Ink, polish, enamel. 
g.  Pest control contractors. 
h.  Public service facilities. 
i.  Sandblasting. 
j.  Tile (indoor kiln). 
k.  Wallboard, glass (no blast furnace). 
l.  Blast furnaces as an accessory use and not needing EPA or AQMD approvals. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.451, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1625, § 8, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 106-613. - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
In the M-2 light industrial zone, the following uses are permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the M-1 zone. 
(2)  Automotive impound area. 
(3)  Metal engraving, metal fabrications. 
(4)  Tire retreading and recapping 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.452, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-614. - Prohibited uses. 
In the M-2 light industrial zone, all uses are prohibited except those expressly permitted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.453, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-615. - Applicable regulations. 
In the M-2 light industrial zone, all uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division, including the following standards. 
(1)  Division 3 of article II of this chapter pertaining to site plan review. 
(2)  Division 3 of article V of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking and loading standards. 
(3)  Division 5 of article V of this chapter pertaining to sign standards. 
(4)  Division 6 of article V of this chapter pertaining to property development standards. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.454, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-616—106-640. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - PD PRECISE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE 
 
Sec. 106-641. - Intent and purpose. 
The PD precise development overlay zone may be applied as an additional zone classification to land zoned under any other zone classification of this chapter. Areas zoned PD shall be subject to compliance with an approved precise plan of development including any conditions established thereon by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.500, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-642. - Uses permitted. 
Only those uses permitted in the zone to which the PD precise development overlay zone is added shall be permitted under conditions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.501, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-643. - Property development standards. 
The provisions of the zone to which the PD precise development overlay zone is added shall apply. In addition, the development shall conform to any conditions established on the approved precise plan of development. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.502, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-644. - Special provisions. 
(a)  Procedure. Development of land in a PD precise development zone for any specific use shall be subject to the issuance of a certificate of use. The issuance of such a certificate of use shall not authorize the development or utilization of the land in question for any other use. All procedures regarding a certificate of use in a precise development zone, or the revocation or modification thereof, shall be governed by provisions establishing procedures related to conditional use permits as amended from time to time. The application for a certificate of use in a precise development shall include the following: 
(1)  A boundary survey map of the property. A tentative subdivision map may be substituted for this requirement if the applicant proposes to subdivide the property. 
(2)  Existing topography of the development area shall be shown with contours at not more than two-foot intervals. 
(3)  The gross land area of the development, the present zoning classification thereof, and the zoning classification and existing land use on all adjacent properties, including the location of structures and other improvements thereon. 
(4)  A general development plan with at least the following details shown to scale and dimensioned: 
a.  Location and use proposed for each existing and each proposed structure in the development area, the number of stories, gross building area, and approximate location of entrances. 
b.  All existing and proposed storage, curb cuts, driving lanes, parking areas and loading areas. 
c.  All pedestrian walks and open areas for the use of occupants of the proposed development and the public. 
d.  Types of surfacing proposed for all walks and driveways. 
e.  A detailed plan for the landscaping of the development, including the location and heights of all proposed walls, fences and screen planting, and a statement setting forth the method by which such landscaping and fencing shall be preserved and maintained. 
f.  A grading plan for the entire development. 
g.  All existing or proposed physical features such as hydrants, utility facilities, floodlights, drainage facilities and recreation facilities, and a statement setting forth the method by where these features shall be preserved and maintained. 
h.  Any additional drawings or information as may be required by the commission. 
(5)  Plans and elevations of one or more structures to indicate architectural type and materials of construction. 
(b)  Planning commission authority. The planning commission shall have the authority, as an administrative act, subject to the provisions of this section, to require conditions of development in addition to those required by the zone, where it is determined that such conditions are necessary to further the objectives of the general plan and are in harmony with the intent, purpose and spirit of this chapter and/or where such additional requirements are deemed essential to protect the public safety and general welfare of the community. All special conditions established by the commission in accordance with this section may be appealed to the council. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.503, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-645—106-665. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - SP SPECIFIC PLAN ZONES 
 
Sec. 106-666. - Intent and purpose. 
The SP specific plan zones are established to acknowledge and make reference to specific plans that have been adopted by the City of San Fernando pursuant to Government Code Section 65450 et seq. The specific plan zones provide for the flexible, creative and detailed planning and design of portions of the city which require a more comprehensive and coordinated approach than can be achieved through the conventional application of zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 10, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 1671, § 2(Exh. B), 12-20-2017)  
Sec. 106-667. - Municipal code and zoning map amendments. 
(a)  The adoption of a specific plan shall be accompanied by an amendment to the San Fernando Municipal Code to acknowledge the approved specific plan and to establish a specific plan zone for the approved specific plan. A specific plan zone shall include the designation "SP," a reference number that corresponds to the particular specific plan, and the name of the specific plan. 
(b)  The adoption of a specific plan shall be accompanied by an amendment to the City of San Fernando Zoning Map to change the zoning designation of the area covered by the specific plan to the designated specific plan zone. The specific plan zone shall be designated on the zoning map with the designation "SP," followed by a reference number that corresponds to the particular specific plan. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 10, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 1671, § 2(Exh. B), 12-20-2017)  
Sec. 106-668. - Specific plan zones and zoning map designations. 
The following specific plans have been approved and are established as specific plan zones to be designated on the city zoning map as set forth herein. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan. The San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan (SP-5), a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, has been prepared to implement development strategies for the revitalization of the city's primary commercial corridors, namely Truman Street, San Fernando Road, Maclay Avenue, and First Street. The San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan (SP-5) covers approximately 150 acres generally located along both sides of Maclay Avenue, from Pico Street to the northerly terminus of the city, along both sides of San Fernando Road and Truman Street from the city's westerly boundary line at Hubbard Street to the city's easterly boundary line along Fox Street (including properties on the south side of Celis Street from Kalisher Street to Fox Street), and along both sides of First Street and the south side of Second Street between Hubbard and Hagar Streets. The area covered by the San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan shall be established as the SP-5 San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan zone, and shall be designated on the zoning map by the designation "SP-5." 
The purpose of the San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan (SP-5) is to put in place regulations and strategies to transform the city's downtown and adjacent supporting districts into attractive, livable, and economically vital places, preserving and enhancing existing industrial uses along First Street, and safeguarding existing, surrounding residential neighborhoods. The plan sets forth a policy framework, development standards, design guidelines, and an implementation program that includes capital improvements. The development standards are mandatory, while the design guidelines are recommendations that provide potential applicants and the city with a basis for proposing and reviewing development applications. 
The provisions of the San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan (SP-5) are applicable to all properties within the specific plan area. The regulations, development standards, and design guidelines as contained in the San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan shall apply in their entirety to the review of development proposals. All other provisions of the Municipal Code continue to apply within the specific plan area except as expressly provided to the contrary in the San Fernando Specific Plan. Where San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan development standards and design guidelines do not provide adequate direction, the City of San Fernando Municipal Code shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 10, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 1671, § 2(Exh. B), 12-20-2017)  
Sec. 106-669. - Amendments to specific plans. 
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable specific plan, all amendments to an adopted specific plan shall require planning and preservation commission review and recommendation and city council review and approval in accordance with the procedures specified by law. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 10, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 1671, § 2(Exh. B), 12-20-2017)  
Sec. 106-670. - Consistency with specific plan. 
No application for a discretionary approval, including, but not limited to, a conditional use permit, site plan review, tentative map or parcel map, may be approved, adopted or amended within an area covered by a specific plan, unless found to be consistent with the adopted specific plan. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 10, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 1671, § 2(Exh. B), 12-20-2017)  
Sec. 106-671. - Relationship of specific plan to San Fernando Zoning Ordinance. 
The provisions of any adopted specific plan shall control over duplicative and conflicting provisions of the San Fernando Zoning Ordinance. In the event the adopted specific plan is silent as to a development standard or procedure, the provisions of the San Fernando Zoning Ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 10, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 1671, § 2(Exh. B), 12-20-2017)  
Secs. 106-672—106-695. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING LINE CHART 
 
Sec. 106-696. - Minimum setback dimensions from ultimate street right-of-way. 
Under this chapter, the minimum setback dimensions, in feet, from the ultimate street right-of-way shall be as follows: 
Zone 	Front 	Side 	Rear 
R-1 	20 1 	5 	20 
R-2 	20 1 	5 	20 
R-3 	20 1 	5 	20 
C-1 	10 2 	5 2 	10 
C-2 	10 2 	5 2 	19 
M-1 	10 	10 	10 
M-2 	10 	10 	10 
1  Where 70% or more front setback depth of existing buildings along a block frontage is greater than the minimum required setback distance, a vacant lot situated along the block frontage shall have a front setback depth which is the average setback depth of existing buildings along the block frontage. 
2  Except as provided for in subsection 106-700(c). 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.600.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-697. - Minimum setback dimensions from property line not abutting street. 
Under this chapter, the minimum setback dimensions, in feet, from the property line not abutting a street (in an interior lot) shall be as follows: 
Zone 	Side 	Rear 
R-1 	5 	15 
R-2 	5 	15 
R-3 	5 	15 
C-1 	0 1 	0 1 
C-2 	0 1 	0 1 
M-1 	0 1 	0 1 
M-2 	0 1 	0 1 
1  When abutting a residential R zone, the required setback shall be 20 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.600.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-698. - Minimum setback dimensions from property line abutting on alley. 
The minimum setback dimensions, in feet, from a property line abutting on alley shall be as follows: 
Zone 	Front 	Side 	Rear 
R-1 	— 	5 	20 
R-2 	— 	5 	20 
R-3 	— 	5 	20 
C-1 	10 	0 	0 
C-2 	10 	0 	0 
M-1 	10 	0 	0 
M-2 	10 	0 	0 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.600.03, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-699. - Applicability. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, given setback dimensions appearing in the building lines chart in this article for specific zones shall prevail in all other situations in the applicable zoning district. 
(b)  Shorter frontage abutting either street of a corner lot shall constitute the front of the lot. Where a corner lot has equal frontage abutting both streets, the owner has the choice of which frontage constitutes the front of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.601.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-700. - Exceptions to setback depths. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, on existing lots of record less than 100 feet in depth may have a front and rear setback equal to 20 percent of the depth of the lot of record. 
(b)  On existing lots of record less than 50 feet in width may have a side yard equal to ten percent of the width of the lot but not less than three feet. 
(c)  In the commercial zone, a land parcel constituting initial platted lots of record and comprising 7,000 square feet or less may have a street right-of-way setback depth equal to the average setback depth of the immediately adjoining buildings abutting the same street. 
(d)  Any one side or rear setback depth, whichever is applicable, may be varied on an existing nonconforming permitted structure in a residential district to an average side or rear setback depth found for similar located structures on lots within the block. Where applicable average depth is less than the existing setback depth, the given setback depth for the present structure shall govern. Where no applicable average depth is found for similarly located structures on lots within the block, established setback depth for the district shall govern. Total area of the proposed structural expansion may not exceed 50 percent of the total surface area of one side of the existing structure, nor shall the proposed structural expansion when completed result in having a detrimental effect on the adjoining property's fire safety and enjoyment of light and air. 
(e)  Where an existing easement depth from the property line is greater than the required setback depth from the property line for a principal or accessory structure, the easement depth shall prevail as the required setback for the principal or accessory structure. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.601.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-701. - Projections into required setback area. 
(a)  Balconies, decks, porches, terraces, exterior steps and exterior stairways. Balconies, decks, porches, terraces, exterior steps in excess of 30 inches in height and exterior stairways, unroofed and unenclosed, may project not more than three feet into any required side setback area or the distance required between buildings on the same building site and not more than five feet into any required front or rear setback area, but in no event shall such balconies, decks, porches, terraces, exterior steps or exterior stairways be closer than two feet to any side property line or three feet to any front or rear property line of a building site, when projecting into any required setback area. 
(b)  Eaves, cornices, canopies and cantilevered roofs. Eaves, cornices, canopies, or cantilevered roofs may project a maximum of 40 percent into any required side setback and 25 percent into any required front or rear setback and 40 percent into the space required between buildings on the same building site, but in no event shall such eaves, cornices, canopies or cantilevered roofs be closer than two feet to any front, side or rear line of the building site when projecting into a required setback area. 
(c)  Chimneys, fireplaces, wing walls and other minor architectural features. Masonry chimneys, fireplaces, wing walls and other minor architectural features may project into any required front, side or rear setback area a maximum of 24 inches, but in no event shall such chimneys, fireplaces, wing walls and other minor architectural features project into any required setback area so as to be closer than three feet to any property line of the building site. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.605.03, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-702—106-730. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 106-731—106-755. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STREET DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENT 
 
Sec. 106-756. - Exceptions. 
Section 106-758 does not apply to the following buildings or structures if they comply with all other sections of this chapter: 
(1)  Electrical distribution and transmission substations. 
(2)  Water storage tanks, water reservoirs and water pumping plants, but excluding offices or maintenance yard facilities. 
(3)  Gas measurement, distribution and meter control stations. 
(4)  Telephone repeater stations. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.660.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-757. - Requirement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division and this article, no building or other structure shall be used on any lot, any portion of which abuts upon any public street, unless the one-half of the street which is located on the same side of the centerline as such lot has been dedicated and improved as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.660.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-758. - Dedication standards. 
Streets shall be dedicated to one-half the planned ultimate width, measured from the centerline, and including corner cutoffs. All such rights-of-way are to be determined by the director as specified in the subdivision ordinance in chapter 78 of this Code and the circulation element of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.660.03, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-759. - Improvements. 
Before a structure subject to this article may be used, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and drainage structures where required shall be constructed at the grade and at the location specified by the director of public works unless these already exist within the present right-of-way; in such cases, all damaged sidewalks, curbs and drainage structures shall be replaced or repaired as required by the director of public works; or on property the owner has agreed to dedicate, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and drainage structures which are adequate, and the director of public works so finds. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.660.04, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-760. - Agreement to dedicate. 
In lieu of dedication as provided in this division, the director of public works may accept an agreement to dedicate signed by all persons having any right, title, interest or lien in the property, or any portion thereof, to be dedicated. The signatures on such agreement shall be acknowledged and the director of public works shall record such agreement in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.660.05, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-761. - Agreement to improve. 
(a)  In lieu of the required improvements under this division, the director of public works may accept from any responsible person a contract to make such improvements. The improvements shall be completed within the time specified in the agreement to improve, except that the director of public works may grant such additional times as he deems necessary if, in his opinion, a good and sufficient reason exists for the delay. 
(b)  Such contract shall be accompanied by a deposit with the city of a sum of money or negotiable bonds or savings and loan certificates of shares in an amount which, in the opinion of the director of public works, equals the cost thereof. If savings and loan certificates or shares are deposited, the owners thereof shall assign such certificates or shares to the city, and such deposit and assignment shall be subject to all the provisions and conditions of the director of public works. 
(c)  If the estimated cost of the improvements equals or exceeds $1,000.00, in lieu of such deposit, the applicant may file with the city a corporate surety bond guaranteeing the adequate completion of all the improvements, in a penal sum equal to such estimated cost. 
(d)  Upon the failure of the responsible person to complete any improvement within the time specified in an agreement, the council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten days served upon the person signing such contract, or upon notice in writing of not less than 20 days served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the person signing such contract, determine that the improvement work or any part thereof is incomplete and may determine that the responsible person is in default and may cause the improvement security or such portion of deposits or bonds given for the faithful performance of the work, as is necessary to complete the work, to be forfeited to the city, or may cash any instrument of credit so deposited in such amount as may be necessary to complete the improvement work. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.660.06, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-762. - Existing structures. 
Sections 106-757 to 106-760 do not apply to the use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot, if the total value of such alteration, enlargement or construction does not exceed one-half of the current market value of all existing buildings or structures on such lot. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.660.07, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-763. - Parkway trees. 
Parkway trees are required to be provided and planted by the owner or developer of any lot in connection with any construction on such lot requiring a permit valued under the building code in excess of $1,000.00, except as otherwise provided in the following: 
(1)  Such parkway trees shall be planted in the public easement (parkway strip) between the street pavement and the lot line of such lot. If a sidewalk exists in such parkway strip without provision for parkway trees, tree wells shall be provided as part of such parkway tree requirement. 
(2)  No occupancy permit shall be issued for such construction on such lot until the required parkway trees have been planted or such planting has been provided for in accordance with this section and the specifications of the director of public works. Such provision may be made by bond in an amount not to exceed the estimated cost of the parkway tree requirement. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section: 
a.  The total estimated cost of the parkway tree requirement shall not exceed one-third of the estimated value of the improvements provided for in such permit; and 
b.  Where adequate public right-of-way (parkway strip) does not exist, or where the adjacent street is not improved with curb, gutter and sidewalk, such parkway tree requirement may be waived in connection with such building permit. Such waiver shall not affect the requirement for parkway trees in connection with any subsequent application for a building permit with respect to such lot. 
(4)  This section shall not apply to incidental construction on already developed residential lots. Such incidental construction shall include, but not be limited to, room or patio additions, room realignment, and swimming pool and garage construction. Incidental construction as used in this subsection shall not include the construction of a residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.660.08, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 98.  
Sec. 106-764. - Landscaping maintenance. 
(a)  Prior to the installation of the landscaping in the public right-of-way, the developer shall provide for the continued maintenance by an agreement with the city. 
(b)  Lawn and ground cover shall be trimmed or mowed regularly. All planting areas shall be kept free of weeds and debris. 
(c)  All plantings shall be kept in a healthy and growing condition. Fertilization, cultivation, and tree pruning shall be a part of regular maintenance. Good horticultural practices shall be followed in all instances. 
(d)  Irrigation systems shall be kept in working condition. Adjustments, replacements, repairs and cleaning shall be a part of regular maintenance. 
(e)  Trees shall be staked and tied with lodge poles. 
(f)  Stakes and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct functions. Ties shall be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or girdling on trunks or branches. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.665.0, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-765—106-790. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - VEHICULAR PARKING, LOADING AND MANEUVERING AREAS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 106-791. - Paving and drainage of vehicular areas. 
(a)  All areas used for the movement, parking, loading, repair, or storage of vehicles of any type, other than mobile home sites, shall be paved with either: 
(1)  Concrete to a minimum thickness of 3½ inches; 
(2)  Asphaltic pavement to a minimum thickness of 1½ inches over four inches of crushed rock, gravel or similar material; or 
(3)  Other surfacing material providing equivalent life, service and appearance in the opinion of the director of public works. 
(b)  All such areas shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water. Drainage shall not be permitted across the surface of sidewalks or driveways, except for vehicular areas serving residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-792—106-820. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Off-Street Parking[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
 
Sec. 106-821. - General requirements. 
Every use of property shall be required to provide the number of off-street parking spaces which satisfies the needs of the use. The required parking spaces shall be used only for the purpose of parking vehicles. Unless otherwise specified in this division, the off-street parking required may be at grade, below grade or above grade and may be open or within a partially or fully enclosed structure. Every parking space shall be directly accessible from a vehicular driveway or aisle unless specified otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987) 
_____ 
Sec. 106-822. - Parking spaces required. 
(a)  Residential. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each category of residential use shall be as follows: 
Use 	Off-Street Parking Required 
(1) 	Attached or detached single-family dwellings 	Two parking spaces (in a garage) for each dwelling 
(2) 	Cluster development 	Two covered parking spaces for each dwelling unit plus one uncovered parking space for each dwelling unit 
(3) 	Two or more dwelling units in one building site such as duplexes, apartments, houses, apartment complexes including condominiums, stock cooperatives and community projects: 	
	a. 	Zero to one-bedroom units 	One and one-half covered off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit 
	b. 	Two-bedroom units 	Two covered off-street parking units for each dwelling unit 
	c. 	Three-bedroom or more 	Two and one-half covered off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit plus one-half off-street parking space for each bedroom in excess of three 
	d. 	In addition to the required number of parking spaces for each dwelling unit, two-tenths guest parking shall be provided for each dwelling unit on a building site containing four or more dwelling units 	
	e. 	For dwelling units containing five or more dwellings, up to 25% of the required uncovered parking spaces may be compact, provided such spaces are clearly and individually marked 	
	f. 	Location of required off-street parking spaces shall be located not more than 200 feet and conveniently accessible to the dwelling units served by the parking spaces 	
	g. 	Required covered off-street parking spaces for multiple-family residential shall be designated as to the dwelling unit to which they are assigned (plot plans and site plans submitted for permits) 	
	h. 	Uncovered and unenclosed off-street parking spaces which are located between building and an abutting street shall be screened from the street to a height of 3½ feet in a manner consistent with the city's ordinances 	
	For the purposes of this subsection, when a room such as a den, study or sewing room is provided in conjunction with a single, bachelor, one-bedroom or two-bedroom unit and the room meets the definition of a habitable room, such room shall be considered a bedroom; if such a room is constructed in a manner that 50 percent or more of one wall is open to an adjacent room or hallway, it shall not be considered a bedroom 	
(4) 	Mobile home park 	Two spaces for each mobile home (tandem parking permitted), plus one guest parking space for each four mobile homes 
(5) 	Convent, rectory, monastery and other group quarters for members of a religious order; boardinghouse or roominghouse, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory 	One space for each two rooming units 
(6) 	Caretaker's residence 	One space for each residence 
(7) 	Retirement home, senior citizens' housing 	One space for each rooming unit, plus two spaces for each resident employee. (The parking area to be improved shall be one space for each two rooming units, plus two spaces for each resident employee. The difference between the required parking area and the parking to be improved shall be held as open space reserve to meet additional parking needs or required parking in case of conversion to another use.) 
 
(b)  Institutional. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each category of institutional use shall be as follows: 
(1) 	Community care facilities 	Required parking spaces to be determined for each conditional use permit based primarily upon the facility's licensed capacity, type of care and number of employees 
(2) 	Longterm health care facility 	One space for each two beds licensed by the regulatory agency 
(3) 	Hospital 	One and one-half spaces for each bed licensed by the regulatory agency 
(4) 	Schools (public or private): 	
	a. 	Elementary school, junior high school (kindergarten through grade 9) 	Two spaces for each classroom 
	b. 	Senior high school 	Five spaces for each classroom 
	c. 	Business, vocational or trade school 	One space for each 125 square feet of teaching area 
(5) 	Library, museum, art gallery 	One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area 
(6) 	Church, mortuary 	One space for each seven fixed seats (or 10½ linear feet of fixed pew or bench) in the largest assembly room. For the area within the largest assembly room not occupied by fixed seats, pew or bench, the off-street parking required shall be one space for each 35 square feet of net floor area 
 
(c)  Commercial. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each category of commercial use shall be as follows: 
(1) 	Gymnasium, skating rink, theater, nightclub, auditorium, lodge room, sports arena, stadium and other places of public assembly or entertainment 	One space for each five fixed seats (or seven linear feet of fixed bench) in the largest room or space for public assembly or entertainment. For the area within the largest room or space for public assembly or entertainment not covered by fixed seats or benches, the off-street parking required shall be one space for each 21 square feet of net floor area. There shall be a minimum of ten parking spaces provided 
(2) 	Dining and drinking establishments 	Areas used exclusively for entertainment shall have a parking requirement as indicated in subsection (c)(1) of this section. All other areas shall have a parking requirement of one space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. There shall be a minimum of ten parking spaces provided 
		In the central business district as defined in the land use element of the general plan, the parking requirement shall be one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area for new development or enlargement of an existing building structure beyond its original size 
(3) 	Bowling alley 	Three spaces for each bowling lane, plus the parking spaces required for the other activities within the building 
(4) 	Hotel 	One space for each transient unit, plus two spaces for the resident manager's unit 
(5) 	Automobile service 	One space for each pump island, station plus one for each bay 
(6) 	Plant nursery 	One space for each 1,000 square feet of indoor or outdoor sales or display area. There shall be a minimum of five parking spaces provided 
(7) 	Offices, studios, retail sales and services and other general commercial activities not classified elsewhere 	One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. For a vehicle sales, display, leasing or rental agency, there shall be a minimum of five parking spaces provided 
(8) 	Clinic, dental or medical 	One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area 
 
(d)  Industrial. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each category of industrial use shall be as follows: 
(1) 	Manufacturing, warehousing and other industrial activities not classified elsewhere 	Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement: 
		a. One space for each 750 square feet of gross floor area up to and including 72,000 square feet, and thereafter one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; or 
		b. One space for each two employees on the largest shift. 
 
(e)  Recreational (public and private). The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each category of public and private recreational uses shall be as follows: 
(1) 	Passive park 	One space for each 10,000 square feet of net land area 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.03, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1463, § 1, 3-4-1996; Ord. No. 1656, § 3, 9-6-2016) 
_____ 
Sec. 106-823. - Computation of required parking spaces. 
(a)  When required parking spaces are based upon gross floor area, the floor area devoted exclusively to parking and maneuvering of vehicles shall not be considered in the computation. 
(b)  When, as a result of computation, the total number of parking spaces results in a fractional amount, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded, and any fraction equal to or greater than one-half shall require one parking space. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.04, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-824. - Parking spaces required for mixed uses. 
(a)  When there are two or more different uses located on the same lot or within the same building, the total number of parking spaces required shall equal the sum of requirements, including fractional amounts, for each use. The resulting sum shall then be rounded off to the nearest whole number pursuant to section 106-823. No parking space required for one use shall be considered as providing the required parking for any other use. However, for the area designated as the central business district in the land use element map of the general plan, parking spaces serving uses possessing unique and widely divergent operating hours, such that one use would not in its day-to-day operation have need of the parking spaces during the operating hours of the other use, may share those parking spaces with another use providing the area where the sharing occurs is not heavily impacted by a parking shortage as determined by the city engineer's parking study prepared and updated periodically for the city parking authority and provided: 
(1)  A shared parking agreement is developed between property owners and the agreement is submitted to the planning department for review prior to recording the agreement with the county recorder; and 
(2)  A copy of the recorded shared parking agreement is transmitted to the planning director prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Office space incidental to a manufacturing, warehouse or other industrial use shall have its required parking spaces computed at the same ratio as the industrial use, provided the office space does not exceed 20 percent of the total gross floor area. Office space in excess of 20 percent of the total gross floor area shall have its required parking spaces computed at the same ratio specified for office space. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.05, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1456, § 1, 7-17-1995)  
Sec. 106-825. - Change in intensity. 
Whenever the intensity of use changes through a change in the number or quantity of dwelling units, floor area, employees, fixed seats or other units of measurement specified in this subdivision to determine the required parking, the number of required spaces shall be adjusted either upward or downward to reflect the change in intensity. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.06, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-826. - Change in use. 
Whenever there is a change in use resulting in a different parking requirement, the required spaces shall be adjusted either upward or downward to reflect the change in use. This section shall not apply to the conversion of manufacturing or warehouse floor area to office space, provided the total office space does not exceed 20 percent of the total gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.07, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-827. - Location of parking. 
(a)  Parking spaces required for uses shall be located on the same lot as the use for which such spaces are provided. For nonresidential development, a variance may be granted to allow some or all of the required parking spaces to be located off site if facilities and/or in-lieu fees determined by city council resolution are provided instead of the required parking spaces. Conditions for granting a variance require findings that the variance will be an incentive to, and a benefit for, the proposed nonresidential development and that public transit facility is available for providing public transit patrons access to the nonresidential development. 
(b)  A nonresidential off-street parking lot may be permitted in a residential zone if the parking lot is located immediately adjacent to or across an alley, street, or easement from a nonresidential zoning district. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, parking for new development or change in use intensity resulting from an enlargement of an existing building footprint occurring in the central business district, as defined in the city's general plan, may take place on the same and/or a different site under the same or different ownership as the use served, provided that the available parking is located within 500 feet of the use being served, measured from the nearest corner of the parking facility to the entrance of the use served via the shortest pedestrian route. Facilities used for off-site parking, except city parking lots, shall require a written agreement between property owners specifying the term of the agreement, the number of spaces to be provided, and the location of the parking facility. The agreement shall be submitted to the planning director for approval before it is recorded in the official records of the county, on title to the property where the off-site parking is being provided. A conformed copy of the recorded agreement shall be delivered to the planning director prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.08, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1463, § 2, 3-4-1996)  
Sec. 106-828. - Provision for using city parking lots for on-site off-street parking facilities. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter to the contrary, off-street parking required of development consisting of either new construction or change in use intensity resulting from an enlargement of an existing building footprint taking place in the central business district, as defined in the general plan, may be provided by existing city parking lots through a written contract with the city. The contract shall: 
(1)  Designate the city parking lot number within the distance designated in section 106-827 and the number of off-site parking spaces to be credited to the development. In no case shall the number of credited parking spaces designated for a city parking lot exceed the actual number of available spaces. 
(2)  Prohibit the owner from utilizing the number of credited parking spaces in a city parking lot for any other use than that provided for in the contract. 
(3)  Provide that the credited parking spaces be conferred on a specified property and shall continue to apply to the property and shall not be transferable to another property by the owner who holds the credited parking spaces under the contract. 
(4)  Specify an appropriate cost per credited parking space to be paid the city by the owner of the property that has been given an entitlement to use credited parking spaces and specify the method of payment. 
(b)  For purposes of meeting the off-street parking requirements of this chapter, a contract meeting the requirements in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to be the equivalent of satisfying on-site off-street parking regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1463, § 3, 3-4-1996)  
Sec. 106-829. - Parking stall size. 
The minimum parking stall dimensions for required parking spaces shall not be less than that set forth as follows: 
	Type 	Dimensions 
(1) 	Residential uses 	Nine feet in width by 19 feet in length for both covered and uncovered parking 
(2) 	Commercial and industrial uses 	Nine feet in width by 19 feet in length 
(3) 	Spaces for physically handicapped 	Fourteen feet in width by 20 in length 
(4) 	Compact vehicle spaces 	Eight feet in width by 16 feet in length 
(5) 	Parallel parking spaces 	Length shall be increased to 24 feet, or 21 feet for compact cars 
(6) 	Nonresidential parking abutting a wall, fence, building or other obstruction 	One and one-half feet of width shall be added to the width otherwise required for commercial uses. Two feet of width shall be added to the width for all other nonresidential uses 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.09, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-830. - Parking for handicapped persons. 
Parking for handicapped persons shall be provided in accordance with standards established in the state handicapped requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.10, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-831. - Compact spaces. 
For nonresidential parking, not more than 30 percent of the total required spaces may be designed and reserved for the parking of compact vehicles. Such spaces shall be so designated either by signing or marking. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.11, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-832. - Parking lot design. 
(a)  The layout and design of parking lots and areas, including access to required parking spaces, turning radii, angle of parking and aisle width shall be as set forth in parking lot design standards adopted in accordance with section 106-868. All required off-street parking spaces shall be designed to provide safe and efficient means of access to an alley, street or driveway to the satisfaction of the director, and all off-street parking lots or areas with six or more spaces shall be designed in such a manner that vehicles exit such lots or areas facing forward. 
(b)  The minimum width with parking aisle for one-way traffic shall be 15 feet. 
Parking Angle 
(degrees) 	Aisle Width 
(feet) 
 0—54 	15.0 
55—59 	16.0 
60—64 	17.0 
65—69 	18.0 
70—74 	19.5 
75—79 	21.0 
80—90 	24.0 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.12, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-833. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Outdoor parking facilities with 25 or more spaces shall include interior landscaping of not less than two percent of the area devoted to outdoor parking. Border plantings abutting a building, structure, sidewalk, wall or street shall not be considered interior landscaping. The two-percent interior landscaping shall be so arranged as to emphasize visual attractiveness as viewed by the public from surrounding streets and walkways. Such landscaping shall be maintained with an automatic irrigation system permanently and completely installed, which delivers water to all landscaped areas. 
(b)  Except where determined infeasible by the director, all interior areas of required outdoor parking facilities with 25 or more spaces which are unused as a result of the parking design and which are directly visible from a public street or walkway shall be landscaped and maintained with an automatic irrigation system permanently and completely installed, which delivers water directly to all landscaped areas. Such landscaping may be included in the computation of the two-percent interior landscaping requirement. 
(c)  Where a required parking facility is located adjacent to a public street or walkway, there shall be a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width running parallel to and along the street or walkway, excluding space devoted to driveways and other access points. The landscaped strip shall be maintained with an automatic irrigation system permanently and completely installed, which delivers water directly to all landscaped areas. Such landscaped strip shall not be included in the computation of the two-percent interior landscaping requirement of this section. Within such landscaped strip, there shall be erected along its interior edge, to the satisfaction of the director, a decorative wall or fence built to a height of three to 3½ feet. Ivy or other vining plant material shall be planted adjacent to any wall or fence and trained to grow up the fence or wall to protect the fence or wall from vandalism. This requirement may be met by providing a landscaped berm three to 3½ feet in height. The plant material shall not be permitted to grow over 3½ feet in height in the front yard. An automatic drip irrigation system shall be provided to adequately water the plant material. 
(d)  Any area required to be landscaped by this section shall have a well-balanced automatic irrigation system designed by a landscape architect or person competent in landscape design and shall be operated by electrically timed controller stations set for early morning irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.13, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-834. - Lighting. 
All off-street parking areas within commercially zoned projects shall be provided with exterior lighting, meeting the following minimums: 
(1)  The equivalent of one footcandle of illumination shall be provided throughout the parking area. 
(2)  All lighting shall be on a time-clock or photo-sensor system. 
(3)  All lighting shall be designed to confine direct rays to the premises. No spillover beyond the property line shall be permitted. 
(4)  Illumination shall not include low pressure sodium. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.14, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-835. - Perimeter guards. 
Bumper guards or wheel stops shall be provided for all parking spaces abutting the perimeter of a parking area where such perimeter is within 15 feet of a building, structure, public right-of-way or lot line, except spaces within a garage or carport. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.15, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-836. - Marking of parking areas. 
Required parking spaces shall be double-striped with the stall widths measured from the midpoints of the double-stripe markings. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.16, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-837. - Parking area design. 
Common off-street parking areas including multiple garages and carports serving five or more dwelling units shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The off-street parking area shall be designed so that a vehicle within a parking area will not have to enter a street to move from one location to another within the parking area. Parking and maneuvering areas, including garages/carports, shall be designed so that any vehicle can leave the parking area and enter an adjoining vehicular right-of-way traveling in a forward direction. 
(2)  Bumpers and tire stops shall be provided at the end of each open parking space along any property line abutting a public walkway, street or alley except for screening its position to ensure that the motor vehicle will not extend into the public right-of-way. 
(3)  All parking spaces shall be clearly outlined on the surface of the parking facility except for parking spaces that otherwise have been in compliance with the parking detail approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.670.17, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-838—106-865. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Truck Loading and Maneuvering 
 
Sec. 106-866. - Loading areas required. 
Off-street loading areas shall be provided for the uses listed as follows: 
Uses 	Minimum Loading Area 
Requirements 
Use in the C-1 or C-2 zone 	One space for each lot, at least 14 feet by 40 feet 
Use in the M-1 or M-2 zone 	One space for each lot, at least 14 feet by 55 feet 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.671.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-867. - Truck maneuvering and loading area standards. 
Truck maneuvering and loading areas shall be provided and arranged as set forth in truck maneuvering and loading area standards adopted in accordance with section 106-866 wherever: 
(1)  A loading area is required. 
(2)  A loading dock is provided. 
(3)  A door greater than eight feet by eight feet is provided, unless the director finds that such door cannot be utilized or is not intended to be utilized for loading and unloading. 
(4)  Wherever a door equal to or less than eight feet by eight feet is provided, unless the director finds that such door cannot be utilized or is intended to be utilized for loading and unloading. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.671.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987) 
Note— Any primary use which is developed as office space shall not be required to provide a truck loading area, provided that a deed restriction is recorded, in the office of the county recorder, restricting the use on the property to office space, and such proof of recordation is submitted to the satisfaction of the director.  
Sec. 106-868. - Driveway access and traffic sight clearance. 
(a)  The location and design of driveway access to the public street and limitations on the location and height of walls, landscaping, buildings, signs and other facilities shall be as required by the director of public works pursuant to the highway and traffic regulations of this Code, where applicable, or as otherwise determined by the director of public works or by the fire department to be necessary in order to provide adequate sight distance for vehicular and pedestrian safety. 
(b)  Driveway access widths required to serve the following uses shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a single-family dwelling the minimum driveway width shall be ten feet. 
(2)  For four or less dwellings in any combination of single-family or multiple-family dwellings, the minimum driveway width shall be 20 feet. 
(3)  For five or more dwellings in any combination of single-family or multiple-family dwellings, the minimum driveway width shall be 24 feet, for each driveway, where one or more two-way traffic driveways are provided or 12 feet, for each driveway, where two or more one-way driveways are provided. 
(4)  For commercial uses, the minimum width of a driveway having public access shall be 24 feet. Channelized driveway widths shall be subject to the approval of the director and the director of public works. 
(5)  For industrial uses, the minimum driveway width shall be 24 feet and subject to the approval of the director and the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.671.03, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987) 
Note— If any building, or portion thereof, is proposed to be located more than 150 feet from a street, then fire department regulations may require a greater minimum driveway access width than the standards stated herein.  
Sec. 106-869. - Parking standards. 
Under this subdivision, the minimum width with parking aisle for one-way traffic shall be 15 feet. 
Parking Angle 
(degrees) 	Aisle Width 
(feet) 
 0—54 	15.0 
55—59 	16.0 
60—64 	17.0 
65—69 	18.0 
70—74 	19.5 
75—79 	21.0 
80—90 	24.0 
 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.671.04, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-870—106-895. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TRASH AREAS 
 
Sec. 106-896. - Multiple dwellings or group quarters. 
For each lot developed with multiple dwellings or group quarters, trash and garbage collection and storage areas shall be provided to serve the residential uses as follows: 
(1)  Location. All trash areas shall be located and arranged both for convenience to residents and for convenient vehicular access and pickup. No trash area shall be located within five feet of any window opening into a dwelling unit. 
(2)  Screening. All trash and garbage collection facilities shall be either enclosed within a building or by a screening fence or wall and gate five to six feet in height, unless, in the opinion of the director, such facilities are not within public view. The screening fence or wall shall be approved by the planning director. 
(3)  Number and size. The number and size of trash areas shall be as follows: 
a.  For residential facilities of one to three units: no specific number or size requirement. 
b.  For residential facilities of four or more units: A common trash area shall be provided of at least 4½ feet by 15 feet with an additional five square feet of trash area for each unit over 13. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.680, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-897. - Nonresidential uses. 
For each lot developed with a nonresidential use, adequate trash and garbage collection and storage areas shall be provided to accommodate all accumulation of refuse on the premises, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Location. All trash areas shall be located and arranged both for convenient vehicular access and pickup and shall not interfere with other pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns. 
(2)  Screening. All trash storage areas shall be enclosed within a building or by a screening fence or wall six feet in height, unless, in the opinion of the director, such facilities are not within public view. The screening fence or wall shall be architecturally compatible with the main building or buildings. 
(3)  Number and size. There shall be at least one outdoor trash storage area. Each trash storage area shall be at least 4½ feet by six feet. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.681, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-898—106-925. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SIGNS 
 
Sec. 106-926. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of the citizens of the city that this division emphasize the importance of business activity to the economic vitality of the city, help improve the ability of business owners and operators to identify their businesses to the community in order to enhance the furtherance of commerce, foster varied and interesting places of trade, and promote public safety by making business signing visible to the passing public. 
(b)  The city recognizes that different situations present different signing problems. Accordingly, the purpose of this division is to control signs in a manner which will maintain a high quality of development throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.691, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-927. - General regulations. 
(a)  A sign permit shall be required prior to the placing, erecting, moving, reconstructing, altering or displaying of any sign within the city. Building and electrical permits shall also be obtained as required by the building and electrical code. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to mean that any permit shall be required for maintaining and repairing existing signs which comply with this division. 
(b)  In no case shall a lighted sign or lighting device thereof be so placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public street, walkway or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove all signs from any business that has been vacant for 60 days. However, any sign may be continued past 60 days if the sign face area is removed and replaced with a blank sign face or covered completely with a material approved by the planning director. If after eight months the business remains vacant or a new business is occupying the building and not utilizing the sign, the sign shall be removed. 
(d)  All signs shall be maintained in good repair, including display surfaces which shall be kept neatly painted or pasted. 
(e)  Any sign which does not conform to this division shall be made to conform or shall be removed as provided in section 106-261. 
(f)  Any sign which is not in compliance with this division shall be brought into compliance within 30 days of notice of the nature of the noncompliance to the owner or person in possession of the sign by the director. If the sign is not made to comply with this division within 30 days, it shall be removed. This 30-day period may be extended by the director for good cause shown by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.692, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-928. - Criteria for all signs requiring a permit. 
A permit application for a sign otherwise in compliance with this division shall be approved by the planning director if the sign complies with the following criteria: 
(1)  A sign would serve primarily to identify the business, the establishment, or the type of activity conducted on the same premises, or the project, service or interest being offered for sale, lease or rent thereon, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
(2)  The design of signs should be consistent with professional graphic standards. 
(3)  Illumination of signs, where not specifically prohibited by this division, should be at the lowest possible level consistent with adequate identification and readability. 
(4)  Signs should be harmonious with the materials, color, texture, size, shape, height, placement and design of the building, property, shopping center and area. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.692.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-929. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The sections of this division regulating signs shall not apply to the following signs except as otherwise indicated: 
(1)  Official notices issued by any court, public body, or public officer. 
(2)  Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or for any person in giving legal notice. 
(3)  Traffic, directional, warning or informational signs required or authorized by the public authority having jurisdiction. 
(4)  Official signs used for emergency purposes only. 
(5)  Permanent memorial or historical signs, plaques or markers. 
(6)  Public utility signs, provided such signs do not exceed three square feet in sign face area. 
(7)  Signs, including painted signs, on private property prohibiting parking, blocking of driveways and trespassing and similar directional signs, subject to the approval of the director. 
(8)  Residential name and number plates identifying the residence address or its occupants, or both, not to exceed two square feet in area. 
(9)  Seasonal or special event signs and decorations displayed between 20 days prior to and 15 days after the event, provided that they are not located in the public right-of-way without city council approval and that seasonal or special event signs shall be limited to one wall sign or one window sign not exceeding 30 square feet in area. 
(10)  Non-commercial signs, not subject to any other subsection of this subsection (a), provided that temporary signs relating to a specific event are not displayed more than ten days after the event, and the total sign area for any one parcel does not exceed 64 square feet, and such signs shall not be located in the public right-of-way. 
(11)  One unlighted construction sign per job site, not exceeding six square feet in any residential zone, or in all other zones, one unlighted project sign not exceeding 32 square feet and one unlighted sign for each participating contractor not exceeding six square feet each. Project and contractor signs shall be removed prior to final inspection. 
(12)  In the C and M zones, temporary advertising signs on windows not exceeding 40 percent of the total window area (with 60-percent visibility). Seasonal or special event decorations shall be calculated as part of the 40-percent window area coverage. 
(13)  Automobile service station price signs, not exceeding 12 square feet in sign area. 
(14)  Menu boards on the interior driveways of drive-through facilities, subject to the approval of the director. 
(b)  All restrictions expressed in section 106-930 are applicable to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.692.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 11-15-2004)  
Sec. 106-930. - Prohibited signs. 
The following advertising signs shall be prohibited in all zones: 
(1)  A-frame or sandwich-board signs. 
(2)  Flashing or scintillating signs. 
(3)  Painted signs (see section 106-6). 
(4)  Devices dispensing bubbles and free-floating particles of matter. 
(5)  Any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public which any person posts, prints, sticks, stamps, takes, or otherwise affixes or causes the same to be done to or upon any public street, walkway, crosswalk, other rights-of-way, curb, lamp post, hydrant, tree, telephone booth or pole, lighting system, or other public place except as may be required by ordinance or law. The provisions of this section shall not impact the city's ability to permit commercial sponsor signs to be posted on the city owned little league fields pursuant to regulations adopted by the city council. 
(6)  Devices projecting, or otherwise reproducing, the image of an advertising sign or message or any surface or object. 
(7)  Signs on vehicles. No person shall erect or maintain a sign which is attached to, suspended from, or supported in whole or in part by any vehicle, whether self-propelled or towed. A sign will be allowed if painted directly upon, or permanently affixed to, the body or integral part of the vehicle or permanent decoration, identification or display, if such vehicle is used regularly in the business to which the sign pertains, for purposes other than as an advertising device, and such sign shall conform to the limitations set forth in the state Vehicle Code, excluding only public carrier buses and trains. 
(8)  Outdoor advertising signs, except as provided for in subsection 106-583(7). 
(9)  Subdivision directional signs. 
(10)  Roof signs. 
(11)  Home occupation signs. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.693, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1513, § 2, 1-18-2000) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1513, adopted Jan. 18, 2000, which amends subsection (5) of this section, further provides that pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, the amendment is categorically exempt under article 19, section 15311(a), accessory structures, on-premise signs.  
Sec. 106-931. - Real estate advertising signs. 
Real estate advertising signs are permitted in residential, commercial and industrial zones, subject to the following: 
(1)  Residential zones. 
a.  In the R-1 zone, one unlighted real estate advertising sign is permitted, not to exceed six square feet in area and six feet in height from ground level to top of sign, on a straight stake, containing information restricted to the sale, lease or rental of the premises on which the sign is located. A double-faced rider, not larger than six inches by 24 inches, containing advertising matter pertinent to the premises, is permitted to be placed under and over the real estate advertising sign. 
b.  In the R-2 and R-3 zones, one nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated sale or lease sign for each street frontage of the total parcel involved is permitted, not exceeding a height of 12 feet if freestanding and not above the roofline if attached to a building; having an area not exceeding six square feet for each lot or for each 5,000 square feet in such total parcel, whichever ratio permits the larger area; and provided that no such sign shall exceed 64 square feet in area and any such sign exceeding 18 square feet in area shall be set back at least four feet from all street property lines. 
c.  Real estate advertising signs shall be removed from the premises within seven days after the close of escrow or cancellation of the sales or lease agreement. 
d.  Flags, streamers, pennants, lean-in and directional signs and similar displays are permitted between 9:00 a.m. and sunset. One additional sign denoting open house, not to exceed six square feet in area, is permitted between 9:00 a.m. and sunset, provided a representative of the real estate firm or the property owner is present at all times while such sign is displayed. Such sign is subject to all restrictions provided in this section. 
e.  All restrictions expressed in division 2 of article III of this chapter are applicable to this section. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial zones. 
a.  One unlighted sign structure is permitted per lot, except on parcels larger than five acres one such sign structure is permitted for each street frontage of the parcel. 
b.  A sign structure may have any number of sign faces, but the total sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet per sign structure in commercial zones and not more than 100 square feet per sign structure in industrial zones. 
c.  All portions of a sign structure shall be not less than five feet from the inside line of the sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, from the lot line, except, if the building setback is less than ten feet, the sign structure shall not be less than one-half of the setback from the inside line of the sidewalk or lot line. 
d.  A sign may be affixed to a building provided that the sign shall not extend above the roofline or parapet wall of the building. 
e.  Advertising copy shall pertain only to the premises upon which the sign is located. 
f.  Any such signs shall be removed within 15 days after the close of escrow or cancellation of the sales or lease agreement. 
g.  All restrictions expressed in divisions 6, 7, 9 and 10 of article III of this chapter are applicable to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.1, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-932. - Identification signs. 
(a)  In residential zones, for each multiple dwelling or roominghouse, one unlighted sign not exceeding six square feet in area and four feet in any dimension may be placed on the wall of the building, provided it does not extend above or out from the front wall and indicates only the name and address of the premises. 
(b)  Identification signs for nonresidential uses, in residential zones including a bulletin board of a public, charitable or religious institution used to display announcements relative to meetings to be held on the premises, may be erected subject to the following: 
(1)  Not more than two sign structures shall be permitted on a lot, except the commission may approve additional signs if it finds there are more than two separate nonresidential uses on the same lot, the location of not more than two sign structures would constitute an unnecessary hardship on the property owner, and the additional signs would not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  The total sign area per lot shall not exceed an area in square feet equal to one-half of the linear feet of lot frontage on a public street not to exceed a maximum of 25 square feet. 
(3)  A freestanding sign in excess of four feet in height shall not be permitted. 
(4)  A sign may be affixed to a building provided that the sign shall not extend more than three feet above the roofline or parapet wall of the building. 
(5)  All restrictions and regulations expressed in sections 106-930 and 106-936 are applicable to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.2, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-933. - Business signs. 
Business signs are permitted in commercial and industrial zones, subject to the following: 
(1)  Total sign area per building frontage shall not exceed 20 percent of the area of the building elevation fronting on a public street, public alley, or parking lot (not to exceed 150 square feet of total sign area). This sign area standard applies to single tenant as well as multitenant buildings. Furthermore, advertising, other than the business name, is restricted to 25 percent of the total sign area. These limitations shall not apply to on-site business directory signs, provided that such on-site directory signs comply with the following: 
a.  The area devoted to advertising each individual business shall not exceed two square feet. 
b.  The area devoted to advertising the name of the complex or center shall not exceed 25 percent of the total directory sign area or 20 square feet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Freestanding monument signs are permitted, subject to the following: 
a.  Height shall be a maximum of four feet. 
b.  The area shall be a maximum of 30 square feet (total area). 
(3)  Canopy signs are permitted, subject to the following: 
a.  The distance between ground elevation and the bottom of such sign shall not be less than ten feet. 
b.  Such sign shall be located at a 90-degree angle to the face of the building. 
c.  Such sign shall be centered between the face of the building and the outer edge of the awning or canopy. 
d.  Such sign shall not exceed two feet in height or two-thirds the length of the projection of the awning or canopy. 
(4)  A wall sign may not extend more than three feet above the roofline or parapet wall of the building. 
(5)  Electronic message center signs are permitted, subject to the following: 
a.  Such sign shall be at least 100 feet from a residential zone. 
b.  Such sign shall be at least 500 feet from any other electronic message center sign. 
c.  Such sign shall be affixed to a pole or building and subject to the freestanding sign limitations of this division. 
d.  No such sign shall be erected until written approval is obtained from the city traffic commission. Approval shall not be granted if the proposed sign would interfere with traffic signals, disrupt normal traffic flow or otherwise create a safety hazard. 
(6)  Signs which are affixed to a building and which project into an existing or future right-of-way may so project to a maximum distance as designated in the following table: 
Height of Bottom of Sign from Finished Grade 
(feet) 	Maximum 
Projection 
Permitted 
Less than 8 	0 
8 to 10 	6 inches 
10 to 12 	2 feet 
12 to 16 	4 feet 
Over 16 	5 feet 
 
(7)  The following signs are permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit: 
a.  Revolving signs; 
b.  Supergraphic signs; and 
c.  A sign program meeting the intent of this chapter and the approval of the planning commission. 
(8)  All restrictions expressed in section 106-930 are applicable to this section. 
(9)  Window signs shall be governed as follows: 
a.  Permanent window sign copy may not occupy more than ten percent of the total area of the window or door where it is displayed. If the lettering or symbol in such a display is higher than three inches, it is counted against the total allowable signage on a building. 
b.  Permanent window sign and temporary advertising postal sign copy and/or painted window sign shall not exceed 40 percent of the total area of the window where they are displayed. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.3, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-934. - Streamers, banners and pennants. 
(a)  Prohibition. Streamers, banners, pennants, and similar displays are not permitted in residential zones except as provided in section 106-931. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial zones. No streamers, banners, pennants, whirling devices, flags and similar objects which wave, float, fly, rotate or move in the breeze shall be permitted except for a 21-day period not to exceed five times each year for promotional event and in connection with opening of a store or other permitted establishment. An opening includes a new facility, establishment under new management and opening following a closure due to accidental damage. A permit shall be issued by the city for each 21-day period per year but not to exceed 105 days. Display of banners and pennants for special events authorized by the city is exempt from the 21-day permit requirement provided the display is removed at the end of the special event. In lieu of the use of streamers, whirling devices, banners, pennants, flags, and similar displays, businesses engaged in the sale of automobiles may utilize a temporary canopy or tent type structure for the 21-day period. Height limits for all displays shall not exceed the height limit established for the zoning district. 
(c)  Restrictions. All restrictions expressed in section 106-930 are applicable to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.4, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-935. - Signs in yards in commercial zones. 
In commercial zones, signs are permitted in required yards other than in existing or future street rights-of-way if in accordance with sections 106-930, 106-931, 106-933 and 106-934. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.41, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-936. - Specific business signs. 
(a)  Automobile service station signs. Automobile service station signs shall be permitted a total sign area of 2½ square feet per linear foot of lot frontage or 20 percent of the area of the building elevation fronting on a public street, public alley, or public parking lot, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Sale of automobiles, recreation vehicles, travel trailers, trucks and trailers. In addition to permanent signs permitted for such facilities, such as pole signs approved by the planning commission through a special sign permit, devices such as kite-shaped, round, oval and other temporary fabric or vinyl signs, called diamond or fan top pole displays or signs of similar materials, typical of car dealerships, may be utilized. Each property shall be limited to one such device for each functional on-site light pole. The signs shall be similar in design to sketches found in Exhibit "A", a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
The maximum size of such signs shall not exceed 48 square feet in area, with a minimum clearance from the public right-of-way of eight feet. No part of the signage shall extend above the connecting base of the light standard to the pole. Such signs shall not obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving an intersection or block out the permanent sign copy of any other business establishment situated along the same street frontage. The temporary signage shall be maintained in a clean, neat and untattered condition. 
To display promotional banner-, streamer- and pennant-type signs, a conditional use application and an interior landscape plan for two percent of the lot area devoted to automotive sales shall be submitted within 90 days from the passage of this ordinance to the planning department. The two percent interior landscaping plan shall be arranged to emphasize visual attractiveness as viewed by the public from surrounding streets and walkways. Included as part of the required two percent landscaping shall be a landscape strip not less than five feet in width running parallel to and along the street excluding space devoted to driveways and other access points. Such landscaped strip shall be maintained with an automatic irrigation system permanently and completely installed, which delivers water directly to all landscaped areas. Work on the proposed interior landscaping plan shall commence in 30 days and be completed in 60 days from the date of approval of the conditional use permit. Failure to comply with the aforementioned time frame shall result in the immediate removal of promotional banners, streamers and pennants. 
(c)  Hospital signs. Hospital signs shall be permitted provided that the signs are submitted to and approved by the planning commission. Off-site directional signs may be permitted by the commission. 
(d)  Exceptions and restrictions. All exceptions and restrictions expressed in sections 106-929 and 106-930 are applicable to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.42, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1496, § 2, 11-16-1998)  
Sec. 106-937. - Freestanding signs. 
(a)  In all commercial and industrial zones, freestanding signs, other than monument signs, shall be reviewed by the planning commission and shall require a special sign permit. In order for the commission to approve such a sign, or approve with conditions, it shall require a finding that the sign is compatible with existing conditions in the neighborhood and is necessary for the conduct of the business the sign advertises. 
(b)  Sign size, height and location shall be subject to planning commission approval. 
(c)  Procedures for approval of an application for a freestanding sign are as follows: 
(1)  An applicant for a freestanding sign shall provide such information and plans as shall be required by the community development department. The department shall notify adjacent property owners within 300 feet on either side along the street frontage of the property that is the subject of the hearing not less than ten days prior to the planning commission public hearing on the application. The notice shall include the sign size, height and location. 
(2)  For this purpose, the last name and address of such owners as shown upon the latest assessment roll of the county assessor shall be used. Such notice shall state the nature of the request, the location of the property and the time and place of the scheduled hearing. 
(3)  The planning commission shall conduct the public hearing in accordance with section 106-73 of this chapter. 
(4)  After conducting the hearing, the commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Such decision shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant and adjacent property owners. The decision will be effective ten days after the decision. 
(d)  The planning commission's decision may be appealed to the city council by any affected party, in accordance with sections 106-76 through 106-81 of this chapter. 
(e)  The application fee and appeal fee for a special sign permit shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.43, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-938. - Materials. 
Signs and sign support structures shall conform to the requirements specified in chapter 62 of the 1991 edition of the City of Los Angeles Uniform Building Code adopted by the city by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.44, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-939. - Required signs in all zones. 
All structures in the city which face a public right-of-way shall display in a conspicuous and easily visible place a sign or plate not to exceed one square foot in area containing the numerals of the street address of the structure. In the residential zones, the numerals shall be no less than three inches in height; in the commercial and manufacturing zones, the numerals shall be no less than four inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.694.50, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-940. - Alcohol advertising. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to promote the welfare of minors by discouraging the commercial exploitation of potential underage alcohol consumers and by discouraging actions that promote the unlawful sale of alcoholic beverages to minors as well as the unlawful purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by minors. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, unless it is clearly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows: 
Advertising means printed matter that calls the public's attention to things for sale. 
Advertising display means any sign, billboard, signboard, poster, placard, pennant, flag, banner, marquee, graphic display, mural, or similar device that is used to advertise or promote a product. 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, or any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted mixed or combined with other substances. 
Area which minors frequent means any school, child-care center, youth center, or park. 
Child-care center means a facility, other than a family day care home, in which less than 24-hour per-day non-medical care and supervision is provided for children in a group setting as defined and licensed under the regulations of the state of California. 
Park means any park, playground, or area of land set aside for public recreational and/or ornamental purposes, which is under the control, operation, or management of a governmental agency and wherein there may be an area containing, but not limited to equipment such as swings and seesaws, athletic fields, baseball diamonds, basketball courts, tennis courts, or swimming pools. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or other legal entity. 
Promotion means a display of any logo, brand name, character, graphic, artwork, colors, scenes, or designs that are a recognized image of a particular product brand that calls the public's attention to the product brand. 
Publicly visible location means any outdoor location that is visible from any street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare, or any location inside a commercial establishment that is in or adjacent to a window or doorway and is visible from any street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare. 
School means any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes kindergarten, elementary, junior high, senior high or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university. 
Youth center means any designated indoor public, private or parochial facility, other than a private residence or a multiple dwelling unit, which contains programs which provide, on a regular basis, activities or services for persons who have not yet reached the age of 18 years, including, but not limited to, community-based programs, after-school programs, weekend programs, violence prevention programs, leadership development programs, vocational programs, substance abuse prevention programs, individual or group counseling, case management, remedial, tutorial or other educational assistance or enrichment, music, art, dance and other recreational or cultural activities, physical fitness activities and sports programs. 
(c)  Restrictions on alcohol advertising. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall place or maintain, or cause or allow to be placed or maintained, any advertising or promotion of alcoholic beverages on any advertising display in a publicly visible location. 
(2)  No part of this section shall be construed to permit any advertising display that is otherwise restricted or prohibited by law. Nor shall it be construed to permit an otherwise restricted or prohibited advertising display because it is combined with a permitted public service message. 
(3)  No part of this section shall be construed to permit any advertising display otherwise restricted or prohibited by sections 106-926 et seq. of this Code. 
(4)  No part of this section shall be construed to regulate messages that do not propose a commercial transaction. 
(5)  No part of this section shall be construed to prohibit the display of public service messages designed to communicate the hazards of alcoholic beverages or to encourage minors to refrain from consuming or purchasing alcoholic beverages. However, this section shall not be construed to permit such a message when it is made in conjunction with the positive display of a recognized image, artwork, photograph, logo or graphic used for marketing or promotion of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to any advertising display: 
(1)  that is located in a nonresidential zone, provided it is more than 1,000 feet in any direction (measured in a straight line from parcel boundary to parcel boundary) from any area which minors frequent; or 
(2)  that is located adjacent to and the copy on which is visible from, an interstate highway; or 
(3)  that exists at the time of the introduction of this ordinance, contains the name or slogan of a business that sells alcoholic beverages, and is on the premises of the business; or 
(4)  that is located on the premises of a commercial establishment if the advertising display provides notice that the establishment sells alcoholic beverages, as long as the display does not promote any brand of alcoholic beverage or otherwise constitute a promotion as defined by this section; or 
(5)  that is located inside the premises of an establishment that lawfully sells alcoholic beverages unless the advertising display is attached to, affixed to, leaning against, or otherwise placed within three feet of any window or door in such a manner that it is visible from outside the building; or 
(6)  that is located on a commercial vehicle used exclusively for transporting alcoholic beverages; or 
(7)  that is located on alcoholic beverage packaging; or 
(8)  that is worn as clothing by an individual; or 
(9)  that is erected in conjunction with a one-day alcoholic beverage sales license or temporary license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control provided the advertising display is located at the location licensed for alcoholic beverage sales. 
(f)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  On the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section, advertising displays that were in place at the time of the introduction of this ordinance may remain in place for no more than 60 additional days, unless an extension of time is granted pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Owners of advertising displays in place on April 19, 1999 may, no later than the 60th day after the effective date of the ordinance, apply for an extension of time for compliance and provide written documentation to the director of community development or his designee that demonstrates that the owner had a right or an obligation under a written lease or contract executed prior to April 19, 1999 to maintain an advertising display in violation of this section for a period extending beyond November 30, 1999. On timely receipt of sufficient documentation, the director of community development or his designee shall grant an extension of time to remove the advertising display for the period required or authorized by the lease or contract or for a period of one year, whichever is shorter. Renewal rights present in the lease or contract shall not affect the determination of the period required or authorized by the lease or contract. 
(3)  Owners of advertising displays in place on April 19, 1999 may, no later than November 30, 1999, apply for an extension of time for compliance and provide written documentation to the director of community development or his designee that demonstrates that timely compliance would cause unreasonable financial hardship and that granting the extension of time would not confer a special privilege on the owner. On timely receipt of sufficient documentation, the director of community development or his designee shall conduct a hearing pursuant to sections 106-71 et seq. of this Code and determine whether, and on what conditions, the extension of time ought to be granted. 
(4)  Whether or not an extension of time to remove a pre-existing advertising display is granted pursuant to subsection 106-940(e)(2), or (3) herein, advertising displays that are prohibited by this ordinance shall not be legal nonconforming uses. 
(g)  Violation/penalties. 
(1)  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a violation. After notification, it shall be a separate offense for each day such violation shall continue. 
(2)  In addition to the other remedies provided in this Code, any violation of this section may be enforced by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including, but not limited to administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. The remedies provided by this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(3)  An action for injunction may be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by any aggrieved person, or any person or entity that will fairly and adequately represent the interests of the protected class. 
(Ord. No. 1503, § 1, 5-3-1999)  
Sec. 106-941. - Tobacco advertising and promotion. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to promote the welfare of minors by discouraging the commercial exploitation of potential underage tobacco consumers and by discouraging actions that promote the unlawful sale of tobacco products to minors as well as the unlawful purchase or possession of tobacco products by minors. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, unless it is clearly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows: 
Advertising means printed matter that calls the public's attention to things for sale. 
Advertising display means any sign, billboard, signboard, poster, placard, pennant, flag, banner, marquee, graphic display, mural, or similar device that is used to advertise or promote a product. 
Area which minors frequent means any school, child-care center, youth center, or park. 
Child-care center means a facility, other than a family day care home, in which less than 24-hour per-day non-medical care and supervision is provided for children in a group setting as defined and licensed under the regulations of the state of California. 
Cigar lounge means a private smokers' lounge of an enclosed area in or attached to a retail or wholesale tobacco shop that is dedicated to the use of tobacco products, including but not limited to cigars and pipes. 
Park means any park, playground, or area of land set aside for public recreational and/or ornamental purposes, which is under the control, operation, or management of a governmental agency and wherein there may be an area containing, but not limited to, equipment such as swings and seesaws, athletic fields, baseball diamonds, basketball courts, tennis courts, or swimming pools. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or other legal entity. 
Promotion means a display of any logo, brand name, character, graphic, artwork, colors, scenes, or designs that are a recognized image of a particular product brand that calls the public's attention to the product brand. 
Publicly visible location means any outdoor location that is visible from any street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare, or any location inside a commercial establishment that is in or adjacent to a window or doorway and is visible from any street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare. 
School means any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by State Board of Education. This definition includes kindergarten, elementary, junior high, senior high or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university. 
Tobacco product means any substance containing any tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, smokeless tobacco, and products prepared from tobacco and designed for smoking or ingestion. 
Tobacco shop means a business establishment whose main purpose is the sale of tobacco products, including but not limited to, cigars, pipe tobacco, and smoking accessories. 
Vendor-assisted sale means a purchase requiring a direct, face-to-face exchange between the retailer and the customer, in which the vendor has access to the tobacco product, and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased. 
Youth center means any designated indoor public, private or parochial facility, other than a private residence or a multiple dwelling unit, which contains programs which provide, on a regular basis, activities or services for persons who have not yet reached the age of 18 years, including, but not limited to, community-based programs, after-school programs, weekend programs, violence prevention programs, leadership development programs, vocational programs, substance abuse prevention programs, individual or group counseling, case management, remedial, tutorial or other educational assistance or enrichment, music, art, dance and other recreational or cultural activities, physical fitness activities and sports programs. 
(c)  Restrictions on tobacco advertising. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall place or maintain, or cause or allow to be placed or maintained, any advertising or promotion of tobacco products on any advertising display in a publicly visible location. 
(2)  No part of this section shall be construed to permit any advertising display that is otherwise restricted or prohibited by law. Nor shall it be construed to permit an otherwise restricted or prohibited advertising display because it is combined with a permitted public service message. 
(3)  No part of this section shall be construed to permit any advertising display otherwise restricted or prohibited by sections 106-926 et seq. of this Code. 
(4)  No part of this section shall be construed to regulate messages that do not propose a commercial transaction. 
(5)  No part of this section shall be construed to prohibit the display of public service messages designed to communicate the hazards of tobacco products or to encourage minors to refrain from using or purchasing tobacco products. However, this section shall not be construed to permit such a message when it is made in conjunction with the positive display of a recognized image, artwork, photograph, logo or graphic used for marketing or promotion of tobacco products. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to any advertising display: 
(1)  that is located in a nonresidential zone, provided it is more than 1,000 feet in any direction (measured in a straight line from parcel boundary to parcel boundary) from any area which minors frequent; or 
(2)  that it is located adjacent to and the copy on which is visible from, an interstate highway; or 
(3)  that exists at the time of the introduction of this ordinance, contains the name or slogan of a business that sells tobacco products, and is on the premises of the business; or 
(4)  that is located on the premises of a commercial establishment if the advertising display provides notice that the establishment sells tobacco products, as long as the display does not promote any brand of tobacco product or otherwise constitute a promotion as defined by this section; or 
(5)  that is located inside the premises of an establishment that lawfully sells tobacco products unless the advertising display is attached to, affixed to, leaning against, or otherwise placed within three feet of any window or door in such a manner that it is visible from outside the building; or 
(6)  that is located on a commercial vehicle used exclusively for transporting tobacco products; or 
(7)  that is located on tobacco product packaging; or 
(8)  that is worn as clothing by an individual. 
(e)  Requirement of vendor-assisted sales. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco product by means of a self-service display, cigarette vending machine, or by any means other than vendor-assisted sales. This prohibition shall not apply to tobacco shops and cigar lounges. A self-service display is the open display of tobacco products which the public has access to without the intervention of a store employee, including but not limited to a rack, shelf, or counter-top display. 
(f)  Purchaser identification. The seller of any tobacco products shall require photographic identification if a purchaser reasonably appears to be under 27 years of age. In compliance with federal and state law, tobacco products shall not be sold to anyone under 18 years of age. 
(g)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  On the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section, advertising displays that were in place at the time of the introduction of this ordinance may remain in place for no more than 60 additional days, unless an extension of time is granted pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Owners of advertising displays in place on April 19, 1999 may, no later than the sixtieth day after the effective date of the ordinance, apply for an extension of time for compliance and provide written documentation to the director of community development or his designee that demonstrates that the owner had a right or an obligation under a written lease or contract executed prior to April 19, 1999 to maintain an advertising display in violation of this section for a period extending beyond November 30, 1999. On timely receipt of sufficient documentation, the director of community development or his designee shall grant an extension of time to remove the advertising display for the period required or authorized by the lease or contract or for a period of one year, whichever is shorter. Renewal rights present in the lease or contract shall not affect the determination of the period required or authorized by the lease or contract. 
(3)  Owners of advertising displays in place on April 19, 1999 may, no later than November 30, 1999, apply for an extension of time for compliance and provide written documentation to the director of community development or his designee that demonstrates that timely compliance would cause unreasonable financial hardship and that granting the extension of time would not confer a special privilege on the owner. On timely receipt of sufficient documentation, the director of community development or his designee shall conduct a hearing pursuant to sections 106-71 et seq. of this Code and determine whether, and on what conditions, the extension of time ought to be granted. 
(4)  Whether or not an extension of time to remove a pre-existing advertising display is granted pursuant to subsection 106-641(g)(2), or (3) herein, advertising displays that are prohibited by this section shall not be legal nonconforming uses. 
(h)  Violation/penalties. 
(1)  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a violation. After notification, it shall be a separate offense for each day such violation shall continue. 
(2)  In addition to the other remedies provided in this Code, any violation of this section may be enforced by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including but not limited to administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. The remedies provided by this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(3)  An action for injunction may be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by any aggrieved person, or any person or entity that will fairly and adequately represent the interests of the protected class. 
(Ord. No. 1504, § 1, 5-3-1999)  
Secs. 106-942—106-965. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 106-966. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the development standards in this division is to: 
(1)  Provide for open areas around structures where needed for access to and around buildings; 
(2)  Protect access to natural light, ventilation and direct sunlight; 
(3)  Separate incompatible land uses; 
(4)  Provide space for privacy, landscaping and recreation; 
(5)  Regulate the height of structures; 
(6)  Support public safety; and 
(7)  Preserve neighborhood character. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.550, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-967. - Residential zoned property. 
Development standards for residential zoned property shall be as follows: 
(1)  Accessory structures (detached). For detached accessory structures, the side and rear yard setback shall be a minimum of three feet. No structure shall exceed 50 percent of the rear yard area. 
(2)  Common area (recreation area). On each lot developed with more than four units there shall be a common area of no less than 1,000 square feet or 100 square per unit, whichever is greater. The minimum dimension for such an area shall be 25 feet. 
(3)  Garages/carports. Garages/carports shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the ultimate street right-of-way. 
(4)  Landscaping. A minimum of 50 percent of the front yard shall be maintained in live landscaping. 
(5)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall be as follows: 
a.  In the R-1 and R-2 zones, 35 feet. 
b.  In the R-3 zone, 45 feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be as follows: 
a.  In the R-1 zone, 50 percent. Accessory buildings may not occupy more than 50 percent of the required rear yard area. 
b.  In the R-2 and R-3 zones, 40 percent. Accessory buildings may not occupy more than 30 percent of the required rear yard area. 
(7)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet. 
(8)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet, 55 feet for a corner lot. 
(9)  Minimum lot depth. The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet. 
(10)  Recreational vehicles. No recreational vehicles shall be permitted within the required front setback area for a period of time exceeding 72 hours. 
(11)  Setback. For setbacks see the building lines chart in article IV of this chapter. 
(12)  Storage facilities. Each dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling shall have at least 100 cubic feet of enclosed storage space. 
(13)  Trash areas. Trash areas shall be provided as approved by the director. 
(14)  Usable open space (balconies, patios). On each lot developed with more than four units, there shall be, in addition to other required yards and spaces, usable open space equal to 150 square feet per unit. Such space shall have a minimum dimension of ten feet. 
(15)  Utilities. All utilities shall be underground. 
(16)  Walls and fences. A six-foot wall shall be constructed where an R-2 or R-3 property abuts an R-1 zoned property and other treatment as approved by the director. Also see section 106-970 pertaining to walls and fences. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.551, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-968. - Commercial zoned property. 
Development standards for commercial zoned property shall be as follows: 
(1)  Exterior building colors. All buildings including nonconforming residential structures shall be painted in compliance with the color chart adopted by the redevelopment agency on file in the office of the community development department, provided that the planning commission may accept buildings operating under a national or retail franchise with uniform colors as part of its trademark or identity from the requirement of plans or color chart. 
(2)  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be 90 degrees cutoff downlight. The rays of any such lighting shall be confined to the property. No spillover shall be permitted. 
(3)  Landscaping. A minimum of ten percent of the lot shall be landscaped. All areas not used for parking or building shall be landscaped with permanent watering and maintenance. (See section 106-764.) 
(4)  Maximum building height. The maximum height of buildings shall be 45 feet. A screened shelter for the protection of equipment necessary only to the operation of the building excluding signs or space for additional floor area may extend a maximum of ten feet above the height limit. Heights in excess of 45 feet are subject to a conditional use permit as provided in division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be 60 percent. 
(6)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet. 
(7)  Parking, loading, etc. Parking, loading, etc., shall be as required by division 3 of article V of this chapter. 
(8)  Permanent buildings. All uses permitted in C-1 and C-2 zones shall be inside permanent buildings except those enumerated in subsections 106-488(6), (7) and (8) and 106-517(7) and (8). 
(9)  Setbacks. For setbacks see the building lines chart in article IV of this chapter. 
(10)  Signs. Signs shall comply with division 5 of article V of this chapter. 
(11)  Storage. All storage must be confined to the interior of the permanent structure. 
(12)  Utilities. All utilities shall be underground. 
(13)  Walls and fences. A six-foot wall shall be constructed where the property abuts residential zoned property and other treatment as approved by the director. The wall shall not encroach into any future right-of-way. Also see section 106-970 pertaining to walls and fences. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.555, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-969. - Industrial zoned property. 
Development standards for industrial zoned property shall be as follows: 
(1)  Exterior building colors. All buildings including nonconforming residential structures shall be painted in compliance with the color chart adopted by the redevelopment agency on file in the office of the community development department, provided that the planning commission may accept buildings operating under a national or retail franchise with uniform colors as part of its trademark or identity from the requirement of plans or color chart. 
(2)  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be 90 degrees cutoff downlight luminaires. The rays on all lighting shall be confined to the premises; no spillover shall be permitted. 
(3)  Landscaping. There shall be a minimum of ten feet of front landscaping. A minimum of 15 percent of the lot shall be landscaped. All areas not used for parking or building shall be landscaped with permanent watering and maintenance. (See section 106-764.) 
(4)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall be 45 feet. 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be 60 percent. 
(6)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(7)  Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 75 feet. 
(8)  Parking, loading, etc. Parking, loading, etc., shall be as required by division 3 of article V of this chapter. 
(9)  Permanent buildings. All uses permitted in M-1 and M-2 zones shall be inside permanent buildings except those enumerated for these zones. 
(10)  Required street frontage. The required street frontage shall be 75 feet. 
(11)  Setbacks. For setbacks see the building lines chart in article IV of this chapter. 
(12)  Signs. Signs shall comply with division 5 of article V of this chapter. 
(13)  Storage. No outside storage is permitted unless approved by conditional use permit. 
(14)  Utilities. All utilities shall be underground. 
(15)  Walls and fences. A seven-foot wall shall be constructed where the property abuts residential zoned property; a six-foot wall or fencing shall be permitted along all other property lines except within the front setback. Also see section 106-970 pertaining to walls and fences. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.560, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-970. - Walls and fences. 
(a)  Residential zones. The following standards shall apply to all walls and fences within the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones. Height limits for all walls and fences in residential zones are as follows: 
(1)  In a required front yard setback, a fence, wall or combination thereof, shall not exceed a maximum height of 36 inches (including pillars, spikes, lights or similar ornamentation) as measured from existing finish grade, and shall be non-view obscuring. Permitted structures in lieu of such a fence are as follows: 
a.  A retaining wall not to exceed a height of 18 inches, or not to exceed a height of 30 inches if permitted pursuant to a special fence review. 
b.  A vegetative hedge not to exceed 30 inches in height. 
(2)  In a side or rear yard, no fence or wall shall exceed a height of six feet as measured from existing finish grade. 
(3)  On a reverse corner lot within a required front yard or street-facing side yard setback, a fence, wall or combination thereof, shall not exceed a maximum height of 36 inches (including pillars, spikes, lights or similar ornamentation) as measured from existing finish grade, and shall be non-view obscuring. Permitted structures in lieu of such a fence are as follows: 
a.  A retaining wall not to exceed a height of 18 inches, or not to exceed a height of 30 inches if permitted pursuant to a special fence review. 
b.  A vegetative hedge not to exceed 30 inches in height. 
c.  A non-view obscuring fence not to exceed a height of six feet and located in the street facing side yard only, if permitted pursuant to a special fence review. 
(4)  On a through lot within the front yard setback facing either of the lot's street frontages, a fence, wall or combination thereof, shall not exceed a maximum height of 36 inches (including pillars, spikes, lights or similar ornamentation) as measured from existing finish grade, and shall be non-view obscuring. Permitted structures in lieu of such a fence are as follows: 
a.  A retaining wall not to exceed a height of 18 inches, or not to exceed a height of 30 inches if permitted pursuant to a special fence review. 
b.  A vegetative hedge not to exceed 30 inches in height. 
c.  A non-view obscuring fence not to exceed a height of six feet and located in the secondary front yard only, if permitted pursuant to a special fence review. 
(5)  For a wall retaining a fill above existing finish grade in a setback area, the combined height of the wall retaining a fill and a freestanding fence or wall built above the retained earth level shall not exceed the maximum height allowed for a freestanding fence or wall within the setback area. 
(6)  For a wall retaining a cut below existing finish grade in a setback area, the combined height of the wall retaining a cut and a freestanding fence or wall built above the existing finish grade shall not exceed the maximum height allowed for a freestanding fence or wall within the setback area. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial zones. The height limit for non-view obscuring fences in commercial and industrial zones shall be eight feet, except that the director may approve a height of up to ten feet for security fencing. The height limit for opaque fences or walls shall be six feet. 
(c)  Construction materials. Construction materials shall conform to the following: 
(1)  In residential zones, all fences and walls shall be made of materials generally used for fencing such as masonry, vegetative hedges, wood, brick, or ornamental tubular steel or wrought iron, and must have a finished appearance. Acceptable finish treatments include colored stucco, wood stain, natural or polished stone, slumpstone, split-faced concrete block, prefabricated finish texture, color coated tubular steel or wrought iron, or a combination thereof. Plain or colored concrete block masonry shall be permitted only if coated with colored stucco or other coating finish approved by the director or designated staff. No chainlink, razor wire, barbed wire, concertina ribbon, electrified fence, protruding fragments of broken glass or similar materials shall be permitted. All proposed fence or wall material shall be compatible with the architectural style and treatment of the primary residential structure. 
(2)  In industrial zones, barbed wire, razor wire and similar materials must be at least eight feet from grade at the public right-of-way with vertical supports for the barbed wire slanting inward away from the property line. 
(3)  Where feasible, solid walls shall be painted with graffiti-resistant paints. 
(d)  Sight clearance. Sight clearance for visibility of pedestrians and vehicles shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  On corner lots in all zones, a sight clearance distance triangle permitting pedestrian and vehicular visibility at intersecting streets shall be maintained for a minimum distance of 20 feet measured along the street right-of-way from the point of intersection of the two streets. Sight distances at alleys intersecting with streets shall be ten feet. 
(2)  In all zones, sight clearance for automobiles emerging from adjacent driveways shall be maintained for a minimum distance of 20 feet for commercial and multifamily driveways and ten feet for single-family driveways, measured from the property line. An open fence that does not impede visibility will be permitted in this area. 
(e)  Permits. All persons erecting or substantially altering or repairing a fence, wall or security gate shall first obtain a building permit. As part of the application process, the applicant shall submit a scaled site plan indicating property lines and the height, location, building materials and finish treatment of the proposed fence, wall or security gate. However, no permit shall be required for temporary construction or security fencing. 
(f)  Inspection. The building inspector must approve all construction or substantial alteration or repair of fences, walls and security gates. An initial inspection of the footings or pole holes shall be conducted before the wall, fence or security gate is erected, and a final inspection shall be conducted upon completion of the construction. 
(g)  Hedges and shrubs. If hedges, shrubs and similar vegetation are maintained at the property line and are of sufficient density to block vision, they shall comply with the height limit for fences and walls within the required front, rear and side yard setbacks. 
(h)  Determination of height. The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from existing finish grade of the subject property. However, when a fence or wall is proposed to be located along a property line separating two lots with a difference in pad elevations of more than 18 inches for a length of more than 50 percent of the common property line, it may be permitted only if approved pursuant to a special fence review. 
(i)  Conflicting fence or wall height requirements. Where applicable building codes or other regulations require a fence or wall exceeding the height limitations specified in this section, a higher than standard fence or wall may be permitted if approved pursuant to a special fence review. 
(j)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section: 
(1)  Non-view obscuring fence is defined as a fence or wall whose solid component portions are evenly distributed, and do not constitute more than ten percent of the total surface area of the face of the fence or wall. 
(2)  Existing finish grade is defined as the natural or existing grade of the property prior to excavation, construction or grading of undisturbed soil. 
(3)  Special fence review is defined as an administrative procedure required under certain circumstances as specified in this section prior to issuance of a building permit for a fence or wall. When required, a special fence review shall be conducted by the director or designated staff subject to the following procedure and criteria: 
a.  Application and fee. An application for a building permit shall be submitted. A special fence review fee may be established by resolution of the city council. 
b.  Public notice. Upon a tentative determination by the director that the proposed fence or wall height should be approved, a notice of such shall be mailed to the owners of all properties adjoining the project site. The notification shall describe the proposed fence or wall, and indicate that prior to a final determination there will be a comment period of at least seven days from the date of mailing the notice. 
c.  Determination. In order to approve or approve with conditions a proposed fence or wall, the director or designated staff must make the following findings: 
1.  The project site is of a suitable size, shape and topography to accommodate the proposed fence or wall. 
2.  The proposed fence or wall will not be detrimental to the character of the subject property or surrounding neighborhood, and will be compatible with the architectural treatment of any existing or planned buildings on the subject property. 
3.  The proposed fence or wall will not unreasonably interfere with the use, possession, and enjoyment of the surrounding and adjacent property owners. 
4.  There is a demonstrated need for the proposed fence or wall. 
d.  Appeal. The director's final determination may be appealed within seven days to the planning commission, pursuant to section 106-76. The appeal shall be made in written form and addressed to the director. 
(k)  Applicability. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to set aside or reduce the requirement for fences and walls as required by applicable federal, state, and local statutes designed to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.565, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987; Ord. No. 1532, § 2, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 1542, § 1, 12-2-2002)  
Sec. 106-971. - Single room occupancy (SRO). 
In the city's C-1 (limited commercial) and C-2 (commercial) zones, a single room occupancy unit (SRO) shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division, including the following standards: 
(1)  Unit size. The minimum size of a unit shall be 150 square feet and the maximum size shall be 400 square feet. A single room occupancy facility is not required to meet density standards of the general plan. 
(2)  Bathroom facilities. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full bathroom facilities. A partial bathroom facility shall have at least a toilet and sink; a full facility shall have a toilet, sink, and bathtub, shower, or bathtub/shower combination. If a full bathroom facility is not provided, common bathroom facilities shall be provided in accordance with California Building Code for congregate residences with at least one full bathroom per every three units on a floor. The shared shower or bathtub facility shall be accessible from a common area or hallway. Each shared shower or bathtub facility shall be provided with an interior lockable door. 
(3)  Kitchen. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full kitchen facilities. A full kitchen includes a sink, a refrigerator, and a stove, range top, or oven. A partial kitchen is missing at least one of these appliances. If a full kitchen is not provided, common kitchen facilities shall be provided with at least one full kitchen per floor. 
(4)  Closet. Each SRO shall have a separate closet. 
(5)  Common area. Four square feet of interior common space per unit shall be provided, with at least 200 square feet in area of interior common space, excluding janitorial storage, laundry facilities, and common hallways. All common areas shall comply with all applicable ADA accessibility and adaptability requirements. 
(6)  Laundry facilities. Laundry facilities shall be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and dryer for every ten units, with at least one washer and dryer per floor. 
(7)  Cleaning supply room. A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO facility. 
(8)  Management plan. A management plan shall be submitted with the development application for an SRO facility and shall be approved by the chief planning official. The management plan must address management and operation of the facility, rental procedures, safety and security of the residents and building maintenance. 
(9)  Facility management. An SRO facility with ten or more units shall have an on-site manager. An SRO facility with less than ten units shall provide a management office on-site. 
(10)  Parking. Parking shall be provided for an SRO facility at a rate of one standard-size parking space per unit as defined in subsection 106-829(1) of this chapter, plus an additional standard-size parking space for the on-site manager. 
(11)  Accessibility. All SRO facilities shall comply with all applicable ADA accessibility and adaptability requirements. 
(12)  Existing structures. An existing structure may be converted to an SRO facility, consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1625, § 9, 3-18-2013)  
Sec. 106-972. - Emergency homeless shelters. 
In the city's M-2 (light industrial) zone, an Emergency homeless shelter shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this division, including the following standards: 
(1)  Maximum number of persons/beds. The shelter for the homeless shall contain a maximum of 30 beds and shall serve no more than 30 homeless persons. 
(2)  Lighting. Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the neighborhood. 
(3)  Laundry facilities. The development shall provide laundry facilities adequate for the number of residents. 
(4)  Common facilities. The development may provide supportive services for homeless residents, including but not limited to: central cooking and dining room(s), recreation room, counseling center, child care facilities, and other support services. 
(5)  Security. Parking facilities shall be designed to provide security for residents, visitors, and employees. 
(6)  Landscaping. On-site landscaping shall be installed and maintained pursuant to the standards outlined in section 106-833. 
(7)  On-site parking. On-site parking for homeless shelters shall be subject to requirements for similarly zoned industrial uses as set forth in subsection 106-822(d)(1). 
(8)  Outdoor activity. For the purposes of noise abatement in surrounding residential zoning districts, outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(9)  Concentration of uses. No more than one shelter for the homeless shall be permitted within a radius of 300 feet from another such shelter. 
(10)  Refuse. Homeless shelters shall provide a trash storage area as required pursuant to subsection 106-897(1) through subsection 106-897(3). 
(11)  Health and safety standards. The shelter for the homeless must comply with all standards set forth in Title 25 of the California Administrative Code (Part 1, Chapter F, Subchapter 12, Section 7972). 
(12)  Shelter provider. The agency or organization operating the shelter shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Temporary shelter shall be available to residents for no more than six months if no alternative housing is available. 
b.  Staff and services shall be provided to assist residents to obtain permanent shelter and income. Such services shall be available at no cost to all residents of a provider's shelter or shelters. 
c.  The provider shall not discriminate in any services provided. 
d.  The provider shall not require participation by residents in any religious or philosophical ritual, service, meeting or rite as a condition of eligibility. 
e.  The provider shall have a written management plan including, as applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to insure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and for training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents. 
(Ord. No. 1625, § 10, 3-18-2013)  
Secs. 106-973—106-995. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 106-996—106-1020. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADULT BUSINESSES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 106-1021. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to adult businesses and similar and related uses. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.710, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1022. - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in section 106-6 of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment which a has segment or section thereof devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
Adult business means any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults, and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat, either by law or by the operators of such business. The term "adult business" also means and includes adult bookstores, adult theaters, massage parlors and modeling studios, adult motels or hotels, not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. 
Adult hotel/motel means a hotel or motel, as defined in section 106-6 of this chapter, which provides, through closed circuit television or other media, material which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting or describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater which presents live entertainment or motion pictures or slide photographs, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas. 
Massage parlor means any establishment required to be licensed pursuant to section 22-141 of this Code. 
Material, relative to adult businesses, means and includes, but is not limited to, accessories, books, magazines, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures and pamphlets, or any combination thereof. 
Modeling studio means any establishment or business which provides, for members of the public, the services of a live human model for the purpose of reproducing the human body, wholly or partially in the nude, by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or other pictorial form. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region; 
b.  Buttock; and 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.710.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-1023. - Special regulations. 
All uses subject to this division shall comply with all of the regulations contained in this chapter and the following: 
(1)  Prior to the establishing or conducting of any adult business, a conditional use permit therefor shall be obtained pursuant to division 4 of article II of this chapter; and 
(2)  No adult business shall be granted a conditional use permit unless that lot upon which such business is proposed to be located is: 
a.  Classified in a C-2 or SC zone; 
b.  Not within 500 feet of any lot classified in any of the R zones; 
c.  Not within 1,000 feet of any lot upon which there is located a church or educational institution, park or other public facility which is utilized by minors; 
d.  Not within 1,000 feet of any lot on which there is located another adult business; and 
e.  Not within 500 feet of any lot upon which is located a business with an on-sale alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.710.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-1024—106-1050. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 106-1051. - Restrictions. 
(a)  A maximum of four amusement devices may be allowed at any one site; provided, however, that amusement devices shall be further limited in number based upon the square footage of the buildings in which they are to be located, as follows: 
Square Footage of Building 	Maximum 
Amusement 
Devices Allowed 
  800 or less 	1 
  801—1,200 	2 
1,201—1,500 	3 
1,501 or more 	4 
 
In no event shall square footage alone entitle an applicant to the maximum number of amusement devices allowed under this section. 
(b)  Amusement devices shall be allowed only as an accessory use to the primary business at the location, and the monthly gross revenues of the amusement devices shall not exceed the monthly gross revenues of the primary business. The revenue records of the business conducted at the site shall be available for inspection by the business license inspector. 
(c)  If the primary business conducted at the site is a fraternal or veteran organization or is restricted to persons 21 years of age or older, the revenue restriction in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply. 
(d)  Unless located in a structure into which entrance is normally restricted to persons 21 years of age or older, amusement devices shall not be located at a business that derives 50 percent or more of its primary business revenues from the sale of distilled spirits. 
(e)  Amusement devices shall not be located within 100 feet of any display for the sale of adult magazines. 
(f)  School-age children 16 years of age or younger shall not be permitted to operate the video game machines during the daily hours in which public schools are open and conducting classroom activities. 
(g)  The applicant shall comply with all of the mandatory requirements of section 22-102 of this Code. 
(h)  All applicable fees shall be paid. 
(i)  The site shall be limited to a maximum number of machines allowed per this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.720.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-1052—106-1080. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE/CONDOMINIUMS AND RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE/CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS 
 
Sec. 106-1081. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this division is to establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.730, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1082. - Conditional use permit required. 
(a)  Residential condominiums and residential condominium conversions shall be permitted in appropriately zoned districts within the city subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(b)  In addition to those notified of public hearing in accordance with division 4 of article II of this chapter, all tenants, if any, then occupying the proposed conversion site shall be notified in writing of the public hearing. A complete list of tenants shall be supplied by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.730.10, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1083. - Development standards. 
(a)  All units constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be in substantial accordance with development standards as set forth in this chapter, and all units constructed subsequent to effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be in full compliance with the development standards. 
(b)  Off-street parking requirements shall be as specified in the applicable zoning district and division 3 of article V of this chapter. 
(c)  A single area having a minimum of 100 cubic feet of private and secure dead storage space shall be provided for each unit. The storage area may be located within the garage, provided it does not interfere with garage use for automobile parking. Customary closets and cupboards within the dwelling unit shall not count toward meeting this requirement. 
(d)  No living units shall be permitted over garages unless one of the following conditions exist: the garage serves the unit above, or the garage is an underground type parking garage. 
(e)  An adjoining private patio or deck shall be provided for each unit. No dimension shall be less than eight feet, or have a minimum area of less than 100 square feet. 
(f)  One hundred fifty square feet of developed common recreation space shall be provided per unit, but in no event less than 1,000 square feet for the condominium project. 
(g)  Separate laundry facilities of sufficient size to allow for the installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided for each condominium unit. If provided for in the garage, the facility shall not encroach into the required parking space. 
(h)  The consumption of gas, water and electricity within each dwelling unit shall have a separate shutoff device to disconnect each unit's utilities, unless utilities are provided by the homeowner's association. 
(i)  All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic appliances, which is determined by the building official to be a source or potential source of vibration or noise, shall be shock-mounted, isolated from the floor and ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the building official to lessen the transmission of vibration and noise. 
(j)  The city shall require the developer to upgrade the project's water delivery system to comply with the city's current fire flow requirements. 
(k)  All structures and buildings included as a part of a condominium project shall conform to the building and zoning requirements applicable to the zone wherein the project is proposed to be located. Designation of individual condominium units shall not be deemed to reduce or eliminate any of the building and zoning requirements applicable to any such buildings or structures. 
(l)  Television and radio antennas. Individual television and radio antennas shall be prohibited outside of any owner's unit. The declaration shall provide either for a central antenna with connections to each unit via underground or internal wall wiring, or each unit shall be served by a cable antenna service provided by a company licensed to provide such service within the city. 
(m)  No conditional use permit shall be granted for a residential condominium development unless the obligation for care, upkeep and management of the common element is imposed on a nonprofit corporation (the association). 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.730.20, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1084. - Application procedures. 
Under this division, a conditional use permit application signed by the property owner or the authorized agent shall be submitted to the planning department. The application shall be accompanied by 20 copies of a precise development plan showing the following details: 
(1)  The estimated square footage of each unit and number of rooms in each unit. 
(2)  The layout of all common areas. 
(3)  The layout and location of all storage space outside of each unit. 
(4)  The layout and location of all facilities and amenities provided within the common area for the enjoyment and use of the unit owners. 
(5)  The layout of all parking spaces to be used in conjunction with each condominium unit. 
(6)  Proposed landscaping and irrigation. 
(7)  Building elevations. 
(8)  Location, height and type of all walls and fences. 
(9)  Location and type of surfacing of all driveways, pedestrian walkways, vehicular parking areas and curb cuts. 
(10)  Trash enclosure details. 
(11)  Defining maintenance responsibility of all buildings and common areas. 
(12)  Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&R's). 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.730.30, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1085. - Fees; approval criteria. 
(a)  Payment of all development fees currently assessed for new condominium projects shall be required for condominium conversions as well, except any such fees which were paid upon construction of the project. Required development fees shall include, where applicable, but not be limited to drainage assessment, parkway trees and park dedication in-lieu fees. 
(b)  A proposed condominium or condominium conversion project may be approved, disapproved or conditionally approved by the planning commission in accordance with criteria as set forth in division 3 of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.730.40, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-1086—106-1110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 106-1111. - Temporary use of Christmas tree facility. 
A temporary Christmas tree sales facility shall be permitted in any C-1, C-2, R-1 zone (not presently being used for single dwelling purposes) subject to the following: 
(1)  Date of opening. A Christmas tree sales facility shall not be open for business during any calendar year prior to December 4. 
(2)  Merchandise to be sold. A permitted Christmas tree sales facility may sell ornaments and other Christmas decorations in addition to Christmas trees, but shall not engage in the sale of any merchandise not directly associated with Christmas trees and Christmas decorations. 
(3)  Electrical permit. The applicant shall secure an electrical permit from the city building and planning department if the facility is to be energized. 
(4)  Removal of facility. The facility shall be removed and the premises upon which it is located shall be cleared of all debris and restored to the condition they were in prior to the establishment of the facility within seven days after the particular Christmas holiday involved. 
(5)  Fire prevention standards. Each Christmas tree sales facility shall comply with fire prevention standards as approved and enforced by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.731.0, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1112. - Religious and entertainment assembly. 
The temporary use of the property in any zoning district for religious and entertainment assembly purposes is permitted subject to the approval of the site development plan and compliance with the following: 
(1)  The temporary use may be permitted for a period not to exceed 14 days. 
(2)  The director may require a cash bond or other guarantee of removal of the permitted temporary use upon expiration of the permit. 
(3)  All permits including tents and/or other temporary structures shall be issued in compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.731.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1113. - Temporary use of unattended collection boxes. 
A collection box is permitted as a temporary accessory to a principal permitted use with approval of site plan review by the community development director pursuant to division 3 of article II of this chapter and subject to the following: 
(1)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, "collection box" means an unattended canister, receptacle, or similar device, used for soliciting and collecting donations of salvageable goods and movable property, but not money or evidences of debt. This term does not include a recyclables container regulated by chapter 70 of this Code. 
(2)  Prohibition. No person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, club, society, or other entity shall engage in any of the following without a permit in accordance with this section: (i) place, install, or maintain on any real property a collection box held out to the public for donations; (ii) extract any item from a collection box; or (iii) allow, aid, abet, or suffer any such action. 
(3)  Application. 
a.  Any requirement to show particular information on the site plan may be waived pursuant to section 106-113 as the director deems appropriate. 
b.  The application shall include: 
1.  The signed and notarized written consent to the application by the owner of the subject parcel of land; 
2.  Contact information for the person responsible for the ongoing maintenance of the collection box; and 
3.  Other information deemed appropriate by the director. 
c.  A permit may be issued only to a nonprofit entity that is eligible to solicit donations of salvageable personal property pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 148.3. 
(4)  Duration. 
a.  Written approval of a collection box under this section shall be considered a temporary permit and shall be valid for a period not longer than 24 months as set forth in the permit, unless otherwise provided by this section. The permit shall terminate earlier than the expiration stated therein if: (1) the permit is revoked on the grounds of non-compliance with the permit or other law; or (2) the collection box is abandoned for 30 days after the mailing date of the city's written notification to the permit holder of the abandonment. 
b.  The permit holder and the owner, tenant, and person or entity in control of the parcel of land on which the collection box is placed shall be jointly and severally liable for costs incurred in removing an unpermitted or abandoned collection box. The director may require a cash bond or other guarantee of removal of the temporary use upon expiration of the permit. 
(5)  Zones. Collection boxes are prohibited in the city's residential zones, except on properties with any of the following land uses approved by conditional use permit: churches, temples or other places of religious worship or similar places of assembly, schools, nursery schools, hospitals, sanitariums, large community care facilities, museums, and libraries. This division shall prevail over the restriction against temporary structures at places of religious worship. The director may issue a temporary permit pursuant to this section for a period longer than 24 months if the applicant demonstrates that the collection box is customarily incidental to the principal use in accordance with the city zoning ordinance. 
(6)  Location. No collection box shall be placed: 
a.  Within 500 feet of another collection box or a salvage and recycling business, or within 30 feet of the property line of any adjacent residentially zoned parcel. The director shall have discretion to waive or modify these distance restrictions if justified by the following: (i) the collection box is customarily incidental to the principal use; (ii) it will cause no significant adverse effect on adjacent property; and (iii) the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice. 
b.  Within a yard setback. 
c.  Within a required off-street parking space. 
(7)  Conditions of approval. Approvals shall be limited to one collection box per property. The director may impose conditions on a collection box permit to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare, including, without limitation, aesthetics and periodic review of compliance with this section. 
(8)  Maintenance. The collection box shall have a firmly closing lid. The permit holder and the parcel owner shall be responsible to: 
a.  Maintain the premises in a clean, sanitary condition at all times, free from discarded items, garbage, and other waste. 
b.  Regularly empty contents to ensure the collection box does not exceed its capacity. 
c.  Remove any graffiti or material placed outside of the collection box within 24 hours. 
(9)  Size. The collection box shall not exceed six cubic yards in volume or six feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1651, § 3, 2-16-2016)  
Secs. 106-1114—106-1140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 106-1141. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter are as follows: 
(a)  To define as public nuisances and violations those conditions and uses of land that are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or which reduce property values in the city. 
(b)  To develop regulations that will promote the sound maintenance of property and enhance conditions of appearance, habitability, occupancy, use and safety of all structures and premises in the city. 
(c)  To establish administrative procedures for the city's use, upon its election, to correct or abate violations of this chapter on real property throughout the city. 
This chapter is not intended to be applied, construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city, or upon any officer or employee thereof, any duty towards persons or property within the city or outside of the city that creates a basis for civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned structure means real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is vacant and is maintained in an uninhabitable condition or a condition of disrepair or deterioration as evidenced by the existence of public nuisances therein, or that is vacant and under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale, or that is vacant and has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure. Factors that may also be considered in a determination of an abandoned structure include, without limitation: present operability and functional utility; the presence of nonfunctional, broken or missing doors or windows, such that entry therein by unauthorized persons is not deterred; the existence of real property tax delinquencies for the land upon which the structure is located; age and degree of physical deterioration of the structure, and the cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value. 
Abandoned personal property means and refers to any item, object, thing, material or substance that, by its condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair, nonuse, or location on public real property or on private real property, causes a reasonable person to conclude that the owner has permanently relinquished all right, title, claim and possession thereto, or that the object, thing, material or substance cannot be used for its intended or designed purpose. Abandoned personal property may include junk and vehicles. 
Attractive nuisance means any condition, device, equipment, instrument, item or machine that is unsafe, unprotected and may prove detrimental to minors whether in a structure or in outdoor areas of developed or undeveloped real property. This includes, without limitation, any abandoned or open and accessible wells, shafts, basements or excavations; any abandoned refrigerators and abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or, any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove hazardous or dangerous to inquisitive minors. An attractive nuisance shall also include pools, standing water or excavations containing water, that are unfenced or otherwise lack an adequate barrier thereby creating a risk of drowning, or which are hazardous or unsafe due to the existence of any condition rendering such water to be clouded, unclear or injurious to health due to, without limitation, any of the following: bacterial growth, infectious or toxic agents, algae, insect remains, animal remains, rubbish, refuse, debris, or waste of any kind. 
Building means any structure having, or originally designed to have, a roof supported by columns or walls used or maintained for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property, and shall also include structures wherein things may be grown, made, produced, kept, handled, stored, or disposed of, and all appendages, accessories, apparatus, appliances, and equipment installed as a part thereof. For purposes of this chapter, this definition shall supercede any other definition of this term in the city code. 
City means the City of San Fernando. 
City administrator means the city administrator or his or her duly authorized representative(s). 
Code or Codes refers to the San Fernando City Code and laws incorporated therein by reference and any adopted and uncodified ordinances. 
Code enforcement actions shall mean and include, but not be limited to, the time and other resources of city personnel expended by them in identifying, inspecting, investigating, seeking or causing the abatement of a violation at real property or in a building or structure thereon. These include, but are not limited to, site inspections; drafting reports; taking photographs; procuring other evidence; engaging in meetings, conferences and communications with responsible persons, their agents or representatives, concerning a violation, as well as with attorneys for the city at any time; and appearances before judicial officers or reviewing authorities during the pendency of a judicial or administrative proceeding and other appearances at such judicial or administrative hearings. The time and resources that city personnel further expend to confirm that a property or structure remains free of a violation while a responsible person is on probation to a court or when a matter concerning a residential structure remains pending before a reviewing authority in an administrative action, shall also constitute code enforcement actions. 
Code enforcement officer means any individual employed by the city with primary enforcement authority for city codes, or his or her duly authorized representative(s). For purposes of this chapter, a "community preservation officer" is a "code enforcement officer" as defined herein. 
Hearing officer means the city employee or representative appointed by the city administrator, or a designee thereof, to hear all timely appeals from a notice of public nuisance and intent to abate with city personnel. 
Inoperable vehicle means and includes, without limitation, any vehicle that is incapable of being lawfully driven on a highway. Factors that may be used to determine this condition include, without limitation, vehicles lacking a current registration, vehicles that have a "planned nonoperational" status with the California Department of Motor Vehicles, a working engine, transmission, wheels, inflated tires, doors, windshield or any other part or equipment necessary for its legal and safe operation on a highway or any other public right-of-way. 
Junk includes, but is not limited to, any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked appliance, device, equipment, furniture, fixture, furnishing, object, material, substance, tire, or thing of any kind or composition. Junk may include abandoned personal property, as well as any form of debris, refuse, rubbish, trash or waste. Factors that may be considered in a determination that personal property is junk include, without limitation, its: 
(1)  Condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair or nonuse. 
(2)  Approximate age and degree of physical deterioration. 
(3)  Location. 
(4)  Present operability, functional utility and status of registration or licensing, where applicable. 
(5)  Cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value. 
Junkyard means real property of any zoning classification on which junk is kept, maintained, placed or stored to such a degree that it constitutes a principal use or condition on said premises. The existence of a junkyard is not a nuisance when it is an expressly permitted use in the applicable zone and the premises are in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Code, as well as all future amendments and additions. 
Owner means and includes any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor's office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. An owner of personal property shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, or possession of, such property. 
Person as used in this chapter, means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. "Person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city. 
Personal property means property that is not real property, and includes, without limitation, any appliance, article, device, equipment, item, material, product, substance or vehicle. 
Public nuisance means anything which is, or likely to become, injurious or detrimental to health, safety or welfare, or is offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any sidewalk, public park, square, building, structure, street or highway. All conditions hereafter enumerated in this chapter, or that otherwise violate or are contrary to any provision of the city code, are public nuisances by definition and declaration, and said enumerated conditions shall not, in any manner, be construed to be exclusive or exhaustive. A public nuisance shall also exist when a person fails to comply with any condition of a city approval, entitlement, license or permit or when an activity on, or use of, real property violates, or is contrary to, any provision or requirement of the city code. 
Real property or premises means any real property owned by any person and/or any building, structure, or other improvement thereon, or portions thereof. "Real property" or "premises" includes any parkway or unimproved public easement abutting or adjacent to such real property, whether or not owned by the City of San Fernando. 
Residential structures shall mean and include all structures and premises that are regulated by the California State Housing Law [California Health and Safety Code, Div. 13, Pt. 1.5, § 17910 et seq.], and any future amendments thereto. These include, but are not limited to, apartment houses, hotels, motels, and dwellings, and residential buildings and structures accessory thereto. 
Responsible person means any person, whether as an owner as defined in this chapter, or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains, suffers or permits a public nuisance, or any violation of the city code or county or state law, or regulation thereof, to exist or continue, by any act or the omission of any act or duty. A responsible person shall also include employees, principals, joint venturers, officers, agents, and/or other persons acting in concert with, or at the direction of, and/or with the knowledge and/or consent of the owner and/or occupant of the real property or building or structure thereon in which a public nuisance or violation exists or existed. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice, wall, fence, or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. For purposes of this chapter, this definition shall supercede any other definition of this term in the city code. 
Vacant shall mean real property or any building or structure thereon that is not legally occupied. Factors that may be used to determine whether real property, or building or structures thereon, is vacant include, but shall not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk, and/or other debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds, and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential and/or commercial furnishings consistent with the permitted uses within the zone of the real property; statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
Vehicle means any device, by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway or other public right-of-way, and includes all vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code, and all future amendments thereto. "Vehicle" does not include devices (i) that are propelled exclusively by human power such as bicycles and wheelchairs, or (ii) those that are used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Violation shall mean and include a public nuisance as described or referred to in this chapter, or any condition, activity or use that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, or inaction) by a responsible person in violation of any other provision, regulation, or requirement of the city code, or any applicable county, state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1143. - Public nuisance conditions. 
The city council finds and declares that it is a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to allow, cause, create, maintain, suffer or permit others to maintain, real property or premises in the city in such a manner that: 
(a)  Any one or more of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
(1)  Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which whether in natural state or as a result of the grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, or to adjacent properties. 
(2)  Buildings or other structures, or portions thereof, that are partially constructed or destroyed or allowed to remain in a state of partial construction or destruction for an unreasonable period of time. As used herein, an "unreasonable" period shall mean any portion of time exceeding the period given to a responsible person by the city for the complete abatement of this nuisance condition with all required city approvals, permit and inspections. Factors that may be used by the city to establish a reasonable period for the complete abatement of this nuisance include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The degree of partial construction or destruction and the cause of the current physical state or condition. 
b.  Whether or not this condition constitutes an attractive nuisance or if it otherwise poses or promotes a health or safety hazard to occupants of the premises, or to others. 
c.  The degree of visibility, if any, of this condition as viewed from public property or adjoining private real property. 
d.  The scope and type of work that is needed to abate this nuisance. 
e.  The promptness with which a responsible person has applied for and obtained all required city approvals and permits in order to lawfully commence the nuisance abatement actions. 
f.  Whether or not a responsible person has complied with other required building or other technical code requirements, including requesting and passing required inspections in a timely manner, while completing nuisance abatement actions. 
g.  Whether or not a responsible person has applied for extensions to a building or other technical code permit or renewed an expired permit, as well as the number of extensions and renewals that a responsible person has previously sought or obtained from the city. 
h.  Whether or not a responsible person has made substantial progress, as determined by the city, in performing nuisance abatement actions under a building or other technical code permit that has expired, or is about to expire. 
i.  Whether delays in completing nuisance abatement actions under a building or other technical code permit have occurred, and the reason(s) for such delays. 
(3)  Real property, or any building or structure thereon, that is abandoned, uninhabited, or vacant for a period of more than six months. 
(4)  Abandoned personal property that is visible from public or private property. 
(5)  Interior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to attics, ceilings, walls floors, basements, mezzanines, and common areas) that are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a decrease in property values, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to, or other provisions of the city code, or state law. 
(6)  Exterior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to, roofs, balconies, decks, fences, stairs, stairways, walls, signs and fixtures), as well as sidewalks, driveways and parking areas, that are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a decrease in property values, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to, provisions of the city code, or state law. 
(7)  Clothes lines in front or side yard areas. 
(8)  Obstructions of any kind, cause or form that interfere with light or ventilation for a building, or that interfere with, impede, delay or get in the way of building or structure ingress and egress. 
(9)  Broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing windows, doors or vents in a building or structure, and/or broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing screens for windows, doors, or crawl spaces in a building or structure. 
(10)  Windows or doors that remain boarded up or sealed after ten calendar days of written city notice to a responsible person requesting the removal of these coverings and the installation of fully functional and operable windows or doors. City actions to board up or seal windows or doors in order to deter unauthorized entry into structures shall not relieve responsible persons from installing fully functional and operable windows or doors. 
(11)  Overgrown vegetation including, but not limited to, any one of the following: 
a.  Vegetation likely to harbor, or promote the presence of, rats, vermin and insects. 
b.  Vegetation causing detriment to neighboring properties, or that is out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or contribute to, a decrease in property values, including but not limited to: 
1.  Lawns with grass in excess of five inches in height, provided that this shall not be applicable to ornamental grasses which are part of a city-approved drought-tolerant landscape plan 
2.  Hedges, trees, lawns, plants, or other vegetation that are not maintained in a neat, orderly, and healthy manner as a result of lack of adequate mowing, grooming, trimming, pruning, fertilizing, watering, and/or replacement; 
c.  Vegetation that creates, or promotes, the existence of a fire hazard. 
d.  Tree branches within five feet of a rooftop that facilitate rodent or animal access to a building or structure. 
e.  Vegetation that overhangs or grows onto or into any public property, including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way, so as to cause an obstruction to any person or vehicle using such public property. 
(12)  Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds, ground cover, and other vegetation, or the absence of live and healthy vegetation, that causes, contributes to, or promotes, any one of the following conditions or consequences: 
a.  An attractive nuisance. 
b.  A fire hazard. 
c.  The creation or promotion of dust or soil erosion. 
d.  A decrease in property values. 
e.  A detriment to public health, safety or welfare. 
(13)  Any form of an attractive nuisance. 
(14)  Items of junk, trash, debris or other personal property that are kept, placed, or stored inside of a structure or on exterior portions of real property that constitute a fire or safety hazard or a violation of any provision of this Code, or items of junk, trash, debris, or other personal property that are visible from public property or adjoining private real property, or that are otherwise out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a decrease in property values. The existence of a junkyard is not a public nuisance when such use and the premises on which such use occurs are in full compliance with all provisions of this Code (including all approvals and permits required thereby), and all other applicable provisions of the city code, as well as all future code amendments and additions, and applicable county, state, and/or federal laws and regulations. 
(15)  Garbage cans, yard waste containers, and recycling containers that are kept, placed or stored in front or side yards and visible from public property, except at times and places that solid or yard waste, or recyclables, are scheduled for collection by the city or its permitted collector(s). A nuisance also exists under this provision when garbage cans, yard waste containers and recycling containers are stored with open lids, and/or any associated trash enclosure contains garbage, yard waste, or recyclables which is not properly placed in said containers. 
(16)  Combustible or other materials including, but not limited to, composting, firewood, junk, lumber, packing boxes, pallets, plant cuttings, tree trimmings or wood chips, in interior or exterior areas of building or structures, when such items or accumulations: 
a.  Render premises unsanitary or substandard as defined by the city housing code, the state housing law, the city building code, or other applicable local, state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
b.  Violate the city health code. 
c.  Cause, create, or tend to contribute to a fire or safety hazard. 
d.  Harbor, promote, or tend to contribute to the presence of rats, vermin and/or insects. 
e.  Cause, create, or tend to contribute to, an offensive odor. 
f.  Cause the premises to be out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a decrease of property values. This use of land or condition shall not constitute a nuisance when expressly permitted under the applicable zone classification and the premises are in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of the city code, as well as all future code amendments and additions, and all applicable county, state and/or federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(17)  Vehicles, construction equipment, or other machinery exceeding the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property upon which they are located. A nuisance also exists under this provision when a vehicle, construction equipment, or other machinery is stopped, kept, placed, parked, or stored on private real property and when such vehicle, equipment, or machinery exceeds the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property that were utilized in its placement on said private real property unless pursuant to a valid permit issued by the city. 
(18)  Any equipment, machinery, or vehicle of any type or description that is designed, used, or maintained for construction-type activities that is kept, parked, placed, or stored on public or private real property except when such item is being used during excavation, construction, or demolition operations at the site where said equipment, machinery, or vehicle is located pursuant to an active permit issued by the city. 
(19)  Abandoned, dismantled, inoperable or wrecked boats, campers, motorcycles, trailers, vehicles, or parts thereof, unless kept, placed, parked, or stored inside of a completely enclosed, lawfully constructed building or structure. 
(20)  Vehicles, trailers, campers, boats, recreational vehicles, and/or other mobile equipment parked or stored in violation of any provision of this Code. 
(21)  Maintenance of signs, banners, streamers, pennants, or sign structures, on real property relating to uses no longer lawfully conducted or products no longer lawfully sold thereon, or signs and their structures that are in disrepair or which are otherwise in violation of, or contrary to this chapter and any other sections of the city code. 
(22)  Specialty structures that have been constructed for a specific use, and which are unfeasible to convert to other uses, and which are abandoned, partially destroyed or are allowed to remain in a state of partial destruction or disrepair. Such specialty structures include, but are not limited to, the following: tanks for gas or liquid(s), lateral support structures and bulk-heads, utility high-voltage towers and poles, utility high-rise support structures, electronic transmitting antennas and towers, structures which support or house mechanical and utility equipment and are located above the roof lines of existing buildings, high rise freestanding chimneys and smoke stacks, recreational structures such as tennis courts and cabanas, and buildings and structures used for specialty equipment or vehicle storage. 
(23)  Any personal property, building, or structure that obstructs or encroaches on any public property, including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way unless a valid encroachment permit has been issued authorizing said encroachment or obstruction. 
(24)  Causing, maintaining, suffering or permitting graffiti or other defacement of real or personal property, as defined in chapter 50, article VII of this Code, to be present or remain on a building, structure or vehicle, or portion thereof that is visible from a public right-of-way or from adjoining public or private real property. 
(25)  Storage of hazardous or toxic materials or substances on real property, as so classified by any local, state or federal laws or regulations, in such a manner as to be injurious, or potentially injurious or hazardous, to the public health, safety or welfare, or to adjacent properties, or that otherwise violates local, state or federal laws or regulations. 
(26)  Failure to provide and maintain adequate weather protection to structures or buildings, so as to cause, or tend to cause or promote, the existence of cracked, peeling, warped, rotted, or severely damaged paint, stucco or other exterior covering. 
(27)  Any condition recognized in local or state law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance, or any condition existing on real property that constitutes, or tends to constitute, blight, or that is a health or safety hazard to the community or neighboring properties. 
(28)  Any discharge of any substance or material, other than storm water, which enters, or could possibly enter, the city's storm sewer system in violation of the city code. 
(29)  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on, or over, any graded surface or hillside, except in the following circumstances: 
a.  A state of emergency has been declared by local, state or federal officials directly impacting the area to be tarped. 
b.  Tarping performed pursuant to an active building or grading permit. 
c.  Tarps installed during the period from December 1 through March 30 of each year, when required by local, state, or federal regulations due to forecasted rain or other weather likely to damage or erode a hillside or graded surface. 
(30)  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on, or over, any roof of any structure, except during periods of active rainfall, or when specifically permitted under an active building permit. 
(31)  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on, over or across any fence, wall or other structure and used as screening material or for any other purpose, except when specifically permitted under an active building permit. 
(31)  Unsanitary, polluted or unhealthful pools, ponds, standing water or excavations containing water, whether or not they are attractive nuisances but which are nevertheless likely to harbor mosquitoes, insects or other vectors. The likelihood of insect harborage is evidenced by any of the following conditions: water which is unclear, murky, clouded or green; water containing bacterial growth, algae, insect larvae, insect remains, or animal remains; or, bodies of water that are abandoned, neglected, unfiltered or otherwise improperly maintained. 
(32)  Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of properties in the vicinity as to cause, or that tends to cause, substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such properties in the vicinity. 
(33)  Any condition recognized in local or state law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance, or any condition existing on real property that constitutes, or tends to constitute, blight, or that is a health or safety hazard to the community or neighboring properties. 
(b)  A condition, use or activity is present that constitutes a public nuisance as defined by California Civil Code §§ 3479 or 3480, and any future amendments thereto. 
(c)  Any building or structure, or portion thereof, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in California Health and Safety Code, § 17920.3 and any future amendments thereto. 
(d)  Any "unsafe building" or "unsafe structure" as defined by the city building code. 
(e)  Any building or structure used by any person to engage in acts which are prohibited pursuant to the laws of the United States or the State of California, the provisions of this Code, or any other ordinance of this city, including, but not limited to the following acts: 
(1)  Unlawful possession, use, and/or sale of controlled substances; and/or 
(2)  Prostitution; and/or 
(3)  Unlawful gambling. 
(f)  Any building, structure, or use of real property that violates or fails to comply with any of the following: 
(1)  Any applicable approval, permit, license, or entitlement or condition relating thereto; 
(2)  Any ordinance of the city, including, but not limited to any provision of this Code; or 
(3)  Any applicable county, state, or federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1144. - Penalty. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any person who causes, permits, suffers, or maintains a public nuisance, or any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with chapter 1, article II of this Code. 
(b)  Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced on this chapter, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1145. - Abatement of public nuisances. 
All conditions or uses that constitute a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, or that are contrary to, or in violation of, any other provision or requirement of the city code, or of any applicable county or state law, or regulation thereof, which shall also constitute a public nuisance, shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair, demolition, removal or termination. The procedures for abatement in this part shall not be exclusive and shall not limit or restrict the city from pursuing any other remedies available at law, whether civil, equitable or criminal, or from enforcing city codes and adopted ordinances, or from abating or causing abatement of public nuisances, in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1146. - Continuing obligation of responsible persons to abatement a public nuisance. 
(a)  Responsible persons shall not allow, cause, create, maintain, suffer or permit a public nuisance to exist on their premises. If public nuisances do arise or occur, responsible persons shall promptly abate them by rehabilitation or repair, demolition, removal or termination with all required and applicable city approvals, permits and inspections. 
(b)  The city may exercise its administrative, civil/injunctive and criminal remedies, or any one or combination of these remedies, to compel responsible persons to abate a public nuisance when, in its judgment, such persons have not completed nuisance abatement actions in a timely or proper manner, or when responsible persons have failed to prevent an occurrence or recurrence of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1147. - Procedures for the city to establish the right to enter private real property to abate a public nuisance. 
(a)  Whenever a code enforcement officer or other public official determines that city employees, representatives or contract agents (hereafter "city personnel") may need to abate a public nuisance, he or she shall give a written "notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel" (hereafter in this section and in subsequent sections of this chapter, the "notice of abatement") to the responsible person(s) that contains the following provisions: 
(1)  The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition(s) exist(s). 
(2)  A description of the nuisance condition(s). 
(3)  A reference to the law prohibiting or pertaining to the nuisance condition(s). 
(4)  A brief description of the required corrective action(s), and, 
(5)  A time period and/or schedule in which to complete the nuisance abatement actions (with all required city approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable). 
(6)  The period and manner in which a responsible person may contest the notice of abatement pursuant to section 106-1150 of this chapter. No such right shall exist when the city is not seeking to establish the right to abate a public nuisance with city personnel. 
(7)  A statement that the city may record a notice of substandard property with the county recorder's office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the city, within a 30-day period after service of the notice of abatement and provided that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made. 
(b)  The procedure in subsection (a) shall not apply to public nuisances constituting an imminent hazard. In such instances, the provisions in section 106-1157 shall be followed. 
(c)  The city's election to issue a notice of abatement pursuant to this section shall not excuse responsible persons from their continuing obligation to abate a public nuisance in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and legal requirements. Furthermore, the issuance of this notice of abatement shall not obligate the city to abate a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1148. - Additional requirements for demolition of buildings or structures. 
(a)  The city shall, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, provide responsible persons with a reasonable period to elect between options of repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, as well as a reasonable period of time to complete any of these options, before city personnel abate a public nuisance by demolishing a building or structure pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall, except in cases involving an imminent hazard, serve a notice of abatement on all secured lien holders of record with the county recorder's office in the event abatement actions include demolition of a building or structure. 
(c)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, entry onto any real property to abate a public nuisance by demolition of a building or structure, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, shall be pursuant to a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply if demolition is required to address an imminent hazard. In such situation, the provisions of section 106-1157 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1149. - Service of notice of abatement. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice required by this chapter may be served by personal delivery to any responsible person or by both certified mail, return receipt requested and first class mail. The date of service shall be the date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service receptacle. Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed notice of abatement by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice issued to an owner of real property shall be sent to the mailing address on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor's office. Failure of any owner to receive a properly addressed notice by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1150. - Right of appeal from a notice of abatement. 
(a)  A responsible person may contest a notice of abatement by filing a written request for an appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days of service of the notice of abatement. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal. 
(b)  A written request for an appeal shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of each responsible party who is appealing the notice of abatement (hereinafter, "appellant"); 
(2)  Address and description of real property upon which the city intends to enter and abate a public nuisance; 
(3)  Date of notice of abatement being appealed; 
(4)  Specific action or decision being appealed; 
(5)  Grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable the hearing officer to understand the nature of the controversy; 
(6)  The signature of at least one appellant. 
(c)  Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a notice of abatement. In this event, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
(d)  The provisions of this section only apply to instances where the city has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate public nuisances with city personnel. In no event does this chapter limit the right of city officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations to responsible persons or to cause the abatement of public nuisances in a different manner, including without limitation, by court orders arising from the city's exercise of its criminal or civil remedies. In such instances, a responsible person shall receive a right to hearing and other due process rights through the court process. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1151. - Sample notice of abatement. 
(a)  The notice of abatement shall be written in a form that is substantially consistent with the following: 
Notice of Public Nuisance(s) and Intention to Abate with City Personnel 
[Date] 
___________ [Responsible Person(s)] 
___________ [Mailing Address] 
___________ [City, State and Zip Code] 
Re: Real Property at ___________ , _______ 
L.A. County A.P.N.: ___________ 
Legal description [Optional]: ________ 
Notice is hereby given that the following public nuisance conditions or activities exist on the premises described above: 
(1)  [Describe condition or activities] ___________ in violation of San Fernando City Code [as well as county and state laws, if applicable] , Section(s) ________. 
(a)  Required Corrective Action(s): ___________ (with all required permits, approvals and inspections). 
(b)  Required Completion Date: ___________. 
     [Repeat (1 a-b) for each additional public nuisance to be included in this notice] 
Please Take Notice that the foregoing public nuisance conditions are subject to abatement by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, removal or termination. 
Please Take Further Notice that city personnel may abate these public nuisance conditions or activities in the manner contained in this document if you do not perform the required corrective or preventative actions in a timely or proper manner with all required approvals, permits and inspections of the city and other appropriate public agencies. In such instances, the city shall seek recovery of all abatement costs, fees and expenses as allowed by the San Fernando City Code, or by applicable state laws, in any manner allowed by law. 
Please Take Further Notice that, in the event of abatement by city personnel, all personal property constituting a public nuisance may be removed from the subject premises or from public property and destroyed or disposed of, without regard to its actual or salvage value. 
Please Take Further Notice that, pursuant to §106-1165 of the San Fernando City Code, the city hereby elects to seek recovery of its attorneys' fees incurred in this action, and in any proceedings arising therefrom, to abate, or cause the abatement of, the public nuisance condition described herein. 
Please Take Further Notice that the city's election to issue this Notice of Intent to Abate does not excuse you from your continuing obligation to abate a public nuisance in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and legal requirements. Furthermore, the issuance of this Notice shall not obligate the City to abate a public nuisance. 
Please Take Further Notice that you may appeal this Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel by submitting an appeal on a completed city-approved form with the city clerk's office (located at 117 Macneil Street, San Fernando, California 91340) within ten (10) calendar days of service of this notice. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of your right to any further administrative appeal and renders the Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel final and binding. 
Please Take Further Notice that, if the violations are not abated within the time specified and a timely appeal is not made, such public nuisance may be abated by city employees, representatives or contract agents (hereafter "city personnel"), in the manner stated in this notice. On such occasions, all costs of the abatement, including, but not limited to, those stated in the city code, shall be assessed against you and/or the subject property, as a lien, or as a special assessment. 
Please Take Further Notice that the city may record a Notice of Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the city, within a 30-day period after service of the Notice of Abatement and provided that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made. 
Dated: This _____ day of _____, 20___. 
_____
City Personnel [Name and Title] 
[End of Form] 
(b)  A notice of abatement shall be deemed in substantial compliance with this subsection regardless of form if all substantive information is contained in such notice of abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1152. - Consequence for an untimely appeal. 
(a)  If a timely appeal is not received by the city clerk, the right to appeal is waived and the notice of abatement is final and binding. In such instances, the city may, without any administrative hearing, cause the abatement with city forces of any or all of the public nuisance conditions or activities stated in the notice of abatement. Entry on improved private real property shall, excepting instances of an imminent hazard, be with an abatement warrant from the county superior court. The city shall follow the procedures stated in this chapter for recovery of all abatement costs, fees and expenses. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall obligate the city to undertake abatement actions pursuant to a notice of abatement, whether or not there is a timely appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1153. - Abatement by responsible person prior to hearing. 
(a)  Any responsible person shall have the right to abate a nuisance in accordance with the notice of abatement at his or her own expense, provided all corrective actions are completed with all required and applicable city permits, approvals and inspections, prior to the date the matter is set for a hearing. 
(b)  A hearing shall be cancelled if all public nuisance conditions or activities are, as determined by the city, fully and lawfully abated prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1154. - Review by hearing officer. 
(a)  Any responsible person who contests a notice of abatement shall, subject to filing a timely appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing officer. The administrative appeal shall be scheduled no later than 60 calendar days, and no sooner than ten calendar days, after receipt of a timely filed request for appeal. The appellants listed on the written request for an appeal shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and location of the hearing at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than two business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing for good cause or on his/her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than 30 calendar days without stipulation by all parties. 
(c)  At the place and time set forth in the notification of appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider the testimony of the appealing person(s), the issuing officer or city personnel, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the alleged public nuisance(s). 
(d)  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a public nuisance exists by a preponderance of evidence. The issuance of a notice of abatement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation and the code enforcement officer who issued the notice of abatement is not required to participate in the appeal hearing. The appellant, and the code enforcement officer issuing the notice of abatement, as well as all other responsible persons, shall have the opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The appellant and the enforcement officer issuing the notice of abatement, or other responsible persons, may represent himself/herself/themselves or be represented by anyone of his/her/their choice. The appellant, or other interested persons, may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his/ her/their sole expense. The city may, at its discretion, record the hearing by stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording. 
(e)  If the appellant fails, or other responsible persons fail, to appear, or to otherwise submit any admissible evidence demonstrating the non-existence of the alleged nuisance(s), the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the responsible person(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to non-appearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1155. - Decision and notice by hearing officer. 
(a)  Within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine if any nuisance condition exists at the subject property. If the hearing officer determines that each nuisance condition described in the notice of abatement is non-existent, the notice of abatement shall be deemed cancelled. If the hearing officer determines that one or more of the nuisance conditions described in the notice of abatement exists, he/she shall issue a written order of abatement which shall contain the following: 
(1)  A finding and description of each public nuisance condition at the subject property, or the non-existence thereof. In the latter instance, the hearing officer shall cancel the notice of abatement. 
(2)  The name of each person responsible for a public nuisance condition, or conditions, at the subject property, as well as the name of any appellant who is not responsible for said public nuisance condition(s). 
(3)  The required corrective action and completion date for each unabated nuisance condition. Such provisions in the decision shall be referred to as an "order of abatement." 
(4)  Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant or related to the subject matter of the appeal. 
(b)  The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive. The decision shall also contain the following statement: 
"This decision is final and binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6." 
(c)  A copy of the decision shall be served by first class mail on each responsible person to whom the notice of abatement was issued. If the owner is not an appellant, a copy of the order of abatement shall also be served on the owner by first class mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  The failure of any responsible person to comply with an order of abatement by completing each of the requisite corrective actions in the manner and time set forth in the order of abatement constitutes a misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1156. - Abatement of nuisance by responsible persons prior to city abatement actions. 
(a)  Any responsible person shall have the right to fully abate a public nuisance in accordance with the hearing officer's decision prior to the date of entry of city personnel upon the subject real property, provided that all corrective actions are completed with all city permits, approvals and inspections, prior to said entry date. In such instances, all administrative proceedings shall be cancelled with the exception of the city's right to seek recovery of its incurred incidental expenses, code enforcement fees, and attorney's fees as provided by and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Once the city enters a subject real property to abate a public nuisance, it shall have the right to complete this action. 
(c)  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with city personnel in the performance of any act that is carried out to abate a public nuisance. 
(d)  All buildings, structures, and/or personal property that are removed by city personnel from premises in the abatement of a public nuisance shall be lawfully disposed of or destroyed without regard to its actual or salvage value. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1157. - Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of the city code to the contrary, the police chief, the fire chief, or the building official, or any of their designees, may cause a public nuisance to be summarily abated if it is determined that the nuisance creates an imminent hazard to a person or persons, or to other real or personal property. 
(b)  Prior to abating the public nuisance, the city administrator or their designee may attempt to notify a responsible person by telephone or in writing of the imminent hazard and request its abatement by said person. The city administrator or their designee may, at his/her discretion, dispense with an attempt of prior notification of a responsible person if the nature or severity of the hazard justifies such inaction. If, in the sole discretion of the city personnel declaring an imminent hazard, the responsible person(s) fail(s) to take immediate and meaningful steps to abate the imminent hazard, the city may abate the public nuisance with city personnel, and charge the costs and fees associated with said abatement to the responsible person(s). 
(c)  Within ten business days following emergency actions of city personnel to abate an imminent hazard, the city shall serve any responsible person with a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard by both certified mail, return receipt requested and first class mail. The city may, if a responsible person is a property owner, rely on that person's mailing address according to the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor's office in determining a service address for this notice. Failure of any responsible person to receive a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  A notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The name of all known responsible persons who are being served with the notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard and the address of the real property on which the imminent hazard was present. 
(2)  A brief description of the condition(s) and reasons why it constitutes an imminent hazard. 
(3)  A brief description of the law prohibiting or pertaining to the imminent hazard. 
(4)  A brief description of the actions city personnel took to abate the imminent hazard. 
(e)  Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard, whether in whole or in part, or the failure of a responsible person to receive this document, shall not render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this chapter invalid. 
(f)  Emergency abatement of an imminent hazard by city personnel shall not preclude the city from recording a notice of substandard property in accordance with the provisions of section 106-1163, if conditions thereafter remain at the premises that constitute a violation of law or a public nuisance. 
(g)  The city shall be entitled to recover its fees and costs (incidental or otherwise) for the abatement of an imminent hazard. In such instances, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1158. - Combination of notices. 
The notices that are authorized by this chapter may be combined in the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1159. - Establishment of costs of abatement. 
(a)  The city shall keep an accounting of the costs, fees and expenses (collectively hereafter, "the costs") of abating a public nuisance. 
(b)  The city shall serve a statement of abatement costs on the responsible persons within 90 calendar days of the city's completion of nuisance abatement actions. Service of this statement may be made in the manner provided for in section 106-1149 of this division. 
(c)  Unless a timely contest of statement of abatement costs is filed, a responsible person shall tender the costs in U.S. currency to the city within 30 calendar days of the date of service of the statement of abatement costs. Alternatively, a responsible person may contest the statement in the manner provided for in subsection (d). 
(d)  A responsible person has the right to contest a statement of abatement costs by filing a written request for contest on a completed city form with the city clerk within ten calendar days of service of the notice of abatement. 
(1)  A written request for contest shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number, and signature of each responsible person who is contesting the statement of abatement costs; 
b.  Address and description of the real property upon which the city abated a public nuisance; 
c.  Date of the statement of abatement costs being contested; 
d.  Description of the specific abatement cost being contested, and a statement of the grounds for contest in sufficient detail to enable the city council to understand the nature of the controversy. 
(2)  No fee shall be due for the filing of a request for contest. 
(e)  Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely contest constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a statement of abatement costs. In this event, the statement of abatement costs is final and binding, and the city may proceed to collect the costs as contained in a final statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law. 
(f)  If a timely appeal is received by the city clerk, a hearing shall be set before the city council no later than 60 calendar days, and no sooner than ten calendar days, of receipt of the request for contest. A notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be served on all responsible persons who contested the statement of abatement costs by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(g)  Any request by an appellant to continue a hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than five business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The city council may continue a hearing for good cause or on its own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more 60 calendar days without stipulation by all parties. 
(h)  At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the request to contest the statement of abatement costs, the city council shall hear and pass upon the evidence submitted by city personnel, together with any objections or protests raised by responsible persons liable for said costs. Testimony and evidence shall be limited to issues related to the abatement costs, and no person shall be permitted to present evidence or testimony challenging the existence of a public nuisance or manner of abatement as described in the notice of abatement. Thereupon, the city council may make such revision, correction or modification to the statement as it may deem just, after which the statement, as it is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(i)  The decision of the city council is final. 
(j)  The city clerk shall cause a confirmed statement of abatement costs to be served upon all responsible persons who contested the original statement by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. The city clerk shall also cause a confirmed statement of abatement costs to be served on the owner of the property on which city personnel abated a public nuisance by first class mail to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll (irrespective of whether the owner contested the statement of abatement costs). This document shall also contain the following statement: 
"This decision is final and binding. Judicial review of the city's council's decision is subject to the provisions and time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6." 
Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed confirmed statement shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(k)  A responsible person shall tender the costs in U.S. currency to the city within 30 calendar days of the date of service of the confirmed statement of abatement costs. The city may thereafter proceed to collect the costs as contained in the confirmed statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1160. - Collection of costs of abatement by special assessment. 
(a)  The city may cause a special assessment to be made upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code, § 38775.5, and future amendments thereto, in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner. 
(b)  A notice of special assessment shall be sent to the owner(s) of the subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is the imposed that shall contain the following recitals: 
The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(c)  The city attorney or city prosecutor shall establish the notice of special assessment form for use, or consideration by, the county tax collector in collecting a special assessment. 
(d)  The notice of special assessment shall be entitled to recordation with the county recorder's office. 
(e)  The amount of a special assessment shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1161. - Collection of costs of abatement by nuisance abatement lien. 
(a)  As an alternative to the procedure contained in section 106-1160, the city may cause a public nuisance abatement lien to be recorded upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code, § 38773.1, and future amendments thereto, in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner. 
(b)  A lien shall not be recorded prior to serving the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance is maintained, with a notice. This document shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with § 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten calendar days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant to California Government Code § 6062. 
(c)  The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
(d)  A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien for the City of San Fernando, the name of the city department(s) on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement actions, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
(e)  In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (d) shall be recorded by the city. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
(f)  A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
(g)  The city may recover from the property owner any of the costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(h)  The amount of a nuisance abatement lien shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the public nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1162. - Triple the costs of abatement. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter, the court may order that person to pay triple the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1163. - Recordation of substandard notice. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of the city code to the contrary, if the city determines that any property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of the city code and said violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined by the city, within a 30-calendar day period after written notice to a responsible person, then the city, in its sole discretion, may record a notice of substandard property with the county recorder's office against said premises. As used herein, "fully abated or corrected" includes the procurement of all required city approvals, permits, licenses and the passage of all city required inspections. 
(b)  The city may record a notice of substandard property without the issuance of a notice of abatement pursuant to section 106-1149 of this chapter, provided that a notice of correction or a notice of violation to a responsible person previously disclosed that a substandard notice may be recorded against a property if a violation is not fully abated or corrected in a period of 30 calendar days. 
(c)  A notice of substandard property may be recorded 30 days after service of a notice of abatement provided that: 
(1)  The notice contained this disclosure; 
(2)  The public nuisance was not fully abated or corrected within that period; and 
(3)  A timely and proper appeal to the notice of abatement was not made. 
(d)  The form that constitutes a notice of substandard property shall be approved by the city attorney or the city prosecutor. 
(e)  The city shall record a notice of rescission of substandard property with the county recorder's office within ten business days of its determination that a violation or a public nuisance has been fully abated or corrected. 
(f)  The city shall cause copies of recorded notices of substandard property and notices of rescission of substandard property to be served on all persons having an ownership interest in the subject real property as shown in the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor's office. Service thereof shall be by first class mail. Failure of any person to receive such notices shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1164. - Code enforcement fees. 
(a)  Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code § 17951, and any successor statute thereto, responsible persons, who cause, allow, permit, suffer or maintain a violation in, or upon, residential properties, shall be charged code enforcement fees, by the city to defray its costs of code enforcement actions, as defined in section 106-1142 of this chapter. Such fees shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to achieve this objective and are chargeable whether the city's code enforcement actions occur in the absence of formal administrative or judicial proceedings, as well as prior to, during, or subsequent to, the initiation of such proceedings. 
(b)  The amount(s) or rate(s) of code enforcement fees for city personnel time and other resources that are used for code enforcement actions shall be established, and may thereafter be amended, by resolution by the city council. 
(c)  The city administrator, or a designee thereof, is authorized to adopt regulations for the uniform imposition of code enforcement fees, and for related administrative actions pertaining to such fees. 
(d)  The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other fees or charges that responsible persons may owe in accordance with any other provision of the city code, or which are imposed pursuant to county, state or federal laws or regulations. 
(e)  Code enforcement fees shall be recoverable in conjunction with any civil, administrative or criminal action to abate, cause the abatement, or cessation of, or otherwise remove, a violation or a public nuisance. 
(f)  Failure to pay code enforcement fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1165. - Recovery of attorney's fees. 
(a)  A prevailing party in any administrative, civil or equitable judicial action to abate, or cause the abatement of a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney's fees in accordance with the following subsections: 
(1)  Attorney's fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the city administrator, or a designee thereof, or an attorney for, and on behalf of, the city, elects in writing to seek recovery of the city's attorney fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney's fees in favor of any person or the city. 
(2)  The city is the prevailing party when an administrative or judicial determination is made or affirmed by which a person is found to be responsible for one or more conditions or activities that constitute a public nuisance. A person is the prevailing party only when a final administrative or judicial determination completely absolves that person of responsibility for all conditions or activities that were alleged, in that action or proceeding, to constitute a public nuisance. An administrative or judicial determination that results in findings of responsibility and non-responsibility on the part of a person for conditions or activities that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a public nuisance, shall nevertheless result in the city being the prevailing party. 
(b)  Provided that the city has made an election to seek attorney's fees, an award of attorney's fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in that action or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 106-1166. - Applicability of other laws. 
(a)  This chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of property within the city. This chapter shall supplement other provisions of this Code and other statutes, ordinances or regulations now existing or subsequently enacted by the city, the state or any other entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(b)  The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions set forth in this Code or by state law for the abatement of public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 1596, §§ 4, 5, 1-19-2010)  
Secs. 106-1167—106-1180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS RELATING TO PLACEMENT OF SATELLITE RECEIVING ANTENNAS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Telecommunications, ch. 86. 
 
Sec. 106-1181. - R zones. 
In any R zone, satellite receiving antennas shall be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)  No satellite receiving antenna shall be mounted on the top or side of any building. All satellite antennas shall be placed at ground level. 
(2)  No satellite receiving antenna shall be placed in the front yard, or the street side, side yard. 
(3)  All satellite receiving antennas shall be completely surrounded by a solid five-foot minimum fence or block wall. 
(4)  The surface of the antenna shall not be painted white, silver or bright colors and shall be treated so as to not reflect glare from the sunlight. 
(5)  No satellite antenna shall be constructed on a slope in such a manner that more than 50 percent of the antenna shall be visible to surrounding streets and residential properties. 
(6)  The maximum diameter of a satellite antenna permitted in a residential zone shall be 13 feet. 
(7)  All installations of satellite receiving antennas deviating from subsections (1) through (6) of this section shall require the prior approval of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.740.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1182. - C zones. 
In any C zone satellite receiving antennas may be installed subject to the following: 
(1)  All installations of satellite receiving antennas shall require the prior approval of a conditional use permit. 
(2)  All satellite receiving antennas shall be screened from view from any collector or arterial street and from any residentially zoned property. 
(3)  All satellite receiving antennas shall not be painted white, silver or bright colors and shall be treated so as to not reflect glare from the sunlight. 
(4)  The maximum diameter of a satellite antenna permitted in a C zone shall be 13 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.740.02, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1183. - M zones. 
In all M zones satellite receiving antennas may be installed subject to the following: 
(1)  All installations of satellite receiving antennas shall require the prior approval of a conditional use permit. 
(2)  All satellite receiving antennas shall be screened from view from any collector or arterial street and from any residential property. 
(3)  All satellite receiving antennas shall not be painted white, silver or bright colors and shall be treated so as to not reflect glare from the sunlight. 
(4)  The maximum diameter of a satellite antenna permitted in an industrial zone shall be 13 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.740.03, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-1184—106-1210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS RELATING TO INSTALLATION OF SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 106-1211. - Single-family dwellings. 
(a)  Any person seeking to install a solar energy system shall file an application for the appropriate permits with the planning director, which shall include supplemental information as may be required by the planning department and this chapter so as to ensure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for evaluation of the application and for the permanent record. 
(b)  In approving any solar energy system, the planning department may impose conditions which are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Code, and which do not significantly increase the cost or decrease the efficiency of the systems. The conditions shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any system visible from an existing or future public right-of-way shall present a finished appearance. Installation of a boxed and glazed array of collector panels or boxing of the system with a decorative wood or metal frame or other finishing element as approved by the planning director may be required. For systems not visible from public rights-of-way, no boxing shall be required. 
(2)  The system, if installed at an angle to the roof, or such that any part projects more than ten inches above the surface of the roof, shall be mounted on the rear roof elevation, and any visible structural members shall be treated with a decorative screen as approved by the planning director, which is architecturally compatible with the existing structure and roofline. 
Exception: Should the orientation of a particular lot or structure necessitate the mounting of the solar energy system on an alternative elevation in order to achieve an efficient system, measures shall be taken to blend the system into the architecture and roofline of the existing structure. Any such screening or architectural treatment is subject to approval by the planning director. 
(3)  All supply, return, connecting and other associated pipes and hardware are to be comparable in color with the surface on which they are mounted. Additionally, all supply and return pipes shall be installed such that a minimum amount of linear feet of pipe is on the surface of the roof. 
(c)  All solar energy systems shall be installed only after approval by the planning director and only after issuance of the necessary building permits and any and all other permits required by the city relating to the plumbing, electrical, and mechanical characteristics of the system. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.741.1, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1212. - Multifamily dwellings, commercial buildings and industrial buildings. 
(a)  Conditions for the installation of solar energy systems on multifamily dwellings, commercial buildings and industrial buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person seeking to install a solar energy system on any multifamily, commercial or industrial building shall include plans and location of the system as part of an application for approval by the planning director. 
(2)  In approving any solar energy system, the planning director may impose conditions which are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Code, and which do not significantly increase the cost or decrease the efficiency of the systems. The conditions shall require that any system visible from any existing or future public right-of-way or any on-site open space area shall be architecturally integrated into the design of the existing structure. 
(3)  All solar energy systems shall be installed only after approval by the planning director and only after issuance of the necessary building permit and any and all other permits required by the city relating to the plumbing, electrical and mechanical characteristics of the system. 
(b)  For the installation of mechanical equipment, no heating or cooling equipment, excepting solar collectors and necessary supply and return lines, shall be mounted on the roof. 
Exception: Should the installation of any mechanical equipment require that it be mounted on the roof, it shall be mounted on the rear roof elevation and it shall be decoratively screened. The screening shall be architecturally compatible with the existing structure and roofline and shall be approved by the planning director as may be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.741.2, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-1213—106-1240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - HOME OCCUPATIONS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 106-1241. - Statement of intent. 
Recognizing that unrestricted use of residential properties for purposes of an occupational nature other than that normally associated with home living has a detrimental effect on both the residential area in which the occupations are conducted and the areas properly designated for such uses, and further recognizing that this detrimental effect results in the depreciations of value, welfare, happiness, and morale of the entire community, it is the purpose of this division to eliminate this detrimental effect by creating criteria for the establishment and conditions for the continuance of home occupations. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.742, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1242. - Classification. 
(a)  Home occupations may include the following: 
(1)  Secondary business offices when a business has its principal office, staff, and equipment located elsewhere. 
(2)  The home office of a salesman when all sales are consummated by telephone and/or written orders with no commodities or displays on the premises. 
(3)  A self-employed person or an independent contractor, but not including a garment worker, a pieceworker or any other person engaged in the manufacturing, assembly, or fabrication of products. 
(b)  The applicant shall be required to pay appropriate fees as determined by city council resolution for processing applications for home occupations. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the planning director or his designee to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning such proposed use and to approve or disapprove. Written approval of a proposed use as a proper home occupation shall be considered a home occupation permit and shall remain in effect until revoked as provided in section 106-1244. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.742.10, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1243. - Requirements. 
The establishment and conduct of home occupations shall comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation, including but not limited to noise or odor caused thereby. 
(2)  A home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed living area of the dwelling unit. 
(3)  Electrical or mechanical equipment which creates visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit or which creates noise not normally associated with residential uses shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Only the residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(5)  To the extent that there is any sale of any item related to a home occupation by the permittee as seller, no delivery of that item to the buyer shall occur on or adjacent to the premises. 
(6)  The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not change the principal character of use of the dwelling unit involved. 
(7)  There shall be no signs other than those permitted by the zone regulations. 
(8)  The conduct of any home occupation, including but not limited to the storage of goods and equipment, shall not reduce or render unusable the areas provided for required off-street parking. 
(9)  No vehicular or pedestrian traffic related to this home occupation shall be allowed. 
(10)  No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or equipment related to the operation of a home occupation shall be visible from the outside of any structure located on the premises. 
(11)  There shall be no advertising in connection with the home occupation which gives the address of the property from which the home occupation is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.742.20, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1244. - Revocation of permit. 
A home occupation permit granted in accordance with this division may be terminated if it is determined by the director that: 
(1)  Any requirement set forth in section 106-1243 of this division is being violated; 
(2)  The use has become detrimental to the public health or safety or is deemed to constitute a nuisance; 
(3)  The permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; 
(4)  The use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for six consecutive months or more; and 
(5)  The conditions of the premises, or of the district of which it is a part, has changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the meaning and intent of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.742.30, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-1245—106-1270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOME PERMIT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to require permit, Health and Safety Code § 1597.46. 
 
Sec. 106-1271. - Intent and purpose. 
The large family day care home permit is applicable to all large family day care homes in a one-family zone within the city. The large family day care home permit considers the compatibility of large family day care homes to coordinate land planning, aesthetics, and economic cohesiveness within residentially zoned properties in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.10, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1272. - Required. 
A large family day care home permit shall be obtained prior to the establishment of such a facility in an R-1 (one-family) zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.20, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1273. - Application. 
(a)  All large family day care home permit applications shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A detailed plot plan (to scale) showing the following: 
a.  Dimensions and location of all structures on the parcel. 
b.  Location of play areas and relationship to adjacent residences. 
(2)  A detailed floor plan of the facility showing the following: 
a.  Proposed location of use. 
b.  Restroom facilities. 
c.  Location of fire detection devices. 
(3)  The number of children, including the applicant's own, and the hours of operation. 
(4)  Method of dropoff and pickup of children. 
(5)  Delineation of traffic patterns. 
(6)  Proximity to any other such use. 
(7)  Radius map and names and addresses of all property owners within 100 feet of the subject property. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide proof of having a minimum of one year's experience as a small family day care home. 
(c)  The applicant shall sign a statement agreeing to comply with all state requirements for large family day care homes. 
(d)  The applicant shall provide evidence of fire department clearance. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.30, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1274. - Commission findings. 
The commission, in approving a large family day care home permit, shall find as follows: 
(1)  The proposed use is properly designed and complies with the requirements of the zone in which it is proposed. 
(2)  The proposed use, with any conditions to be imposed, is in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the general plan and is not economically or aesthetically detrimental to existing or previously approved uses or structures within the surrounding area. 
(3)  The proposed use is compatible with other uses and structures in the surrounding area. 
(4)  The proposed use shall be conducted only by the residents of the proposed location. 
(5)  There are no other such operations within 500 feet of the proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.40, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1275. - Commission authority. 
In issuing a large family day care home permit, the planning commission shall have the authority, as an administrative act, subject to this division, to require conditions of development in addition to those required by the zone where it is determined that such conditions are necessary to further the objectives of the general plan and are in harmony with the intent, purpose and spirit of this chapter and/or where such additional requirements are deemed essential to protect the public safety and general welfare of the community, and the children involved. These conditions may include standards for spacing and concentration, traffic control, parking and noise control. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.50, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1276. - Commission hearing procedure. 
(a)  Notice of the application for a large family day care home permit shall be mailed, not less than ten calendar days prior to the hearing, to all owners of property within a radius of 100 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property under consideration, using for this purpose the names and addresses of such owners as shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county assessor. 
(b)  Application for a large family day care home permit shall be filed by the owner of the property for which the permit is being sought or his duly authorized agent. Application shall be made to the planning commission on forms furnished by the planning department. The application shall be accompanied by those materials required in section 106-1273 at the time of application, and a filing fee shall be paid for the purpose of defraying costs incidental to the proceedings. Appropriate fees shall be determined by city council resolution. 
(c)  If there is no response by those notified requesting a public hearing within ten days of the notification, there shall be no public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.60, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1277. - Commission action and appeal procedures. 
(a)  The planning commission may approve or conditionally approve the application for a large family day care home permit and shall announce and record its decision within 21 days following the conclusion of the public hearing. The decision shall set forth the findings by formal resolution of the planning commission. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the applicant. 
(b)  The decision of the planning commission shall be final and shall become effective ten days after the adoption of the resolution by the commission. However, if within such ten-day period an appeal of the decision is filed by an aggrieved person, the applicant or the city council, the filing of such appeal within such time limit shall suspend the decision of the planning commission until the determination of the appeal by the city council or its dismissal by the appellant. Such appeal shall be filed, in writing, with the city clerk on forms furnished by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.70, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1278. - Appeal to city council. 
(a)  The hearing date for the appeal of the planning commission's decision made under this division shall be set by the city clerk after the filing of the appeal on the forms provided. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(c)  The commission shall transmit to the council the original application, records, written reports, and commission resolution disclosing in what respect the application and facts offered in support thereof met or failed to meet the requirements set forth in this division. 
(d)  The council may by resolution affirm, reverse, or modify in whole or in part any appealed decision, determination or requirement of the commission. However, before granting any appealed petition which was denied by the commission or before changing any of the conditions imposed by the commission, the council shall make a written finding of facts setting forth wherein the commission's findings were in error and wherein the property or particular use involved meets or does not meet the requirements set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.80, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1279. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any permit granted pursuant to this division shall be revoked upon a finding that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The large family day care home permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud. 
(2)  The use for which the permit was granted has ceased, or has been suspended for one year or more. 
(3)  The applicant has not complied with one or more of the conditions of approval of the permit. 
(b)  Any such finding shall be by the planning commission after public hearing of which the initial applicant shall be given ten days' advance written notice by first class mail directed to the applicant's address of record, as per the files of the planning commission. The finding of the commission and its determination pursuant thereto shall be subject to appeal by any interested person, including any councilmember, in the same manner and within the same time as provided in this division to the council, which shall, upon the same written notice, conduct a hearing, notice of which shall have, however, been given at such corrected address as the original certificate holder or his successor may have furnished in writing. The decision of the planning commission or of the council, as the case may be, shall be final and conclusive. Action of the planning commission or of the council shall be by resolution, shall contain specific findings, and shall contain specific action relative to revocation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything in this section contained, the commission or the council, as the case may be, with respect to any ground of revocation coming within subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section, may grant a period of time within which the case may be reactivated or within which noncompliance with conditions may be remedied. In such event, the resolution shall be considered interlocutory to the first regular meeting of the body adopting the resolution following such extended date set for full compliance. Thereupon by further resolution, the body therefor otherwise finally acting shall take final action with respect thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.743.90, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-1280—106-1305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 106-1306. - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to establish regulations and standards that enhance compatibility of automotive repair use with other commercial activity in the same zone and afford protection to abutting residential property where the two zones converge. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.744.01, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1307. - Regulations and standards. 
(a)  The regulations and standards for automotive repair in this section shall supplement development standards enumerated in this chapter for commercial and industrial zoned property. The standards imposing the more stringent requirement shall prevail. These supplemental development standards shall apply not only to new development or conversions subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, but to an existing development that may wish to expand or modify its operations. 
(b)  Repair work shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and dismantled vehicles and tow trucks shall be stored inside a building or, if permitted, inside a screened area where the vehicles shall not be visible from off the site when the business is closed on weekends and overnight. 
(c)  Surfaced transitional parking areas shall be provided on site where vehicles awaiting service shall be stored. Except for cursory examination, no actual repair work shall be conducted on vehicles parked in the transition area. 
(d)  Major repair and refinishing shops will be permitted as accessory to automobile sales dealerships when located not less than 200 feet from residentially zoned property. 
(e)  Accessory automobile repair facilities shall not exceed one-third the total square foot area devoted to the entire principal use. 
(f)  Automobile repair facilities falling under the category of an accessory use for a permitted retail or service use in the commercial zone shall be subject to the applicable requirements of this section. 
(g)  Major or minor automobile repair facility structures shall not be closer than 40 feet to any street right-of-way or closer than 60 feet to any lot in a residential district. Buildings used for repair shall position garage doors away from residential property. 
(h)  Parking standards for automobile repair facilities shall be two spaces for each service stall, pit, or rack plus parking and loading spaces required per division 3 of article V of this chapter. Transitional parking areas shall be exclusively designated for vehicles requiring repair service. 
(i)  The minimum lot area for an automobile repair facility shall be predicated on the amount of land area required to satisfy property development standards for the zone where the automobile repair use is permitted and applicable standards specified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.744.10, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Secs. 106-1308—106-1335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 106-1336. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide comprehensive criteria, regulations, and standards for the siting and maintenance of hazardous waste management facilities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.746.10, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1337. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this division, words, phrases, and terms shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in volume II, Technical Supplement, of the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan (CoHWMP) beginning on page xii. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.746.20, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-1338. - Criteria and standards. 
Those hazardous waste management facilities permitted with a conditional use permit shall comply with the applicable criteria and standards listed in this section and/or criteria and standards listed in the CoHWMP. Whenever there is conflict between the criteria and standards listed in this section and the CoHWMP, the most restrictive shall apply. The criteria and standard for hazardous waste management facilities are as follows: 
(1)  Off-site hazardous waste management facilities. 
a.  Off-site hazardous waste management facilities shall not be within 1,000 feet of any residentially zoned property. 
b.  Off-site hazardous waste management facilities shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any area designated by the state geologist as a special studies zone. 
c.  Off-site hazardous waste management facilities shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any existing hospital for humans, school, day care center, convalescent home or group care quarters, or any permanently occupied human habitation, other than those used for industrial/purposes. 
d.  Off-site hazardous waste management facilities shall be located so as to avoid transportation routes through residential areas and high density traffic areas. 
e.  An environmental impact report, traffic study, transportation plan, emergency contingency plan, area excavation plan, environmental site assessment and geotechnical report shall accompany all applications for new hazardous waste facilities. In addition, risk assessments, hazard footprints, acoustical studies or other technical reports may be required if deemed by the community development director necessary for review of the application. 
f.  Setbacks, height, and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for in the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
g.  Space shall be provided for the anticipated peak load of delivery trucks, employees and customers, to circulate, park, queue and load or unload materials. Such facilities shall be adequate in size and configuration to ensure public safety and compatibility with surrounding operations and properties. 
h.  No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level as a result of the operations of the facility may be detected on neighboring properties. Measurements of ambient conditions shall be made part of the environmental impact report. 
i.  All facilities shall be fully paved and provided with secondary containment and storage facilities. Loading areas shall be equipped with fire suppression and vapor recovery system. 
j.  An environmental site assessment prepared and certified by a state-certified soils or environmental engineer shall accompany all applications for new off-site hazardous waste management facilities. If the environmental assessment reveals that hazardous substances, hazardous waste or hazardous materials have been released in, on, under, within or about the property, the material and any and all contamination resulting therefrom shall be fully assessed and remediated in accordance with all applicable federal, state, regional and local authorities. 
(2)  On-site hazardous waste management facility. On-site hazardous waste management facilities shall be subject to the criteria and standards set forth in subsections (1)f through (1)j of this section. 
(3)  Transfer facility/station. 
a.  A transfer facility/station shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residentially zoned property. 
b.  A transfer facility/station shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any area designated by the state geologist as a special studies zone. 
c.  A transfer facility/station shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any existing hospital, public school, convalescent care or group quarters facility. 
d.  A transfer facility/station shall be subject to the criteria and standards set forth in subsections (1)f through (1)j of this section. 
(4)  Treatment facility. Treatment facilities shall be subject to the criteria and standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(5)  Transportable treatment units. Transportable treatment units shall be considered temporary uses subject to the provisions and time limitations given as part of the conditional use permit process pursuant to division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.746.30, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1339. - Conditional use permit. 
All applicants for facilities under this division shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in division 4 of article II of this chapter. If the conditional use permit is approved, the applicant shall be required to sign a statement indicating that the facility is in compliance with the conditions of this chapter and the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. This affidavit shall be submitted on a yearly basis for as long as the conditional use permit remains effective. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.746.40, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1340. - Existing facilities. 
Legally existing hazardous waste management facilities shall be considered existing nonconforming land uses. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.746.50, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1341. - Fees. 
All owners and/or operators of a hazardous waste management facility shall pay any and all reasonable costs and fees incurred or to be incurred by the city for the following: 
(1)  Any and all environmental monitoring of the hazardous waste management facility; 
(2)  Any and all costs incurred in providing emergency response services; and 
(3)  Costs incurred as a result of an area evacuation if there is any release or threatened release of any hazardous material, hazardous substance or hazardous waste. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.746.60, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1342. - License taxes. 
All owners and/or operators of a hazardous waste management facility shall pay a license tax to the city in an amount equal to ten percent of the annual gross receipts of each facility. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.746.70, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Sec. 106-1343. - Monitoring and periodic review. 
(a)  All owners and/or operators of a hazardous waste management facility shall adopt a monitoring plan which has been approved by the city community development director for the purpose of monitoring any release or threatened release of any hazardous material, hazardous substance or hazardous waste in, on, under, beneath or from the property of the facility, and for the purpose of measuring the ambient air of property in and around the facility. 
(b)  All owners and/or operators of hazardous waste management facilities shall submit annual reports by December 31 of each year, whereby such reports shall include the following: 
(1)  Results from the tests conducted pursuant to the monitoring plan. 
(2)  Information on the occurrence of any release or threatened release occurring at the facility within the preceding 12-month period, including information on any removal, remediation or mitigation measures implemented as a result of such. 
(3)  The total type, quantity and origin of any hazardous material, hazardous substance or hazardous waste disposed of, stored or treated at the facility within the preceding 12 months. 
(c)  In order to carry out and ensure compliance with the obligations of this division, any authorized city representative may, at any reasonable hour of the day, enter and inspect a hazardous waste management facility, whereby such inspection may include but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  A physical on-site inspection of the premises including a survey to determine the topography and geology of the property. 
(2)  Conduct any and all sampling activities necessary to carry out this division, including sampling of the soil, vegetation, air, water and biota on or beneath the premises, or from any vehicle on the premises or storage area within the premises, provided such samples are made available to the person from whom or from whose property or vehicle the samples are obtained. 
(3)  Set up and maintain monitoring equipment for the purpose of assessing or measuring the actual or potential migration of any hazardous material, hazardous substance or hazardous waste or the release or any threatened release on, beneath toward or from the property of the facility. 
(4)  Stop and inspect any vehicle reasonably suspected of transporting any hazardous material, hazardous substance or hazardous waste, when accompanied by a uniformed peace officer in a clearly marked vehicle. 
(5)  Inspect and copy any and all records, reports, test results, or other information regarding the operations on the facility, which concern or in any way relate to a release or threatened release of any hazardous material, hazardous substance or hazardous waste. 
(6)  Photograph any condition or operation on the property, including any hazardous material, hazardous substance or hazardous waste container, label, vehicle, or disposal area, and including any condition or operation constituting a violation of any law. Whenever photographs have been taken, the owner or operator of the facility shall be notified prior to public disclosure of the photograph and, upon request of that person, shall be provided a copy of any photograph for the purpose of determining whether trade secrets or information for facility securing will be revealed by the photograph. Public disclosure as used in this subsection does not include review of photographs by a court of competent jurisdiction or by any administrative law judge. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § 30.746.80, 9-30-1985; Ord. No. 1305, 6-15-1987)  
Division 13. - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities  
Subdivision I. - Overview 
 
Sec. 106-1344. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  This division establishes standards for the development and placement of wireless telecommunications facilities. This division is not intended to regulate health impacts associated with telecommunications projects. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Ensure access to reliable wireless communication services throughout all areas of the city; 
(2)  Encourage the location of new monopoles and telecommunication facilities in non-residential areas; 
(3)  Encourage the use of existing monopoles for the co-location of telecommunications facilities; 
(4)  Encourage the location of monopoles and other telecommunications facilities in areas where the adverse visual and aesthetic impacts on the community will be minimal; 
(5)  Minimize the potential adverse visual and aesthetic effects associated with the construction of monopoles and towers through the utilization of best quality design, landscaping and construction practices; 
(6)  Ensure public health, safety, welfare, and convenience; 
(7)  Conform to federal and state laws that limit certain aspects of local regulation of personal wireless telecommunications facilities; and 
(8)  Establish clear local guidelines and standards for the regulation of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1345. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Accessory equipment. Any equipment building, shelter, or cabinet serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless telecommunications facility or support structure. This equipment includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, and shelters or other structures associated with the operation of a wireless telecommunications facility or support structure. 
Antenna. Any structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves for the provision of cellular, paging, personal communication services (PCS) and microwave communications. Such structures and devices include, but are not limited to, directional antennas, such as any system of wires, poles, rods, discs, reflecting discs, panels, flat panels, dishes, whip antennae, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency electromagnetic waves. Antennas include devices having active elements extending in any direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna. The height of all antennas shall include the highest point of all array structures. 
Co-location. The placement of more than a single antenna on a telecommunications site or facility, including antennas operated by different wireless telecommunications service providers. 
Cell on wheels (COW). A portable self-contained site that can be moved to a location and set up to provide personal wireless telecommunications services on a temporary or emergency basis. A COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna support structure. 
Chief planning official. The community development director which includes his or her authorized representative. 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The Federal Communications Commission is the governmental agency responsible for regulating wireless telecommunications in the United States. 
Monitoring protocol. An industry accepted radio-frequency radiation measurement protocol used to determine compliance with FCC radio frequency radiation exposure standards in accordance with the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements Reports 86 and 119 and consistent with the radio frequency radiation modeling specifications of the most recent edition of the FCC Office of Engineering and Technology's "OET Bulletin 65" (or any superseding reports/standards) which is to be used to measure the emissions and determine radio frequency radiation exposure levels from existing and new telecommunications facilities. 
Monopole. A single, freestanding pole-type structure supporting one or more antennas. These structures are sometimes camouflaged to look like palm trees or pine trees. For purposes of this division, a monopole is not a tower. 
Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER). Radiation from the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum with frequencies of insufficient energy to break chemical bonds, including all frequencies below the ultraviolet range such as visible light and radio frequency radiation. 
Replacement. Removing an existing support structure and constructing a new support structure of equal height and proportions to the preexisting support structure in order to accommodate co-location. 
Stealth technology/techniques. Camouflaging methods applied to any wireless telecommunications facility such that the wireless telecommunication towers, antennas, and/or other components of the facility in such a manner so as to render it "minimally visible", and so that the purpose of the facility for providing wireless services is not readily apparent to a casual observer. Stealthing may utilize, but does not require, concealment of all components of the wireless facility. 
Support structure. A structure designed primarily to support wireless telecommunications facilities including, but not limited to, monopoles, towers and other freestanding self-supporting structures. 
Tower. A mast, guyed tower, lattice tower, free-standing tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to support antennas. A lattice-type structure, guyed or freestanding, that supports one or more antennas. 
Wireless telecommunications facility. Any unmanned facility established for the purpose of providing wireless transmission of voice, data, images or other information including, but not limited to, cellular telephone service, personal communication service (PCS), and paging service. A wireless telecommunications facility consists of one or more antennas on a support structure and any accessory equipment, fences, lighting or other appurtenances. A wireless telecommunications facility does not include any facility that is not used for wireless telecommunication, or radio frequency machines which have an effective radiated power of 100 watts or less. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1346. - Conditional use permit and site plan review required. 
Unless listed in section 106-1349 as exempt, no wireless telecommunications facility shall be constructed, replaced, or modified without first undergoing the site plan review process per sections 106-111 to 106-113 and obtaining a new conditional use permit and/or modifying an existing applicable conditional use permit pursuant to application and review procedures contained in sections 106-141 to 106-148. Facilities determined to have minimal impacts or which are exempt from local review by state or federal statutes have been classified as exempt under this division and are not subject to discretionary review so long as they meet the requirements for such exempt facilities as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1347. - Exempt facilities. 
The following wireless telecommunications facilities are exempt from conditional use permit requirements and site plan review requirements under this division, provided they meet the requirements set forth in this section: 
(1)  Interior and exterior antennas accessory to a permitted use of a site, limited to television reception antennas, satellite reception dishes, and amateur radio facilities meeting all the requirements set forth below: 
a.  Direct broadcast satellite ("DBS") antennas and television broadcast services ("TBS") antennas or other similarly scaled telecommunications device may not exceed 36 inches in diameter. DBS and TBS antennas, satellite dishes and similar devices may not extend above the roof peak or parapet of the supporting structure unless otherwise approved by the chief planning official. 
b.  Antennas, including support structures, may not be located within any required building setback area, and must be screened from public view. No portion of the antenna, support structure, and/or accessory equipment may overhang or extend beyond any property line. 
c.  Antenna height may not exceed the maximum allowable building height for the zoning district in which it is located. The antenna support structure may not exceed a width or diameter of 24 inches. 
(2)  Public safety facilities, used only for public safety functions, including transmitters, repeaters, and remote cameras so long as the facilities are designed to match the supporting structure. 
(3)  Wireless telecommunications facilities accessory to other publicly owned or operated equipment for data acquisition such as irrigation controls, well monitoring, and traffic signal controls. 
(4)  Wireless telecommunications facilities erected and operated for emergency situations, as designated by the chief administrative officer, so long as the facility is removed at the conclusion of the emergency. 
(5)  Multi-point distribution services (MDS) antennas and other temporary mobile wireless services including mobile wireless communication facilities and services providing public information coverage of news events for a duration of no more than 14 days. 
(6)  Mobile facilities, including "cell on wheels" (COW) equipment, when placed at a location for no more than seven consecutives days, subject to prior authorization by the chief planning official and when the mobile facility is located within a zoning district that permits wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(7)  Wireless telecommunications equipment that replaces or alters an existing facility such as replacement of a pre-existing antenna with a smaller antenna, installation of quieter equipment, or modifications that decrease capacity, subject to prior review and approval by the chief planning official and issuance of a building permit. 
(8)  Any antenna or wireless telecommunications facility, for which a permit or certification has been issued by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) specifically stating that the antenna or wireless telecommunications facility is exempt from municipal regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1348. - Legal nonconforming uses. 
All existing wireless telecommunications facilities approved and in operation prior to adoption of this division shall be exempt from the provisions of this division, subject to division 6 (Nonconforming Structures and Uses) of article II of this Code, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Any expansion or alteration to existing equipment, structure, site and/or facility, including any new co-locations, shall comply with the standards and procedures for the development of new wireless telecommunications facilities as in this division. If the existing facility is in a location where development of new wireless telecommunications facilities is prohibited, no increase in height shall be permitted. 
(2)  All existing wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to provisions set forth in this division as they relate to the public safety impacts, periodic review, and monitoring requirements. 
(3)  All maintenance work on existing wireless telecommunications facilities and accessory equipment shall comply with the noise regulations in section 34-27. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Secs. 106-1349—106-1351. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Development Requirements and Standards 
 
Sec. 106-1352. - Location standards. 
(a)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be prohibited on all properties adjacent to residentially zoned properties and/or within 250 feet of any property line of a residentially zoned parcel, whichever provides the greater distance from residentially zoned properties. 
(b)  Subject to the requirements for conditional use permits per section 106-1348, wireless telecommunications facilities are permissible only in the following areas: 
(1)  Properties within the Workplace Flex District of the SP-5 (San Fernando Corridors Specific Plan) zone. 
(2)  Properties within the M-1 (Limited Industrial) zone. 
(3)  Properties within the M-2 (Light Industrial) zone. 
(4)  Properties owned and utilized by the City of San Fernando for municipal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. 1671, § 2(Exh. B), 12-20-2017)  
Sec. 106-1353. - Facilities permissible with a conditional use permit. 
The following types of wireless telecommunications facilities shall be permissible if approved pursuant to a conditional use permit in accordance with sections 106-141 through 106-148, provided the site plan review application procedures set forth in sections 106-111 through 106-113 are satisfied and provided the facilities meet the location and design standards set forth in this division. Any application for a wireless telecommunications facility may be denied based on aesthetic or land use impacts. 
(1)  Mobile antenna when placed on a site for more than seven consecutive days, subject to the following standards: 
a.  An antenna vehicle or an antenna trailer shall be located only on a paved surface. 
b.  Any vehicular access and parking for support personnel shall be provided on a paved surface. 
c.  Operational safety signage shall be provided. 
d.  An antenna vehicle or an antenna trailer and support parking shall not be located within a public right-of-way without first obtaining an encroachment permit. 
(2)  Additional antennas and/or modifications to an existing monopole or tower, subject to the following standards: 
a.  The existing monopole or tower was constructed and is operating in accordance with the requirements of a conditional use permit. 
b.  The type and size of additional antenna(s) is consistent with the provisions of this division. 
c.  The additional antenna array does not exceed the height of the existing tower. 
d.  The additional antenna array is the second or third grouping of antenna panels on the tower. 
e.  The additional antenna array fits within the three dimensional envelope of the existing monopole or tower and arrays. 
f.  The additional antenna array does not include a microwave dish greater than one meter in diameter. 
g.  The combined electromagnetic radiation for all antenna arrays does not exceed applicable standards. 
h.  The additional antenna array does not require substantial modifications to the existing tower. 
(3)  Building mounted antennas, subject to the following standards: 
a.  The lowest part of the antenna shall be a minimum of 15 feet above grade. 
b.  The antenna and mountings shall not project more than 18 inches from the building surface to which it is mounted. 
c.  Antennas, connections, and supports shall be treated to match the color scheme of the building, or as approved by the planning commission. 
d.  Antennas and connections shall not project above the building facade. 
e.  Accessory equipment shall be fully screened from public view if mounted on the ground, or shall otherwise be located underground. 
f.  Exterior electrical lines serving the equipment cabinet or building shall be located underground. 
g.  If panel type antennas are proposed, then the total square footage of all panels shall not exceed 25 square feet on any facade. 
(4)  Roof mounted antennas, subject to the following standards: 
a.  The antenna(s) and related equipment shall be fully screened from view or architecturally integrated into the building design. 
b.  Antenna(s) shall match the color scheme of the building facade to which they are attached. 
c.  Accessory equipment shall be fully screened from public view if mounted on the ground, or shall otherwise be located underground. 
d.  Antenna(s) and support structures shall not exceed the allowable height limit for the zoning district in which it is located by more than ten feet or exceed the parapet by more than six feet, whichever is less. 
(5)  Wireless telecommunications antennas on city facilities, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Antenna(s) may be ground mounted or mounted on existing buildings or structures. 
b.  The antenna(s) shall be integrated into the site and/or structure design. 
c.  Accessory equipment shall be fully screened from public view if mounted on the ground, or shall otherwise be located underground. 
d.  Any vehicular access and parking for support personnel shall be provided on a paved surface. 
(6)  Modifications to existing antennas, including any modification to equipment or accessories of existing wireless telecommunications facilities whether conforming or legally nonconforming to the provisions of this division, with the exception of reducing the height, reducing the number of panels and/or antennas, and/or reducing the radio frequency radiation and/or noise emissions. 
(7)  "Emergency 911" wireless telecommunications facilities, including any alteration, upgrade or addition of equipment or accessories to allow for "Emergency 911" uses. 
(8)  Antenna arrays mounted on existing signs, water towers, sport field light towers, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Antenna(s) shall be designed to match the supporting structure. 
b.  Accessory equipment shall be fully screened from public view if mounted on the ground, or shall otherwise be located underground. 
(9)  Monopole or towers, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Monopoles and towers shall be located and designed to minimize visual impacts. Towers located in high visibility locations shall incorporate "stealth" design techniques to camouflage the tower to the maximum extent feasible as art, sculpture, clock tower, flag pole, tree or any other appropriate and compatible visual form. 
b.  Monopoles and towers shall be located on the rear half of the parcel, unless the planning commission determines that aesthetic benefit is achieved through an alternative location. 
c.  New private monopoles and towers shall not be located on any land developed or zoned for any residential and/or school use, unless otherwise specified in this division. 
d.  Monopoles and towers shall not be permitted within 400 feet of an existing tower, except that the planning commission may modify this standard in cases where it finds, in conjunction with approval of a conditional use permit, that cumulative visual impacts are not significant and that the tower is necessary to provide services not possible with co-location on an existing tower or structure in the service area. The chief planning official may require an independent study, at the applicant's expense, of the basis for making such findings. 
e.  Monopoles and towers shall be designed at the minimum functional height pursuant to the requirements of section 106-1355. This standard may be modified to allow for an increase not to exceed 15 feet above the maximum permitted height within any zone upon a finding by the planning commission that the cumulative visual impacts are not significant and that the height is necessary to provide for co-location opportunities not possible with a tower meeting the required height standard. Independent review of the request, at the expense of the applicant, may be required by the chief planning official. 
f.  As a condition of approval for all monopoles and towers, the applicant shall provide a written commitment that it will allow co-location of antennas on towers where technically and economically feasible. 
g.  Accessory equipment shall be fully screened from public view if mounted on the ground, or shall otherwise be located underground. 
h.  Any vehicular access and parking for support personnel shall be provided on a paved surface. 
(10)  Other wireless telecommunications facilities not listed as exempt in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1354. - General standards. 
The standards in this section are applicable to any wireless telecommunications facility not exempt under section 106-1348. 
(1)  If technological improvements or developments occur that allow the use of materially smaller or less visually obtrusive equipment, the wireless telecommunications service provider may be required to replace or upgrade an approved wireless telecommunications facility upon application for a new permit in order to minimize the facility's adverse impact on land use compatibility and aesthetics. This provision applies only to the specific site for which the application for a modification is requested. 
(2)  Each telecommunications service provider with a wireless telecommunications facility shall obtain a business license prior to initiation of service. 
(3)  The chief planning official may hire a third party independent engineer to evaluate any technical aspect of the application. The applicant will be responsible to pay for all costs of this analysis. 
(4)  Failure to comply with any of the conditions of the permit may result in the revocation of the permit after a duly noticed public hearing pursuant to the procedures in section 106-148. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1355. - Height. 
(a)  All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be designed to the minimum functional height required. 
(b)  Unless this division imposes a more restrictive height limitation on a specific type of facility, the wireless telecommunications facility's height shall not extend beyond the maximum allowable height for the zone in which it is located, except when additional height is permitted by the planning commission when necessary to accommodate co-location. 
(c)  Wireless telecommunications facilities providing for co-location may be permitted to extend up to ten feet beyond the maximum allowable height for the zoning district in which it is being proposed. 
(d)  The height of a monopole, tower or other support structure shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground surface below the center of the base of the structure to the top of the structure itself or, if higher, the tip of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1356. - Setback. 
(a)  All wireless telecommunications facilities and accessory equipment and structures shall comply with the required building setbacks for the zoning district in which they are located. However, in no instance shall the facility (including antennas and equipment) be located closer than five feet to any property line. Additional setback requirements shall be established in conjunction with a conditional use permit for those antennas exceeding the height limit for the zoning district. 
(b)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be located within the required front-yard area of any parcel, or within a designated parking area, unless the planning commission determines that aesthetic benefit is achieved through such location. 
(c)  The planning commission may reduce required setbacks from property lines for wireless telecommunications facilities upon determination that aesthetic impacts would be reduced or open space improved. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1357. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Landscaping, wherever appropriate, shall be used as screening to reduce visual impacts of a wireless telecommunications facility. Any such landscaping shall be visually compatible with existing vegetation in the vicinity. 
(b)  Existing landscaping in the vicinity of a wireless telecommunications facility shall be protected from damage during and after the facility's construction. Where applicable, the applicant for a new wireless telecommunications facility shall submit a tree protection plan to ensure compliance with this requirement. 
(c)  Off-site landscaping may be required to mitigate off-site impacts. Additional landscaping may also be required in public right-of-ways to obscure visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities from passing motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. 
(d)  An automatic irrigation system shall be provided for all existing and proposed on-site and off-site landscaping. 
(e)  All existing and proposed on-site and off-site landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1358. - Design standards. 
(a)  All wireless telecommunications facilities and accessory equipment structures shall utilize state of the art stealth technology as appropriate to the site and type of facility. Where no stealth technology is proposed in an application for a new wireless telecommunications facility, a detailed analysis as to why stealth technology is physically and/or technically infeasible for the project shall be submitted with the application. 
(b)  Monopole support structures shall not exceed four feet in diameter unless technical evidence is provided showing that a larger diameter is necessary to attain the proposed height and that the proposed height is necessary. 
(c)  Any wireless telecommunications facility mounted on a building shall be located in a manner so as to minimize visual impacts on surrounding properties and right-of-ways. 
(d)  Any building-mounted antenna and support structure shall be painted to be architecturally compatible with the building, and to minimize visual impacts on surrounding properties. The specific color is subject to approval based on a visual analysis of the particular site. 
(e)  Accessory equipment must be screened from public view. 
(f)  Wireless telecommunications facility support structures shall be sized and designed to allow at least one additional wireless telecommunications service provider to co-locate on the support structure. 
(g)  All fencing shall be decorative and compatible with the adjacent buildings and properties within the surrounding area; and shall be designed to resist graffiti vandalism and to facilitate the removal of graffiti. Chain link, barbed wire, and concertina wire are prohibited. 
(h)  Lighting shall not be permitted on wireless telecommunications facilities unless required as a public safety measure. If lighting is required, it must be provided in a manner designed to minimize glare and light overflow onto neighboring properties. Security lighting installed at wireless telecommunications facility sites shall only be operational when support personnel are present. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1359. - Signage. 
A permanent, weather-proof identification sign, approximately 16 inches by 32 inches in size, must be placed on the gate of the fence surrounding a wireless telecommunications facility or, if there is no fence, on the facility itself. The sign must identify the facility operator's name and address, and specify a telephone number at which a representative of the service provider can be reached at any time in the event of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1360. - Public health and safety 
(a)  All wireless telecommunications facilities in combination shall comply with all public health and safety rules, regulations and standards, including compliance with non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation standards set by the FCC and/or any other agency with the authority to regulate such facilities. If such rules, standards and/or regulations are changed, the service provider(s) and/or property owner(s) shall bring such facilities into compliance with such revised rules, standards and/or regulations within six months of the effective date of such rule, standard and/or regulation, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Any violation of this section is hereby deemed a public nuisance and shall constitute grounds for revocation of any permits and/or approvals granted under this division. 
(b)  If it is found that any wireless telecommunications facilities are or will be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons working or residing near such facilities, then the service provider(s) and/or property owner(s) shall be entirely responsible for the removal, adjustment, or replacement of the facilities. In no case shall a facility remain in operation if found to create a hazard to public health, safety, and welfare. A wireless telecommunications facility shall not be found to create a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare as a result of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation emissions from the facility so long as it meets all then current standards established by the FCC or other federal agency having jurisdiction. 
(c)  For the protection of emergency response personnel, each wireless telecommunications facility shall have a main breaker switch to disconnect electrical power at the site. For co-location sites, a single main switch shall be installed to disconnect electrical power for all carriers at the site in the event of an emergency. 
(d)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be operated in a manner that would cause any interference with any public emergency telecommunications system. If such interference occurs, the wireless telecommunications service provider shall remedy the problem. 
(e)  Fencing, barriers, or other appropriate measures to restrict public access to wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in a functional condition at all times. 
(f)  A violation of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of this section shall constitute grounds for abatement and removal of the wireless telecommunications facility at the expense of the service provider and/or the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1361. - Noise. 
(a)  All wireless telecommunications facilities, including their power sources, ventilation, air conditioning units and any other cooling equipment, and all other accessory equipment shall operate in compliance with the noise regulations in section 34-27. 
(b)  Back-up generators shall only be operated during power outages and/or for testing and maintenance purposes on weekdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1362. - Compliance with radiation exposure standards. 
(a)  Subsequent to construction of a new wireless telecommunications facility or modification of an existing wireless telecommunications facility, the facility shall not be operated prior to final inspection and authorization to operate by the chief building official or designee. Within ten days after authorized operation of the facility begins, the wireless telecommunications service provider shall submit a report prepared by a qualified licensed engineer acceptable to the chief planning official certifying that at full power operation the facility is operating in compliance with all applicable standards regulating non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation emissions, and that the measured cumulative level of all such emissions at the site and in the vicinity of the facility do not exceed allowable levels. The report certifying such compliance shall document the basis for such certification pursuant to the monitoring protocol as defined in this division. These provisions shall be met through submission of a report documenting field measurements of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation measurements. All reports shall consider cumulative effects of co-located facilities and shall be written in plain English. 
(b)  Post-construction testing of new and/or modified wireless telecommunications sites and facilities with respect to non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation emissions is required for all new and modified wireless telecommunications facilities to ensure that they operate in compliance with the applicable radiation exposure standards. Monitoring of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation is to be conducted consistent with the monitoring protocol as defined in this division. If such testing indicates that the site or facility is not in compliance with the applicable standards and requirements contained in this division, the non-compliant site shall cease all operation causing the emission in excess of the applicable standards. The service provider shall have 30 days to bring the site or facility into compliance. If this is not completed by that time, the chief planning official may initiate the process as necessary to modify or revoke all permits, turn off power and other services to the site and/or facility and begin procedures to demolish the facility at the expense of the service provider and/or the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Secs. 106-1363—106-1365. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Approval Process 
 
Sec. 106-1366. - Pre-application. 
Two pre-application meetings are recommended for applicants proposing development of new wireless telecommunications facilities. The first meeting should take place at the earliest stage of site location research and subsequent to voluntary submittal of a service area map and description of the type of antenna and facility proposed. The second meeting is recommended after the site is selected and subsequent to voluntary submittal of a preliminary site plan and visual impact graphics. These meetings are voluntary, and no fees shall be required for the review of material submitted at this stage. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1367. - Submittal requirements. 
Except for facilities specifically identified as exempt under this division, all applications for development of new wireless telecommunications facilities require: (i) a conditional use permit application to be submitted pursuant to sections 106-141 through 106-148; and (ii) a site plan to be submitted pursuant to sections 106-111 through 106-113. The number, size, and content of the plans shall be determined by the chief planning official. The chief planning official may require additional information, besides the information specified in this division, in order to properly assess a particular application. All applications for wireless telecommunications projects shall include the following: 
(1)  All application materials generally required for a conditional use permit, as provided for in sections 106-141 through 106-148. 
(2)  Vicinity map, including topographic areas, designation of properties within a 1,000 feet radius from the proposed facility, residential and school zones, and major roads/highways. The distance of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility from existing residentially zoned areas, existing residences, schools, major roads and highways, and all other existing or approved but unbuilt or otherwise inoperative wireless telecommunications facilities within a 1,000 feet radius from the proposed location of a proposed wireless telecommunications facility shall be shown on the vicinity map. 
(3)  Site plan including and identifying: 
a.  All facility related support and protection equipment. 
b.  A description of general project information, including the type of facility, number of antennas, maximum height including the top antenna panels and arrays, radio frequency range, wattage output of equipment, and a statement of compliance with the current requirements of the FCC and of any other agency with authority to regulate such facilities. 
(4)  Elevations of all proposed facility structures, accessory equipment and appurtenances, and composite elevations from the street(s) showing the proposed project and all buildings on the site. 
(5)  Photo simulations, photo-montage, story height poles, elevations and/or other visual or graphic illustrations necessary to determine potential visual impact of the proposed project. Visual impact demonstrations shall include accurate scale and coloration of the proposed facility. The visual simulation shall show the proposed facility as it would be seen from surrounding properties from perspective points to be determined in consultation with the chief planning official prior to preparation. The chief planning official may also require a simulation analyzing proposed stealth designs, and/or on-site demonstration mock-ups before the public hearing. 
(6)  Landscape plan that shows existing vegetation, vegetation to be removed, and proposed plantings by type, size, and location. If deemed necessary, the chief planning official may require a report by a licensed landscape architect to verify project impacts on existing vegetation. This report may recommend protective measures to be implemented during and after construction. Where deemed appropriate by the chief planning official, a landscape plan may be required for the entire parcel and leased area to be occupied by the proposed facility. 
(7)  A written statement and supporting information regarding alternative site selection and co-location opportunities in the service area. The application shall describe why the proposed location is preferred, and shall include a list of alternative sites considered in the site selection process along with an indication as to why such alternative sites were rejected. An assessment of the potential for co-location opportunities shall be provided when applicable, including a statement and evidence of any refusal by other wireless telecommunications service providers regarding co-location. 
(8)  Noise and acoustical information for the base transceiver station(s), equipment buildings, and associated equipment such as air conditioning units and back-up generators. Such information shall be provided by a qualified firm or individual approved by the chief planning official, and paid for by the project applicant. 
(9)  A radio frequency radiation emissions analysis conducted and certified by a State of California licensed radio frequency engineer to determine probable emissions from the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and comparison of those outputs with the maximum allowable non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation emissions allowed by the FCC or other agency with authority to regulate such emissions. A report with evidence of estimated compliance with the FCC's non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation standards, and with the standards of any other agency with the authority to regulate such emissions shall be submitted by the engineer. Such information shall be provided by a qualified firm or individual, approved by the chief planning official, and paid for by the project applicant. 
(10)  A cumulative impact analysis of development and operation of the proposed facility in conjunction with any other existing or approved but unbuilt or otherwise inoperative wireless telecommunications facilities within a distance of 1,000 feet from the proposed facility, or as otherwise determined by the chief planning official. The analysis shall address the height, dimensions and power rating of all antennas and support equipment within this designated study area, as well as the existing ambient and estimated future cumulative level of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation exposures within the designated study area due to operation of the proposed facility in conjunction with operation of all existing and all approved but unbuilt or inoperative wireless telecommunications facilities that could measurably contribute to such exposure levels within this designated study area. 
(11)  A written statement by the applicant conveying willingness to allow other wireless telecommunications service providers to co-locate on the proposed facility wherever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable. 
(12)  A signed copy of the proposed property lease agreement or license agreement, exclusive of the financial terms of the lease, including provisions for removal of the facility and appurtenant equipment within six months of its abandonment. The final agreement shall be submitted prior to issuance of a building permit for any such facility. 
(13)  An "Evidence and Needs Report" detailing operational and capacity needs of the applicant's system within the vicinity of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility. The report shall detail how the proposed site or facility is technically necessary to address the current demand for service and to address technical limitations of the applicant's current system. Such report shall be evaluated by a qualified firm or individual, chosen by the chief planning official, and paid for by the project applicant. The chosen firm or individual may request additional information from the project applicant as necessary to sufficiently evaluate the proposed project. 
(14)  A security plan which includes emergency contact information, main breaker switch, emergency procedures to follow, and any other information as required by this division and/or the chief planning official. 
(15)  A description of the anticipated maintenance program and back-up generator power testing schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1368. - Use of outside consultants. 
From time to time the chief planning official may contract for the services of a qualified outside consultant to supplement staff in the review of a proposed wireless telecommunications facility. The use of outside consultants shall be at the applicant's expense. The costs of these services shall be in addition to all other applicable fees associated with the project. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1369. - Public hearing and notices. 
Notices of a public hearing on any proposed wireless telecommunications facility shall be provided in accordance with sections 106-71 through 106-81. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1370. - Findings for approval. 
In addition to the findings required for approval of any conditional use permit, all of the following findings must be made prior to approval of a conditional use permit for any wireless telecommunications facility: 
(1)  The proposed wireless telecommunications facility has been designed to minimize its visual and environmental impacts, including utilization of stealth technology as warranted. 
(2)  The site of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility has the appropriate zoning, dimension, slope, design, and configuration for the development of the proposed facility. 
(3)  The proposed wireless telecommunications facility will provide landscaping in a manner so as to partially screen the facility's structure(s) and antenna(s), and to provide an attractive environment and preserve natural features and elements. 
(4)  The proposed wireless telecommunications facility is in compliance with all requirements of the FCC and the California Public Utilities Commission, and any other agency with authority to regulate such facilities. 
(5)  The proposed wireless telecommunications facility is necessary to address current demand capacity or other technical limitations of the system in order to maintain service levels. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1371. - Appeals. 
Any person dissatisfied by the decision to either approve or deny a conditional use permit for the construction or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility, excluding exempt facilities, may file an appeal in accordance with section 106-76. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Secs. 106-1372—106-1374. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Monitoring, Transfer, and Revocation 
 
Sec. 106-1375. - Periodic review. 
(a)  The chief planning official may conduct a periodic review of any wireless telecommunications facility to consider whether or not the facility is operating in conformance with the conditions of its discretionary approval or appropriate permits. In addition, the wireless telecommunications facility operator shall provide on a yearly basis a compliance letter outlining the continued compliance with all applicable FCC regulations regarding non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
(b)  The city shall consider whether or not the wireless telecommunications facility conflicts with emerging land uses approved under the San Fernando General Plan or any applicable specific plan. If the city council determines that adverse impacts to emerging land uses can be reduced through the use of new technology, or through the retirement of the current facility, the chief planning official shall work with the telecommunications facility service provider or the property owner to develop a mutually acceptable plan for achieving these mitigations. 
(c)  The city may conduct spot-check monitoring of wireless telecommunications facility operations at any time for compliance with the requirements of this division and the conditions of approval for a particular facility. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1376. - Implementation and monitoring costs. 
The wireless telecommunications service provider and/or the property owner shall be responsible for the payment to the city of all reasonable costs associated with monitoring the conditions of approval contained in any discretionary approval issued pursuant to this division, including costs incurred by the city or any other affected agency. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1377. - Transfer of operation. 
Any telecommunications service provider authorized to operate a wireless telecommunications facility may assign the operation of the facility to another service provider licensed by the FCC provided that advance notice of the transfer is given to the chief planning official within 30 days of said change of operator and all conditions of approval for the subject facility are carried out by the new service provider. Notwithstanding the above, a service provider may transfer, without advance notice, operation of a wireless telecommunications facility to its general partner or any party controlling or controlled by the existing service provider. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1378. - Abandonment. 
(a)  If the service provider plans on abandoning an antenna or a wireless telecommunications facility, the service provider shall notify the chief planning official at least 30 days prior to such planned abandonment. Failure to comply with any section of this division shall result in issuance of a compliance order and/or administrative penalties pursuant to article III and IV of chapter 1 of this Code. 
(b)  If any wireless telecommunications facility is not operated for a continuous period of six months, or falls into disrepair, it shall be considered abandoned. A wireless telecommunications facility considered abandoned shall be removed by the service provider and/or the property owner within three months and the site shall be restored to its original setting. If the abandoned facility is not removed within six months, the city may remove it at the property owner's expense. In the event of a transfer of ownership, the seller shall be responsible for notifying the buyer of this requirement and for notifying the city of the transfer. For co-location facilities, the facility shall not be deemed abandoned until all users cease operation of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Sec. 106-1379. - Revocation of permit. 
Wireless telecommunications service providers shall fully comply with all provisions of this division and with all conditions of approval related to any permit or approval granted under this division. Failure to comply with all such provisions of this division and with any such conditions of approval shall constitute grounds for revocation of such permit or approval. If a violation of a condition of approval is not remedied within a reasonable period, the chief planning official may schedule a public hearing before the planning commission to consider revocation of the conditional use permit and/or other permit(s) or approval granted under this division. 
(Ord. No. 1569, § 3, 12-5-2005)  
Secs. 106-1380—106-1382. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 106-1383. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for recognition, preservation, protection and use of historic resources in the city in a manner consistent with the goals and objectives of the Historic Preservation Element of the General Plan, and with the public health, safety and welfare, by establishing such procedures and regulations that are necessary to: 
(1)  Implement the city's historic preservation goals, policies and programs; 
(2)  Protect, enhance and perpetuate historic resources that represent or reflect distinctive and important elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, archeological and architectural history; 
(3)  Encourage public understanding and involvement in the unique architectural and environmental heritage of the city; 
(4)  Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the past by promoting private stewardship of historic resources that represent these accomplishments; 
(5)  Encourage and promote preservation, restoration, rehabilitation and maintenance of historic resources and potential historic resources for the culture, education, enjoyment and economic welfare of the city's inhabitants; 
(6)  Ensure that historic preservation planning is inclusive and reflective of the unique background and diversity of the city; 
(7)  Encourage the repair rather than the replacement of historic materials in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards; 
(8)  Protect historic and cultural resources from demolition and inappropriate alterations; 
(9)  Integrate historic preservation into community economic development strategies for sustainable development and to promote adaptive reuse of historic structures; 
(10)  Fulfill the city's responsibilities under the California Environmental Quality Act; 
(11)  Fulfill the city's responsibilities pursuant to federal historic preservation statutes; and 
(12)  Stabilize, improve, and protect property values within the city by establishing policies and procedures that protect historic resources. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1384. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adaptive reuse means the act of rehabilitating a building or site to include elements that allow a particular use or uses to occupy a space that originally was intended for a different use. 
Adverse effect means an activity or action that has the potential to diminish the significance of a historic resource. 
Alteration (also alter) means any physical modification or change to a building, structure, site, object or designated interior that may have a significant adverse effect on character-defining features of a historic resource. 
California Environmental Quality Act (also CEQA) means the California Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a certificate issued by the commission approving such plans, specifications, design, statements of work, and any other information which is reasonably required by the commission to make a decision on any proposed alteration, restoration, construction, removal, relocation or demolition, in whole or in part, of or to a historic resource. 
Certificate of no effect means a certificate issued by the director stating that proposed work on the property is minor in nature and will have no detrimental effect on the historic character of the property and therefore can proceed with the issuance of necessary permits for the proposed work. 
Certified local government (also CLG) means a local government that has been certified by the National Park Service to carry out the purposes of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 470 et seq.), as amended, pursuant to Section 101(c) of that Act and the regulations adopted under the Act, which are set forth in Part 61 (commencing with Section 61.1) of Title 36 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Commission means the City of San Fernando Planning and Preservation Commission established pursuant to the provisions of article II of chapter 62 of this Code. 
Contributing structure (also contributing site) means a structure or site within a historic district as designated by the city council or as listed in the State or National Register that has a special character, special historic or aesthetic interest or value, and is incorporated into the district for that reason. 
Demolition means an act or process that destroys or razes in whole or in part a building, structure or site, or permanently impairs its structural integrity and/or may have an adverse effect on the significance of a historic resource. 
Demolition by neglect means the failure to provide ordinary maintenance and repair to a historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit, whether such neglect is willful or unintentional, by the owner or any party in possession of such property, which results in one or both of the following: 
(1)  The severe deterioration of exterior features so as to create or permit a dangerous or unsafe condition to exist. 
(2)  The deterioration of a structure or its components, including but not limited to exterior walls, roof, chimneys, doors, windows, porches, structural or ornamental architectural elements, or foundations, which would result in permanent damage and loss of an historic resource's architectural and/or historic significance. 
Designation means the act of recognizing, labeling, and listing an historic resource into the San Fernando Register of Historic Resources by the city council. A designation formally establishes that an historic resource has historic significance. 
Director means the director of the community development department or the director's duly authorized representative. 
Exterior features means the architectural style, design, general arrangement, components and natural features or all of the outer surfaces of an improvement, including, but not limited to, the type, color and texture of the building material, the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, walls, fences and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement, and the natural form and appearance of, but not limited to, any grade, rock, tree, plant, shrub, road, path, walkway, plaza, fountain, sculpture or other form of natural or artificial landscaping. 
Fixture means a decorative or functional device permanently affixed to the site or the interior or exterior of a structure and contributing to its ability to meet historic resource criteria. 
Historic American Buildings Survey (also HABS) is intended to be used as a comprehensive guide for producing existing-condition measured drawings of buildings and other structures, as well as natural and man-made sites, pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. Sec. 470 et seq.) and the Historic Sites Act of 1935 (16 U.S.C. Sec 461-467), as amended. 
Historic American Engineering Record (also HAER) is intended to be used as a companion program to Historic American Buildings Survey, to document structures representing technological and engineering significance. 
Historic district means a geographic area or noncontiguous grouping of thematically related properties which the city council has designated as and determined to be appropriate for historical preservation pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
Historic resource means those improvements, sites, natural features or areas designated by the city council having a special character or special historical, cultural, archaeological, architectural, community or aesthetic value as part of the heritage of the city, region, state or nation and which has been designated, pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
Historic resources survey means the most recent comprehensive reconnaissance survey that is endorsed by the commission as listing sites and structures that are considered to have potential for designation as historic resources. 
Improvement means any manmade physical object or structure, or manmade alteration of terrain or plantings, constituting a physical feature of real property. 
Integrity means the ability of an historic resource to convey its significance, with consideration of the following aspects of integrity: location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association. 
Mills Act Contract (also contract) means the historical property contract between the city and property owner that provides the potential for reduced property taxes in return for the rehabilitation, restoration and preservation of an historical resource, pursuant to California Government Code § 50280 et seq. and California Revenue and Taxation Code § 439 et seq. In effect, the Mills Act contract serves as an economic incentive to owners to preserve their historic resource for the benefit of the entire community. 
Nomination means a nomination for placement of an historic resource on the San Fernando Register of Historic Resources pursuant to this division. 
Noncontributing structure (also noncontributing site) means a structure or site within an historic district that does not possess the qualifications or characteristics of a contributing structure due to such factors as age or alteration, but which has been included within the district because of its impact on the geographic integrity and overall character of the district. 
Ordinary maintenance and repair means any cleaning, painting, or similar work that does not result in the alteration of an improvement. 
Permanently affixed means, but is not limited to, attachment by screws, bolts, pegs, nails or glue, and may include such attachment as rope, glass or leather if such material is integral to the design of the device. Fixtures include, but are not limited to, lighting devices, murals, built-in furniture and cabinetry, paneling and molding, leaded glass or other decorative windows and decorative hardware. 
Preservation means the act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and materials of a building or structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover of a site. 
Reconstruction means the act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a previously existing building, structure, or object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time. 
Register means the San Fernando Register of Historic Resources, as defined herein. 
Relocation means the displacement of any improvement within the same site or to a different site. 
Removal means the displacement from the site of a historical resource of any device, feature, fixture, hardware, structural or decorative material contributing to the cultural, historic or architectural character of the historic resource. 
Resource means any building, structure, site, area, district, place, feature, characteristic, appurtenance, landscape, landscape plan, or improvement. 
Restoration means the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a resource and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work. 
San Fernando Register of Historic Resources (also register) means the official list of historic resources and historic districts in the city and any properties specified in the historic preservation element of the general plan. 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties (also Secretary's Standards) means the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and guidelines for rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or reconstruction of an historic resource. These standards and guidelines delineate accepted treatments for the protection and rehabilitation of materials pursuant to 36 CFR Part 68. 
Site means any parcel or portion of real property which has a special character or special historical, cultural, archaeological, architectural, community or aesthetic value. 
State Historical Building Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code §§ 18950 through 18961, as it may be amended from time to time, allows reasonably equivalent alternatives to the adopted California Building Code to facilitate the preservation and continuing use of designated historical resources while providing reasonable safety for the building occupants and access for people with disabilities. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground, except areas such as walks, paved areas, tennis courts, and similar open recreation areas. This definition includes buildings. 
Structure of merit means any improvement which has not been designated as a historic resource but is determined to be appropriate for official recognition by the commission pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008; Ord. No. 1586, § 3, 3-16-2009)  
Sec. 106-1385. - Criteria for designation of historic resources. 
(a)  Historic resource. An improvement may be considered for designation as an historic resource if it meets at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  It is associated with events or lives of persons that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of the history of the city, region, state or nation; 
(2)  It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a historic type, period, architectural style or method of construction, or represents the work of an architect, designer, engineer, or builder whose work is significant to the city, region, state or nation; or 
(3)  It has yielded, or is likely to yield, information important in the history of the city, region, state or nation. 
(b)  Historic resource (Interior). Public or semi-public spaces and features for an interior to a building may be designated as an historic resource if it meets all of the following criteria. 
(1)  Historically, the space has been open to the public; 
(2)  The materials, finishes or detailing are intact or later alterations are reversible; 
(3)  The plan, layout and features of the space are illustrative of its historic function; 
(4)  Its form and features articulate a particular concept of design; and, 
(5)  There is evidence of distinctive craftsmanship. 
(c)  Historic district. An area of the city including more than one property may be considered for designation as an historic district if it meets at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any of the criteria identified in section 106-1385(a) of this Code; 
(2)  It is a noncontiguous grouping of thematically related properties or a definable area possessing a concentration of historic, scenic or thematic sites, which contribute to each other and are unified aesthetically by plan, physical development or architectural quality; 
(3)  It reflects significant geographical patterns, including those associated with different eras of settlement and growth, particular transportation modes, or distinctive examples of park or community planning; or, 
(4)  It has a unique location, a singular physical characteristic, or is an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the city. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1386. - Procedure for designating historic resources. 
The commission, upon its own initiative or upon the written request of any person or organization, may propose the designation of an historical resource in the city. Upon submittal of such a proposal to the director, the procedure to consider it shall include the following actions: 
(1)  The applicant shall complete the application for the proposed designation on a form provided by the director, include all information required, and pay any required fee. 
(2)  The director shall notify the property owner of record in an effort to obtain such owner's written consent prior to initiation of the proposed designation. 
(3)  The commission shall review the proposed designation at a meeting pursuant to section 2-472 of this Code. Written notice of such meeting shall be sent to the property owner, at least ten days prior to the meeting date. The commission shall determine if the proposed resource meets the specified criteria for designation as an historic resource, as supported by substantial evidence in the record documenting the historic, architectural or other significance. 
(4)  If the commission determines that the proposed designation does not merit approval, the applicant and property owner shall be notified of such determination and the process shall terminate, except that any person may appeal it to the city council within ten days of the commission's determination per the procedure provided in section 106-77 of this Code. 
(5)  If the commission determines that the proposed designation warrants approval, the director shall schedule the matter for consideration by the city council. However, if the proposed historic resource is privately owned, the director shall obtain prior to scheduling the matter for consideration by the city council a written statement by the property owner, or by those owners having an interest greater than 50 percent of the assessed value of the property, consenting to such designation, unless the director determines that there is good cause to schedule the matter for consideration by the council without such written consent. An owner or owner's successor in interest may thereafter provide such concurrence at any time by filing such a written statement with the director. 
(6)  Subsequent to scheduling a proposed designation for consideration by the city council, the director shall provide a written report to the council incorporating the commission's recommendation and its reasons in support of the proposed designation. If the proposed historic resource is privately owned, such report shall include written documentation of the property owner's consent to the proposed designation if such consent has been obtained. Notice of the scheduled consideration of the matter by the city council shall be provided to the applicant and the property owner(s) at least ten days prior to such consideration. 
(7)  A declaration shall be recorded by the city clerk in the office of the county recorder when the city council designates a historic resource, except that no such declaration shall be recorded on a private property without the written consent of the property owner(s) to designation of the property as a historic resource. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1387. - Procedure for designating historic districts. 
The commission, upon its own initiative or upon the request of any person or organization, may propose the designation of an historic district in the city. Such proposal shall specify proposed contiguous or non-contiguous areas to be included in the district and the guidelines and requirements that would apply to all properties within the district. Such proposal shall also include a survey of all properties within the district that assesses their historical significance. Upon submittal of such a proposal to the director, the procedure to consider it shall include the following actions: 
(1)  The applicant shall complete the application for the proposed designation on a form provided by the director, include all information required, and pay any required fee. 
(2)  The director shall notify the property owners within the proposed district in an effort to obtain such owners' written consent prior to initiation of the proposed designation. 
(3)  The commission shall review the proposed designation at a meeting pursuant to section 2-472 of this Code. Written notice of such meeting shall be sent to the owners of property within the proposed district at least ten ays prior to the meeting date. The commission shall determine if the proposed district meets the specified criteria for designation as an historic district, as supported by substantial evidence in the record, including testimony and documentation of historic, architectural or other significance. 
(4)  If the commission determines that the proposed district does not merit approval, the owners of property within the proposed district shall be notified of such determination, and the process shall terminate; except that any person may appeal the commission's decision to the city council within ten days of the commission's determination per the procedure provided in section 106-77 of this Code. 
(5)  If the commission determines that the proposed district warrants approval, the director shall schedule the matter for consideration by the city council and submit a written report to the city council incorporating the commission's recommendation and its reasons in support of the proposed designation. Such report shall include written documentation of the property owners consenting to the proposed designation if such consent has been obtained. Notice of the scheduled consideration of the matter by the city council shall be provided to the applicant and to the owners of all property located within the proposed district at least ten days prior to such consideration. 
(6)  Upon a determination by the commission that the proposed district merits approval, any alteration, restoration, construction, removal, relocation or demolition, in whole or in part, of a building or structure within the proposed historic district is prohibited, and no permit issued by any city department, board or commission, including, but not limited to, any entitlements authorizing any such alteration, restoration, construction, removal, relocation or demolition, shall be granted while consideration of the proposed designation of the proposed district by the city council, or any appeal related thereto, is pending. 
(7)  Any person subject to subsection 106-1387(6) of this Code may apply to the director, on appeal, for an exception. Exceptions may be granted for repairs or alterations which do not involve any detrimental change or modification to the exterior of the structure in question or for actions which are necessary to remedy emergency conditions determined by the director to be dangerous to life, health or property. 
(8)  The owner of any property that is included in a proposed district may elect to exclude their property from inclusion into the proposed district by written request to the director prior to designation of the district. 
(9)  If the city council determines that the proposed district is eligible for designation, but objection to such designation is made by 51 percent of the owners of property within the proposed district, the district shall not be designated and no declaration of designation shall be recorded. Otherwise, the city council may approve the historic district, which approval shall be evidenced by a resolution declaring designation and attached map identifying the district's boundary. 
(10)  A declaration shall be recorded by the city clerk in the office of the county recorder when the city council designates a historic district. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1388. - Criteria for designating a structure of merit. 
For the purpose of this division, an improvement may be designated a structure of merit if the commission determines that it has one or more of the following characteristics: 
(1)  The structure is included in the historic resources survey. 
(2)  The structure was built at least 50 years prior to its consideration for such designation, and meets at least one of the following criteria: 
a.  The structure is a unique or rare example of an architectural design, detail, historical type, or the work of a notable architect, builder, or designer whose style influenced architectural development of the city, region, state, or nation; 
b.  The structure is representative of an architectural style in the city, region, state, or nation that is no longer prevalent; 
c.  The structure contributes to a potential historic district; or 
d.  The structure is identified with a person or persons or groups who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the city, region, state, or nation. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1389. - Procedure for designating a structure of merit. 
Structures of merit may be designated by the commission in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Any person may request the designation of an improvement as a structure of merit by properly filing with the director an application for such designation. Additionally, the commission may file an application for the designation of a structure of merit on its own motion. Within 30 days of filing an application, the property owner and tenants of the subject property shall be notified of the application filing. 
(2)  Upon the proper filing of an application, the removal or demolition, in whole or in part, of a proposed structure of merit is prohibited. No permit shall be issued by any city department, board or commission including, but not limited to, any entitlements authorizing any such removal or demolition, while any action on the application or any appeal related thereto, is pending. 
(3)  The director shall conduct an evaluation of the proposed designation and shall make a recommendation to the commission as to whether the structure merits such designation. The commission shall meet pursuant to section 2-72 of this Code within 60 days of filing of an application to determine whether the structure merits such designation. 
(4)  The decision of the commission shall be in writing and shall state the findings of fact and such decision shall be filed with the director. Any person may appeal a decision or action of the commission to the city council within ten days of the commission's decision, per the procedure provided in section 106-77 of this Code. 
(5)  Upon designation of a structure of merit, as evidenced by a resolution of the commission or of the city council on appeal, the owner of the designated structure shall be given written notification of such designation by the director. 
(6)  A declaration shall be recorded by the director in the office of the county recorder when the commission designates a structure of merit. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1390. - Criteria for rescinding or amending a historic resource, historic district, or structure of merit designation. 
The city council may consider rescinding or amending the designation of a historic resource, historic district, or structure of merit upon request by a majority of affected property owners, by a recommendation of the commission, or by motion of a majority of the city council. In rescinding the designation of a historic resource, historic district or structure of merit the city council shall determine that the historic resource, historic district, or structure of merit no longer meets the designation criteria due to any of the following findings of fact that: 
(1)  Destruction of the historic resource or structure of merit through a catastrophic event has rendered the historic resource or structure of merit a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare; 
(2)  The historic resource, historic district or structure of merit no longer conforms to any of the criteria identified in section 106-1385 of this Code; 
(3)  There is a clear and convincing evidence that the historic significance of the historic resource, historic district or structure of merit has diminished and is no longer significant; or 
(4)  The historic resource or structure of merit cannot be restored, rehabilitated, stabilized or renovated for any use permitted in the zone in which it is located without causing an economic hardship disproportionate to the historic value of the historic resource or structure of merit as substantiated by clear and convincing evidence. Proof of economic hardship shall require a showing that the cost of stabilization of the historic fabric of the property or properties exceeds the appraised value as determined by a qualified appraiser of the historic improvements on the site or in the district through a hardship waiver application. If the appraised value of the historic improvements on a historic site is less than 75 percent of the average value of similarly sized buildings within a 500-foot radius, the average appraised value of property improvements in the radius area shall be used. For properties where neighborhood standards are not comparable, standard real estate practice comparable worth studies shall be produced to justify the burden of stabilization as compared to property value. The city council shall consider the value of property tax incentives allowed by this division and other benefits as may be available for historic preservation or stabilization in determining if economic hardship exists to the extent that removal of the designation status of an historic resource is warranted. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1391. - Procedure for rescinding or amending historic resource, historic district or structure of merit designation. 
Upon the request of a majority of the affected property owners, or upon a recommendation of the commission, or by a motion of the majority of the city council, the procedure for city council consideration of a rescission or amendment of a historic resource or district designation shall include the following steps: 
(1)  The applicant shall complete the application on a form provided by the director, include all information required, and pay any required fee. 
(2)  The director shall notify the owner(s) of all affected property in an effort to obtain such owners' written consent prior to consideration of the proposed rescission or amendment of an historic resource, historic district or structure of merit designation. 
(3)  The commission shall review the proposed rescission or amendment at a meeting pursuant to section 2-472 of this Code. Written notice of such meeting shall be sent to the owners of all affected property or district, and to all owners of property within 500 feet of the affected property, at least ten days prior to the meeting date. The commission shall determine if the proposed rescission or amendment meets the criteria for rescission of an historic resource, historic district or structure of merit designation as specified per section 106-1388 of this Code, and as supported by substantial evidence in the record. 
(4)  If the commission determines that the proposed rescission or amendment does not merit approval, the owners of all affected property shall be notified of such determination, and the process shall terminate; except that any person may appeal the commission's decision to the city council within ten days of the commission's determination per the procedure provided in section 106-77 of this Code. 
(5)  If the commission determines that the proposed rescission warrants approval, the director shall schedule the matter for consideration by the city council and submit a written report to city council incorporating the commission's recommendation and its reasons in support of the proposed rescission. Such report shall include written documentation of the property owners consenting to the proposed rescission if such consent has been obtained. Notice of the scheduled consideration of the matter by the city council shall be provided to the applicant, to the owners of all affected property, and to the owners of all property within 500 feet of any affected property or district at least ten (10) days prior to such consideration. 
(6)  If the city council approves the proposed rescission or amendment, it shall make findings of fact and determinations in writing subject to the requirements of California Environmental Quality Act. The city clerk shall record the declaration in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1392. - Certificate of appropriateness and certificate of no effect. 
(a)  Any person, owner or entity applying for a building permit or any other permit for exterior alteration, relocation or development of a structure designated as a historic resource or a contributing structure, and for interior alteration of a structure with a designated interior historic resource, shall apply for and obtain a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of no effect. The applicant shall complete the application on a form provided by the director, include all information required, and pay any required fee. 
(b)  The provisions for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of no effect shall not be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair which does not change the design, materials, or architectural elements or site features of a historic resource. Selected activities are exempt from the review procedures, including interior remodeling (unless the interior of the structure is designated as a historic resource), exterior painting, and the repair of exterior walls with materials and finishes to match the existing walls. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1393. - Criteria and procedure for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  The review and decision on the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness will be undertaken by the commission. The director shall review the application, deem it complete, and then schedule the item for consideration by the commission. 
(b)  The director shall review the application using the Secretary's Standards and make a recommendation to the commission. In analyzing the project's conformance with the building code provisions, the state historical building code may be applied to the project. 
(c)  The property which is the subject of review for a certificate of appropriateness shall be posted with a notice of such pending application at least ten days prior to the commission review. The posting shall consist of a sign that states "Notice of Pending Application" and include the nature of the request, the location of the property, and the time and place of the scheduled meeting. The location of the posting on the site, the number of postings, and the size of the posting shall be determined by the director. 
(d)  At a scheduled meeting, the commission shall approve, deny, approve with conditions, or continue the application with specific direction for additional information needed to render a decision to approve or deny the application. Any person may appeal a decision or action of the commission to the city council within ten days of the commission's decision, per the procedure provided in section 106-77 of this Code. 
(e)  A certificate of appropriateness shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless work is started within that time. No changes shall be made to the approved plans after the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness without resubmittal to the director and determination of the necessary approval process for the proposed changes. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1394. - Process for revocation of certificate of appropriateness. 
Revocation proceedings may be initiated upon a motion by the commission or city council. Once revocation proceedings have been initiated, all work being done in reliance upon such certificate or associated permits shall be immediately suspended until a final determination is made regarding the revocation. The decision to revoke a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by the commission at a meeting pursuant to section 2-72 of this Code. A certificate of appropriateness may be revoked or modified for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Noncompliance with any terms or conditions of the certificate of appropriateness; 
(2)  Noncompliance with any provisions of this division; or 
(3)  A finding of fraud or misrepresentation used in the process of obtaining the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1395. - Criteria and procedure for issuance of a certificate of no effect. 
(a)  The director shall issue a certificate of no effect only after all of the following findings of fact are made in a positive manner: 
(1)  It is determined that the work is minor and clearly meets the applicable city design guidelines; 
(2)  Modifications to the proposed work requested by the city are agreed to by the applicant; 
(3)  The proposed work will not diminish, eliminate or adversely affect the character of the historic resource. 
(b)  No changes shall be made to the approved plans for which a certificate of no effect was issued without resubmitting to the director for approval of the changes. 
(c)  If the director determines that the proposed work is not eligible for a certificate of no effect, then the applicant must apply for and obtain a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1396. - Hardship waiver. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to address circumstances in which the applicant for a proposed project to alter or demolish, in whole or in part, a historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit, asserts that full compliance with all of the requirements of this division would create an undue economic hardship, or is infeasible for other specific reasons. Under such circumstances, a project feasibility assessment shall be required to determine the nature and extent of the economic or other hardship, and to assess the impact of the proposed project on the community's historic resources. A hardship waiver of specified requirements of this division for the proposed project may be approved subject to the standards and procedures in this section. 
(b)  Criteria for approval of a hardship waiver. 
(1)  For an income producing property that is an historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit, the basis for approval of a hardship waiver exempting a project to alter or demolish the property, in whole or in part, from full compliance with the requirements of this division shall be that a reasonable rate of return cannot be obtained from the property if altered in a manner consistent with the requirements of this division, or in its present condition, and that the proposed project will not have a significant adverse impact on the community's historic resources. 
(2)  For a non-income producing property that is an historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit, the basis for approval of a hardship waiver exempting a project to alter or demolish the property, in whole or in part, from full compliance with the requirements of this division shall be that the property no longer provides beneficial public, private or institutional benefit to the community, and that that the proposed project will not have a significant adverse impact on the community's historic resources. Non-income producing properties shall consist of owner-occupied dwellings or properties owned by institutional, non-profit organizations, or public entities. 
(3)  The following circumstances shall not be considered as contributing to the basis for approval of a hardship waiver: 
a.  Willful or negligent acts by the property owners or managers; 
b.  Purchase of the property for substantially more than market value; 
c.  Failure to perform ordinary maintenance and repairs; 
d.  Failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants; 
e.  Failure to provide normal tenant improvements; or 
f.  Failure to accept an offer of purchase of the property at fair market value from a party willing to dedicate a conservation easement for the preservation of the property. 
(c)  Procedures for approval of a hardship waiver. 
(1)  Application: The applicant shall complete the application provided by the director, include all information required, and pay any required fee. The property owner seeking a project approval under a hardship waiver must provide information as necessary to support the application for a hardship determination. The director shall maintain a written policy statement identifying the types of submittal materials required for the consideration of a hardship waiver. Different submittal materials may be required depending upon the property's use and circumstances. Necessary studies, evaluations and the compilation of information as required by the director shall be provided at the waiver applicant's expense. 
(2)  Review process: Upon receiving an application for a hardship waiver, the director shall provide a written response describing the submittal materials required to consider the request pursuant to the following procedure: 
a.  Upon receipt of an application and required submittal materials, the director shall determine its completeness. If the director determines that the application is not complete, the applicant will be notified in writing as to the deficiencies. The director will take no further steps to process the application until the deficiencies have been remedied. 
b.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the director shall conduct an evaluation of the proposed designation and shall make a recommendation to the commission as to whether a hardship waiver is justified for the proposed project. The commission shall meet pursuant to section 2-72 of this Code to consider whether a hardship waiver is justified for the proposed project. If the proposed project is to demolish, in whole or in part, a historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit, all property owners within 500 feet of the project location shall be notified at least ten days prior to the meeting. 
c.  If the commission determines that a hardship waiver is not justified for the proposed project, the project applicant and all owners of the subject property shall be notified of such determination, and the process shall terminate; except that any person may appeal the commission's decision to the city council within ten days of the commission's determination, per the procedure provided in section 106-77 of this Code. 
d.  If the commission determines that a hardship waiver for the proposed project is justified, or justified with conditions, the director shall schedule the matter for consideration by the city council and submit a written report to the city council incorporating the commission's recommendation and its reasons in support of the proposed hardship waiver. If the proposed project is to demolish, in whole or in part, a historic resource, contributing structure or structure of merit, all property owners within 500 feet of the project location shall be notified at least ten days prior to the meeting. 
e.  If the city council approves, or approves with conditions, a hardship waiver for a proposed project, it shall make findings of fact and determinations in writing subject to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
f.  If a hardship waiver is approved for a project to demolish, in whole or in part, a historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit, the project applicant may be required to take measures including, but not limited to, the following prior to any demolition: 
1.  Document the site, structures, buildings or objects that are to be demolished, using the Historic American Buildings Survey and/or the Historic American Engineering Record standards when determined to be applicable by the director; and 
2.  Salvage building materials, architectural elements or other features deemed valuable for other preservation or restoration activities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1397. - Ordinary maintenance and repair of a historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent: 
(1)  The ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit that does not involve a change in design, alteration or appearance thereof; or 
(2)  The repair of an unsafe or dangerous condition pursuant to section 106-1398 of this Code. Every historic resource and contributing structure shall be maintained in good repair by the owner in order to preserve it against decay and deterioration to the extent practicable. 
(3)  An environmental assessment pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1398. - Unsafe or dangerous conditions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the director may authorize permits to alter, restore, construct, demolish, relocate, remove or significantly alter an historic resource, a contributing structure, or a structure of merit for the purpose of remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property. In such cases, no certificate of appropriateness from the commission shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1399. - Construction-based incentives. 
In addition to any other incentive of federal or state law, owners of properties designated as historic resources may apply to the director for the following: 
(1)  Building permit fee waiver. Building permit fees (excluding fees covering structural plan check, school fees and associated costs) shall be waived for construction work that is determined by the director to preserve or enhance the historical features of a building that is designated as a historic resource. 
(2)  State Historical Building Code. Whenever applicable, the property owner may elect to use the State Historical Building Code for alteration, restoration, new construction, removal, relocation, or demolition of a historic resource, in any case which the building official determines that such use of the code does not endanger the public health or safety, and such action is necessary for the continued preservation of an historic resource. Such use of the code is subject to construction work undertaken for historical resources pursuant to the secretary's standards, and that has already been reviewed and approved by the commission and/or city council in conjunction with a certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  Parking reduction for historic resources. Addition of floor area to a residential building designated as an historic resource of up to 25 percent shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection 106-822(a) of this Code if such addition is determined by the director to preserve or enhance the historical features of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1400. - Financial incentive. 
In addition to any other incentive of federal or state law, owners of properties designated as historic resources or contributing structures may apply to the director for a Mills Act contract. 
(1)  Mills Act Contract Application. All applications shall be filed with the director. The applicant is encouraged to confer with the director prior to application submittal. All applications shall include all of the following: 
a.  A copy of an updated title report for the property; 
b.  A rehabilitation plan which lists the work to be completed within the ten year contract period, including cost estimates and the year in which the work will be completed; 
c.  A financial analysis form showing current property taxes and estimated taxes for the property under a Mills Act contract; and 
d.  Required fees, as set by city council resolution. 
(2)  Mills Act Contract Requirements. Mills Act contracts shall comply with the provisions listed in section 50281 of the California Government Code, which includes, but is not limited to, the following contract terms: 
a.  The term of the contract shall be for a minimum of ten years. 
b.  The owner shall comply with the Secretary's Standards and the State Historic Building Code for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring and reconstructing historic structures. 
c.  The owner shall agree to periodic inspections to determine the owner's compliance with the contract. 
d.  The contract shall be binding upon, and inure to the benefit of, all successors in interest of the owner. 
e.  The director shall provide written notice of the contract to the office of historic preservation within 180 days of entering into the contract. 
(3)  Mills Act Contract Procedure. 
a.  The director shall determine the completeness of an application within 30 days of receipt. Once an application is deemed complete, the director shall seek a recommendation by the commission. 
b.  The commission shall make a recommendation in writing and transmit such to the city council, the property owner(s), and the applicant. 
c.  The city council, within 60 days of receipt of the recommendation from the commission, shall approve or deny the application and shall notify the applicant of the city council's decision within ten days. 
(4)  Mills Act Contract Non-Renewal. A Mills Act contract shall be a minimum ten (10) year contract that automatically renews annually. Either party may file a request for non-renewal by written notice. 
(5)  Mills Act Contract Cancellation. A Mills Act contract may be cancelled or modified if due to: 
a.  Owner's written request to the director at any time; 
b.  Noncompliance with any terms or conditions of the contract; 
c.  Noncompliance with any provision of division; or 
d.  A finding of misrepresentation or fraud used in the process of obtaining the contract. 
(6)  Mills Act Contract Cancellation Procedure. Cancellation proceedings may be initiated by any member of the commission. 
a.  Once cancellation proceedings have been initiated, the commission shall make a recommendation to the city council and the property owner. 
b.  The city council, within 90 days of initiation of the proceedings, shall cancel or continue the contract. 
c.  The property owner shall be notified of the city council's decision within ten days of a determination on the contract. 
(7)  Mills Act Contract Cancellation Fee. If a Mills Act contract is cancelled, a cancellation fee equal to 12.5 percent of the current assessed fair market value of the property, as determined by the county assessor as though the property were free of the contractual restriction, shall be paid to the county auditor, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50286 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1401. - Conservation easements. 
Conservation easements for historic resources may be acquired by the city or by a third party through purchase, donation or condemnation. A conservation easement would include any recorded easement, restriction, covenant or condition designed to preserve or maintain the significant features of such historic resource. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1402. - Redevelopment project areas. 
The provisions of a disposition and development agreement or owner participation agreement, approved and entered into by the redevelopment agency, may supersede the provisions of this division, exclusive of any environmental review pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1403. - CEQA time extensions. 
Any time periods set forth in this division may be extended by the director as necessary to comply with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1404. - Structure demolitions and relocations. 
(a)  Designated structures. A structure designated as an historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit shall not be demolished or relocated unless the city council, pursuant to the procedure for approval of a hardship waiver, and subsequent to a recommendation by the commission, makes one or more of the following findings of fact at a public hearing: 
(1)  Based upon sufficient evidence, including evidence provided by the applicant, the property retains no reasonable economic use, taking into account the condition of the structure, its location, the current market value, and the costs of rehabilitation to meet the requirements of the building code or other city, state or federal law. 
(2)  That the demolition or relocation of the structure is necessary to proceed with a project consistent with and supportive of identified goals and objectives of the general plan, and the demolition of the structure will not have a significant effect on the achievement of the purposes of this division or the potential effect is outweighed by the benefits of the new project. 
(3)  In the case of an application for a permit to relocate, that the structure may be moved without destroying its historic or architectural integrity and importance. 
(4)  That the demolition or relocation of the historic resource is necessary to protect or to promote the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city, including the need to eliminate or avoid blight or nuisance. 
(b)  Undesignated structures. Prior to the issuance of a permit pursuant to section 18-31 in article II of chapter 18 of this Code for the demolition or relocation of any structure that is not designated as a historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit, the director within 30 days of receipt of a permit request to demolish or relocate such a structure shall determine whether the structure has potential for designation as an historic resource based on the criteria for such designation in this division. If the director determines that such potential exists, the structure shall not be demolished or relocated unless and until an environmental assessment is completed pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act. This will entail the preparation of an Initial Study to determine whether an environmental impact report or a negative declaration must be prepared by the city in conjunction with any such demolition. The cost of conducting this environmental assessment shall be borne entirely by the applicant for the demolition permit. If an environmental impact report is completed and it documents that demolition of the structure would have a significant effect on the environment, the structure shall not be demolished or relocated unless the city council, pursuant to the procedure for approval of a hardship waiver, and subsequent to a recommendation by the commission, makes one or more of the following findings of fact at a public hearing: 
(1)  Based upon sufficient evidence, including evidence provided by the applicant, the property retains no reasonable economic use, taking into account the condition of the structure, its location, the current market value, and the costs of rehabilitation to meet the requirements of the building code or other city, state or federal law; 
(2)  That the demolition or relocation of the structure is necessary to proceed with a project consistent with and supportive of identified goals and objectives of the general plan, and the demolition of the structure will not have a significant effect on the achievement of the purposes of this division or the potential effect is outweighed by the benefits of the new project; 
(3)  In the case of an application for a permit to relocate, that the structure may be moved without destroying its historic or architectural integrity and importance; or, 
(4)  That the demolition or relocation of the structure is necessary to protect or to promote the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city, including the need to eliminate or avoid blight or nuisance. 
(c)  Demolition by neglect of an historic resource, contributing structure, or structure of merit is prohibited. 
(d)  Demolition or relocation of any structure in violation of this section may be subject to criminal prosecution by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1405. - Decisions and general findings. 
The commission shall not approve applications or proposed designations submitted pursuant to the provisions of this division unless the commission makes one or more of the following findings concerning the proposed application, as it may have been conditioned or modified: 
(1)  The project is consistent with the secretary's standards and the purposes of this division. 
(2)  The project is not consistent with the secretary's standards due to economic hardship or economic infeasibility that has been proven by the project applicant, but the project is generally consistent with, and supportive of, the goals and policies of the general plan and the purposes of this division. 
(3)  The project is not consistent with the secretary's standards, but it is consistent with and supportive of identified goals and objectives of the general plan; and the project is either generally consistent with, and supportive of, the purposes of this division, or if not, the benefits of the project and furthering the identified goals and policies of the general plan justify the project's inconsistency with any purpose of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1406. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any determination, interpretation, decision, judgment or similar action taken by the director under this division may appeal such action to the commission. Any person aggrieved in a similar manner by any action taken by the commission may appeal such action to the city council. The city council by a majority vote may initiate an appeal to the city council of any action taken by the commission. Otherwise, any appeals made pursuant to this section shall be filed per the procedure provided in section 106-77 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1407. - Fees. 
The city council shall by resolution prescribe fees for all applications, reviews and appeals authorized by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-1408. - Enforcement. 
A violation of any provision of this division is expressly prohibited and is punishable pursuant to section 1-53 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 11-17-2008)  
Secs. 106-1409—106-1419. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - DENSITY BONUS 
 
Sec. 106-1420. - Purpose. 
State density bonus law (Government Code section 65915), provides that local governments shall grant density bonus and regulatory concessions and incentives to developers of housing, child care facilities, or for donation of land for housing, where the developer agrees to construct a specified percentage of housing for lower income households, very low income households, moderate income households or qualifying residents. 
(Ord. No. 1628, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1421. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Affordable housing agreement means an agreement between the applicant and the city guaranteeing the affordability of rental or ownership units in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
Affordable housing costs means the amounts set forth in the Health and Safety Code sections 50052.5 and 50053, as may be amended. 
Childcare facility means a child day care facility other than a family day care home that includes, but is not limited to: infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school-age child care centers. 
Common interest development means a condominium project as defined by section 1351(f) of the Civil Code, or a planned development as defined by section 1351(k) of the Civil Code, as may be amended. 
Concessions or incentives shall mean a benefit offered by the city to facilitate construction of eligible projects as defined by the provisions of this division. 
Density bonus means an increase in density over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density of a housing development as of the date of application by applicant to the community development director or his designee. 
Density bonus units means the residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this division, that exceed the maximum allowable residential density for the development site. 
Development standard includes site or construction requirements that apply to a residential development pursuant to any applicable city ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, or any other locally adopted condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation. 
Housing development means one or more groups of projects for residential units with a minimum of five residential units, including a subdivision or common interest development approved by the city and consists of residential units or unimproved lots and either: (1) a substantial rehabilitation and conversion of an existing commercial building to residential use, or (2) a substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in subdivision (d) of the Government Code section 65863.4, as may be amended, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units. 
Lower income households means households defined in section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, as may be amended. 
Maximum allowable residential density means the density allowed under the city's zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan applicable to the project. Where the density allowed under the zoning ordinance is inconsistent with density allowed under the land use element of the general plan, the general plan density shall prevail. 
Moderate income households means households defined in section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, as may be amended. 
Total units or total dwelling units means the maximum number of units that can be developed on a project site under its applicable zoning designation, not including those units added by a density bonus. 
Senior citizen housing development means a project as defined by sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the Civil Code, or mobilehome park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code. 
Very low income households means households defined in section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1628, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1422. - Density bonus requirements. 
(a)  Minimum development requirements. Upon written request by an applicant, the community development director shall grant a density bonus and provide incentives or concessions as provided in this division when the applicant for the housing development agrees or proposes to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus granted pursuant to this section that contains at least any one of the following: 
(1)  Lower income households. Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for lower income households. 
(2)  Very low income households. Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low income households. 
(3)  Senior housing. A senior citizen housing development, unless prohibited by state and/or federal law. 
(4)  Common interest development. Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development for persons and families of moderate income, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase. 
(b)  Maximum development requirements. If an applicant exceeds the minimum percentages set forth in subsection (d), the applicant shall be entitled to an additional density bonus calculated as follows: 
(1)  Low income units. For each one percent increase above the ten percent of the percentage of units affordable to lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
(2)  Very low income units. For each one percent increase above the five percent of the percentage of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by 2.5 percent up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
(3)  Moderate income units. For each one percent increase above the ten percent of the percentage of units affordable to moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent. 
(c)  Density bonus calculation. 
(1)  Density bonus calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
(2)  Only the total units of a housing development shall be used to determine those units to be added as part of a density bonus. 
(3)  For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one development application but need not be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. 
(4)  A density bonus may be selected from only one category, except in combination with a land donation or a child care facility, provided the total density bonus does not exceed 35 percent. 
(5)  The applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus. 
(6)  The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower income households are located. 
_____
(d)  Density bonus calculation table. 
Income Group 	Minimum Set-Aside of Affordable or Senior Units 	Density Bonus 
		Base Bonus Granted 	Each Additional 1% of Affordable Units Adds: 	Total Maximum Density Bonus 
Very Low Income (50% AMI) 	5% 	20% 	2.5% 	35% 
Lower Income (80% AMI) 	10% 	20% 	1.5% 	35% 
Moderate Income (120% AMI, Common Interest Development Only) 	10% 	5% 	1.0% 	35% 
Land Donation (very low income projects only) 	10% 	15% 	1.0% 	35% 
Condominium/Apartment Conversions 	33% low-to-moderate income 	25% 	No Sliding Scale Available 	25% 
	15% very low income 			
Senior Citizen Housing Development 	100% 1 (35 units minimum) 	20% 	No Sliding Scale Available 	20% 
 
Note: 
1.  A senior citizen housing development is not required to be affordable in order to receive a density bonus. However, 100% of the units in the development (35 units minimum) must be restricted as senior housing. 
(e)  Sample calculation of a density bonus. 
	Very Low Income (50% AMI) 	Lower Income (80% AMI) 	Moderate Income (120% AMI) 	Senior Housing 
Initial Project Size (Total Units) 	20 units 	20 units 	20 units 	35 units 
Affordable Units 	5% 	10% 	10% 	100% 
Density Bonus Qualified 	20% 	20% 	5% 	20% 
Project Units 	24 units 	24 units 	21 units 	42 units 
Distribution of Project Units 	1 Very Low Income 
23 Market-Rate 	2 Lower Income 
22 Market-Rate 	2 Moderate Income 
19 Market-Rate 	42 units 1 
 
Note: 
1.  A senior citizen housing development is not required to be affordable in order to receive a density bonus. However, 100% of the units in the development (35 units minimum) must be restricted as senior housing. 
_____
(f)  Land donation requirements. An applicant for a tentative map, parcel map or any other discretionary approval required to construct a residential development in the city shall receive a 15 percent density bonus above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the residential development when the applicant donates land to the city as provided in this section. This 15-percent bonus shall be in addition to any other density bonus provided for in this section, up to a total combined density bonus of 35-percent. Applicants are eligible for the 15-percent land donation density bonus if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant shall donate and transfer land to the city prior to approval of the final map or other discretionary approval required for the residential development. 
(2)  The transferred land shall have the appropriate acreage and zoning classification to permit development of affordable housing for very low income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development. 
(3)  The transferred land shall be at least one acre or of sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 residential units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned with appropriate development standards for development at the density described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of section 65583.2 of the Government Code. 
(4)  The transferred land shall be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. 
(5)  The transferred land and the very low income units constructed shall have a deed restriction recorded with the county recorder, to ensure continued affordability of the units. The deed restriction must be recorded on the property at the time of transfer. 
(6)  The transferred land shall be conveyed in fee simple to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. 
(7)  The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed residential development, or no more than approximately one-quarter mile from the boundary of the qualified project, if the city so approves. 
(8)  No later than the date of approval of the final map or other discretionary approval required for the residential development the transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land. 
(9)  A proposed source of funding for the very low income units shall be identified not later than the date of the final map or other discretionary approval. 
(g)  Child care facility requirements. 
(1)  The city shall grant either of the following to a density bonus project that includes a child care facility located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project: 
a.  An additional density bonus in an amount equivalent to or greater than the amount of the square footage of the childcare facility; or 
b.  An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
(2)  In order to receive the additional child care density bonus, the project must comply with the following requirements: 
a.  The child care facility will remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as, or longer, than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable. 
b.  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the percentage of children of very low income, lower income, or moderate income households shall be equal to, or greater than, the percentage of affordable units. 
c.  Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate child care facilities. 
(h)  Condominium conversion. 
(1)  When an applicant for conversion of apartments to condominiums agrees to provide at least 33 percent of the total units of the proposed condominium to persons and families of low to moderate income or 15 percent of the total units of the proposed condominium to lower income households, and agrees to pay administrative costs incurred by the city pursuant to this section, the community development director shall either: 
a.  Grant a density bonus; or 
b.  Provide other incentives of equivalent financial value. 
The community development director may place reasonable conditions on the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value as appropriate, including, but not limited to, continued affordability of units to subsequent purchasers who are persons and families of low and moderate income or lower income households. For only this section, the following definitions apply: 
c.  Density bonus means an increase in units of 25 percent over the number of apartments to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion. 
d.  Other incentives of equivalent financial value shall not require the city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation but may include the reduction or waiver of requirements which the city might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval. 
(2)  Proposal for subdivision map approvals. An applicant for approval to convert apartments to condominiums may submit a preliminary proposal to the community development department, for review by the community development director or his or her designee, prior to the submittal of any formal requests for subdivision map approvals. The city shall, within 90 days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the applicant in writing of the manner in which it will comply with this section. 
(3)  Ineligibility. An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives were previously provided. 
(4)  Other requirements. Nothing shall require the city to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums. 
(Ord. No. 1628, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1423. - Concessions and incentives. 
(a)  Number of incentives/concessions. The applicant shall be entitled to receive the following number of incentives or concessions in subsection (b): 
(b)  Incentive/concession table. 
Target Group 	Target Units 
Very Low Income (50% AMI 1 ) 	5% 	10% 	15% 
Lower Income (80% AMI) 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Moderate Income (120 % AMI, Common Interest Development Only) 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Number of Incentives 2 	1 	2 	3 
 
Note: 
1.  AMI is an abbreviation for Los Angeles County Area Median Income 
2.  Child care facility: When a qualified project also includes a child care facility as described in section 106-1422(g), the applicant shall receive one additional incentive. 
_____
(c)  Menu of incentives/concessions. 
(1)  Additional density provided the overall density bonus received for the entire residential development does not 35 percent. 
(2)  A reduction in site development standards, including: 
a.  Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions. 
b.  Reduced minimum lot setbacks. 
c.  Reduced minimum private and/or common outdoor open space. 
d.  Increased maximum building height (up to one additional story). 
e.  Reduced on-site parking standards in excess of standards set forth in section 106-1424 (parking study required). 
(3)  Tandem and uncovered parking allowed. 
(4)  Other regulatory incentives that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
(d)  Evidence for concession and incentives. An applicant of a housing development may submit to the community development department a proposal for specific incentives or concessions for review by the community development director or his or her designee, and may request a meeting with the community development director or his or her designee. 
(e)  An applicant of a housing development may submit to the community development department a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards that will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of subsection (d) of section 106-1422 at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by subsection (b) of section 106-1422 for review by the community development director or his or her designee, and may request a meeting with the community development director or his or her designee. A proposal for the waiver of development standards under this subsection shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to subsection (b) of section 106-1422. 
(f)  If a meeting is requested, the community development director or his or her designee, shall meet with the applicant within 15 working days to discuss the proposal. 
(g)  When the community development director grants a density bonus, the community development director shall grant the additional concession or incentives requested by the applicant unless the community development director it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence of any the following conditions: 
(1)  The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs; or 
(2)  The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code section 65589.5(d)(2), as may be amended, upon the public health and safety or the physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households; or, 
(3)  The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households; or 
(4)  The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1628, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1424. - Development standards. 
(a)  Design requirements. Affordable units developed in conjunction with a market rate development shall be of similar design and quality as the market rate units. Exteriors and floor plans of affordable units shall be of similar quality to the market rate units. 
(b)  Location distribution requirements for affordable units. Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the housing development rather than clustered in a single area or a few areas. Location of the affordable units within a housing development shall be reviewed and approved by the community development director. 
(c)  Parking standards. Unless the city's adopted parking standards will result in fewer parking spaces, the following maximum parking standards shall apply, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, for the entire residential development: 
Number of On-Site Parking Spaces 1, 2 	Maximum Number of Bedrooms 
1.0 	1 
2.0 	2 to 3 
2.5 	4 or more 
 
Notes 
1.  A parking calculation resulting in a fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
2.  Parking standards provided in this subsection are inclusive of guest and handicapped parking. 
3.  A development may provide "onsite parking" through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. 
_____
(d)  Other requirements. The granting of a density bonus shall not require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval, and shall be processed in conjunction with the application of a housing development. 
(Ord. No. 1628, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1425. - Continued affordability. 
(a)  Affordability requirement. An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure the following: 
(1)  Continued affordability of all low and very low income units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for a minimum period of 30 years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. 
(2)  Rents for the lower income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent as defined in section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code. Prior to the rental of any affordable unit, the city or its designee, shall verify the eligibility of the prospective tenant. The owner shall maintain on file certifications by each household. Certifications shall be obtained immediately prior to initial occupancy by each household and annually thereafter, in the form provided by the city or its designee. The owner shall obtain updated forms for each household on request by the city, but in no event less frequently than once a year. The owner shall maintain complete, accurate and current records pertaining to the housing development and will permit any duly authorized representative of the city to inspect records pertaining to the affordable units and occupants of these units. 
(3)  The city may establish fees associated with the setting up and monitoring of affordable units. 
(4)  The owner shall submit an annual report to the city, on a form provided by the city. The report shall include for each affordable unit the rent, income, and family size of the household occupying the unit. 
(5)  Owner-occupied units shall be available at an affordable housing cost as defined in section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(6)  Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall be used within five years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of section 33334.2 of the Health and Safety Code to promote home ownership. 
(7)  The owner shall provide to the city any additional information required by the city to ensure the long-term affordability of the affordable units by eligible households. 
(b)  Affordable housing agreement. Affordability shall be ensured by requiring that the applicant enter into an affordable housing agreement in accordance with this division, as approved by the city attorney. The affordable housing agreement shall be recorded by the applicant of a housing development with the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1628, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1426. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Application materials. In addition to the required application materials for the project, the applicant shall submit separate site plan(s) containing the following information: 
(1)  A brief description of the housing development, and a chart including the number of market-rate units and affordable units proposed, and the basis for the number of affordable units. 
(2)  The unit-mix, locations, floor plans and square footages, and a statement as to whether the housing development is an ownership or rental project. 
(3)  In the event the developer proposes a phased project, a phasing plan that provides for the timely development of the affordable units as the housing development is constructed. 
(4)  A detail of the specific concessions, incentives, waivers, or modifications being requested for the housing development. 
(5)  Any other information reasonably requested by the community development director to assist with the evaluation of the affordable housing plan and housing development. 
(6)  The affordable housing site plan shall be incorporated into all sets of plans used in application for building plan check and building permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1628, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1427. - Appeals. 
(a)  The applicant, upon the community development director's written denial of a housing development, may appeal the decision of the community development director to the planning and preservation commission. 
(b)  If the planning and preservation commission upholds a denial issued by the community development director, the applicant may appeal the decision of the planning and preservation commission to the city council. 
(c)  An applicant shall file a written appeal of a decision for denial of a housing development issued by the community development director or planning and preservation commission pursuant to division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1628, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Secs. 106-1428, 106-1429. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
 
Sec. 106-1430. - Purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this division, pursuant to federal and state fair housing laws, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in the application of the city's rules, policies, practices, and procedures, as necessary, to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. The purpose of this division is to provide a procedure for individuals with disabilities to make requests for, and be provided, reasonable accommodation with respect to development standards, building regulations, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the city, including land use and zoning regulations, when reasonable accommodation is warranted based upon sufficient evidence, to comply fully with the intent and purpose of the fair housing laws. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1431. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Applicant means a person, business, or organization making a written request to the city for reasonable accommodation in the strict application of land use or zoning provisions of this division. 
Department means the city's community development department. 
Director means the city's community development director. 
Individual with a disability means an individual who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more of that person's major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of having such impairment; but not including an individual's current, illegal use of a controlled substance, unless an individual has a separate disability. 
Fair housing laws mean the "Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988" (42 U.S.C. § 3601, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required by 42 U.S.C. § 3604 (f)(3)(B), and the "California Fair Employment and Housing Act" (California Government Code Section 12900, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required specifically by California Government Code Sections 12927 (c)(1) and 12955 (l), as any of these statutory provisions now exist or may be amended from time to time. 
Reasonable accommodation means any deviation or waiver requested and/or granted from the strict application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, development standards, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the city, to individuals with a disability, or developers of housing for people with disabilities, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities and provide an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. Deviations may include, but shall not be limited to, requirements for special yards, open spaces, buffers, fences, walls, and screening; requirements for installation and maintenance of landscaping and erosion control measures; regulation of vehicular ingress and egress, and traffic circulation; regulation of signs; regulation of hours or other characteristics of operation; requirements for maintenance of landscaping and other improvements; establishment of development schedules or time limits for performance or completion; requirements for periodical review by the director; and such other conditions as the director may deem necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1432. - Requesting reasonable accommodation. 
(a)  In order to make specific housing available to individuals who have physical or mental impairments, an individual with a disability or representative may request reasonable accommodation, pursuant to this division, relating to the application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, development standards, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the city. 
(b)  Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed at public information counters in the department and building divisions advising the public of the availability of the procedure for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to the public in the department and building divisions. 
(c)  If an individual with a disability or representative needs assistance in making a request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the department will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative. The applicant may be represented at all stages of the proceeding by a person designated by the applicant as his or her representative or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning, or building regulation, policy, practice, or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. 
(d)  A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
(e)  While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. 
(f)  Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
(g)  A request for reasonable accommodation to allow one or more deviations of laws, development standards, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures must be filed on an application form provided by the city, shall be signed by the owner of the property, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation; 
(2)  Name and address of the property owner(s); 
(3)  Address of the property for which accommodation is requested; 
(4)  The current actual use of the property that is the subject of the request; 
(5)  Description of the requested accommodation and the regulations, policy or procedure for which accommodation is sought; 
(6)  Verifiable evidence to support the claim that fair housing laws apply to the individual(s) with a disability, which may include a letter from a medical doctor or other licensed health care professional, a handicapped license, or other appropriate evidence that establishes that the individual(s) needing the reasonable accommodation is/are disabled/handicapped pursuant to fair housing laws; 
(7)  The specific reason the requested accommodation is necessary for individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling; 
(8)  Verification by the applicant that the property that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be used by the person for whom reasonable accommodation is requested and whose disabilities are protected under fair housing laws; 
(9)  The required filing fee for a reasonable accommodation request, as provided for in the city's adopted fee schedule; and 
(10)  Other supportive information deemed necessary by the department to facilitate proper consideration of the request, consistent with fair housing laws and the privacy rights of the individual(s) with a disability. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1433. - Review and determination. 
(a)  Review. The director or his or her designee shall review and provide a determination on an application for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this division and fair housing laws. The director shall have the ability to request any information necessary to assess an application for reasonable accommodation and provide a determination to an applicant within 30 days of the date of submittal of a completed application. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the 30-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. Within 30 days of the date of the submittal of a completed application, and as provided for in this section, the director shall take one of the follow actions regarding a request for reasonable accommodation: 
(1)  Grant the reasonable accommodation request, pursuant to section 106-1433(g); 
(2)  Grant the reasonable accommodation request, subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions, pursuant to section 106-1433(g); 
(3)  Deny the reasonable accommodation request pursuant to section 106-1433(g); or, 
(4)  Refer the determination of the reasonable accommodation request to the planning and preservation commission, who shall render a determination on the application. 
(b)  Tentative determination of approval. Upon submittal of a completed application for reasonable accommodation and subsequent to an application being deemed complete, the director shall prepare a notice of tentative determination regarding the director's intent to approve the reasonable accommodation request pursuant to this division and fair housing laws. The notice of tentative determination shall be prepared and disseminated as provided below. 
(1)  Content. The notice of tentative determination shall provide a detailed description of the subject property, the reasonable accommodation request, and tentative findings pursuant to section 106-1433(g). Additionally, the notice of tentative determination shall include information on the public comment period for the request. 
(2)  Public notice. A notice of tentative determination shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner of record of the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request, and all neighboring properties abutting the subject property within 15 days from the submittal of a completed application for reasonable accommodation. 
(3)  Public comment period. A comment period of no less than ten days from the date noted on the notice of tentative determination shall be provided to all affected owners of property that abut the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request. 
(c)  Final determination of approval. Subsequent to the issuance of a notice of tentative determination for approval of the reasonable accommodation request, as provided for in subsection (b), the director shall prepare a notice of final determination regarding the director's decision to approve the reasonable accommodation request. The notice of final determination shall be prepared and disseminated as provided below. 
(1)  Content. The notice of final determination shall provide a detailed description of the subject property, the reasonable accommodation request, and findings required for approval pursuant to section 106-1433(g). Additionally, the notice of final determination shall include information on the appeal process for all abutting properties that are aggrieved by the decision of the director. 
(2)  Public notice. A notice of final determination shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner of record of the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request, and all neighboring properties abutting the subject property within 30 days from the submittal of a completed application for reasonable accommodation. 
(d)  Denial. Subsequent to submittal and the director's review of a request for reasonable accommodation, the director shall notify an applicant in writing if a determination for denial of the reasonable accommodation request is made. The director shall provide the justification for denial of the reasonable accommodation request pursuant to section 106-1433(g). An applicant may appeal the decision of the director to the planning and preservation commission, as provided for in section 106-1434. 
(e)  Applicability. A reasonable accommodation request that is granted pursuant to this division shall not require the approval of any variance. The reasonable accommodation shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to a residential structure occupied by one or more individuals with a disability. 
(2)  The reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to the specific use for which application is made. 
(3)  The reasonable accommodation is subject to any and all building code permit and inspection requirements of the city. 
(4)  Any change in use or circumstances that negate the basis for the approval of the reasonable accommodation shall require its termination and removal, unless continuance of the reasonable accommodation is approved by the director pursuant to section 106-1433(f). 
(5)  Within 60 days from the date that an individual with a disability vacates the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation, the reasonable accommodation shall be removed in its entirety. 
(6)  The director may impose additional conditions on the approval of a reasonable accommodation request that are consistent with the purposes of this division and fair housing laws. 
(f)  Duration of reasonable accommodation. If a request for reasonable accommodation is approved pursuant to this division, the request shall be granted to an individual with a disability and shall not run with the land unless: 
(1)  The reasonable accommodation is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot be easily removed or altered to comply with all applicable laws, development standards, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures; or, 
(2)  Another individual or individuals with a disability use the property and structure that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request; or, 
(3)  The property owner of record provides a written request stating the reason why the reasonable accommodation shall be retained without the occupancy of the residential structure by an individual with a disability, as originally permitted; and 
(4)  The director provides a written determination assessing the applicant's request to retain the reasonable accommodation without the occupancy of the residential structure by an individual with a disability, as originally permitted. A determination for denial of the retention of a reasonable accommodation pursuant to this section shall require the director to make those findings provided in section 106-1433(g). Subsequent to the director's determination of denial, the property owner of record shall have 60 days to remove the reasonable accommodation from the subject property or comply with the previously approved reasonable accommodation request pursuant to this division. 
(g)  Required findings. A written determination to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the parcel and/or housing that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under fair housing laws; 
(2)  Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific housing available to one or more individuals protected under fair housing laws; 
(3)  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and 
(4)  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies, and/or other procedures of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Sec. 106-1434. - Appeals. 
A final written determination made by the director on a reasonable accommodation request may be appealed to the planning and preservation commission, as provided below: 
(a)  Within ten days of the date of the notice of final determination, an appeal may be filed in writing or on a form provided by the city, pursuant to this section. An appeal shall contain a detailed statement of the grounds for the appeal. 
(b)  Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
(c)  An appeal may be filed by those directly aggrieved by the decision and determination of the director. For purposes of this section, "directly aggrieved" shall mean the applicant, representative of an individual with a disability, or owner of the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request, and those property owners that directly abut the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation. 
(d)  The written decision of the director shall become final unless an applicant appeals it to the planning and preservation commission. 
(e)  The planning and preservation commission shall hear the matter and render a written determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than 60 days after an appeal has been filed, or after an application has been referred to it by the director. All determinations shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken. 
(f)  A notice of public hearing for the appeal shall be mailed to the person filing the appeal and those directly aggrieved at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. The notice of public hearing shall include a description of the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation, the reason for which the appeal is filed, the date of the public hearing, and the location of the public hearing. 
(g)  Within 30 days from the decision and determination of the planning and preservation commission, those directly aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the city council. The procedures that apply for filing an appeal with the city council are the same procedures that apply for filing an appeal with the planning and preservation commission pursuant to division 2 of article 2 of this chapter. All determinations shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken. 
(h)  The written decision of the planning and preservation commission shall become final unless an applicant appeals it to the city council. 
(i)  The filing fee for an appeal shall be equal to half of the application filing fee for the reasonable accommodation request, as provided for in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
(j)  An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 3, 10-21-2013)  
Secs. 106-1435—106-1449. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
Sec. 106-1450. - Findings and declaration of intent. 
(a)  The California Legislature in section 65864 of the Government Code has found that the lack of certainty in the approval of development projects can result in a waste of resources, escalate the cost of other development to the consumer, and discourage investment in and commitment to comprehensive planning which would make maximum efficient utilization of resources at the least economic cost to the public. 
(b)  The city council finds and determines that the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare will be furthered by the adoption of this division in order to provide a mechanism for the enactment of development agreements in order to implement various goals and objectives of the city's general plan and to provide flexibility for the implementation of certain development project approvals for the development of particular projects and to provide a mechanism for allowing expenditures to respond selectively to development proposals, including assurances of adequate public facilities at the time of development, proper timing and sequencing of development, effective capital improvement programming to accomplish the foregoing purposes and aims and the realization of the benefits to be derived therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1451. - Purpose of development agreement. 
Development agreements enacted pursuant to this division are to assure the qualified applicant for a development project that upon approval of the development project by the city, the qualified applicant may proceed with the development project in accordance with certain existing policies, rules and regulations, and subject to specified conditions of approval. Development agreements will also ensure that all conditions of approval, including the construction of off-site improvements made necessary by such land developments, will proceed in an orderly and economical fashion to the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1452. - Authority for adoption. 
This division pertaining to development agreements for the implementation of development projects, is adopted under the authority of Government Code sections 65864 through 65869.5, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1453. - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this division shall have the following respective meanings: 
(1)  Developer means a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of a development agreement. 
(2)  Development agreement means a development agreement enacted by legislation between the city and a qualified applicant pursuant to government code sections 65864 through 65869.5. 
(3)  Director means the community development director or his or her duly authorized designee. 
(4)  Qualified applicant is a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of a proposed development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1454. - Forms and information. 
(a)  The director shall prescribe the form of each application, notice, and documents provided for or required under this division for the preparation and implementation of development agreements consistent with the provisions of this division and chapter. 
(b)  The director may require an applicant for a development agreement to submit such information and supporting data as the director, city council, and other agencies to which the applicant is referred under this division and chapter, which are considered necessary to properly process the application. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1455. - Fees. 
The city council shall, from time to time by separate resolution or resolutions, fix schedules of fees and charges to be imposed for the filing, processing, and recording of each application and document provided for or required under this division and chapter, which fees and charges as then currently prescribed shall accompany each application made under this division and chapter. 
These fees and charges shall be in addition to, and not in substitution of, any other required fees and charges relative to development of the subject property and shall be for the purpose of defraying the costs associated with city review and action on an application. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1456. - Qualification as an applicant. 
Except as provided in section 106-1457(a), only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant includes an authorized agent of a qualified applicant. The director may require an applicant to submit proof of his/her interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the qualified applicant. Such proof may include a title report, policy or guarantees issued by a title insurance company licensed to do business in the State of California evidencing the requisite interest of the applicant in the real property. If the application is made by the holder of an equitable interest, the application shall be accompanied by a title guarantee issued by a title insurance company report and by a notarized statement of consent to proceed with the proposed development agreement executed by the holder of the legal interest. Before processing the application, the director shall obtain the opinion of the city attorney as to the sufficiency of the qualified applicant's interest in the real property to enter into the development agreement as a qualified applicant hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1457. - Procedure for development agreement. 
(a)  Initiation by application. An application for a development agreement may be made to the director in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. 
(1)  Application may be made by any qualified applicant. 
(2)  Application may be made by the city council. If an application is made for a development agreement by the city council, the city shall obtain and attach a notarized statement of consent to proceed with the proposed agreement executed by the owner of the subject property. 
(b)  Contents of the application. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the director and shall be accompanied by a proposed ordinance and development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1458. - Proposed form of development agreement. 
Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the qualified applicant or as authorized in section 106-1457. Any such development agreement prepared by a qualified applicant shall contain the provisions required under section 106-1460, section 106-1483, and section 106-1485 of this division shall also include the following: 
(1)  The parties to the development agreement; 
(2)  The nature of the qualified applicant's legal or equitable interest in the real property constituting such person as a qualified applicant hereunder; 
(3)  A description of the development project sufficient to permit the development agreement to be reviewed under the applicable criteria of this division and chapter. Such description may include, but is not limited to, references to site and building plans, elevations sufficient to determine heights and areas, relationships to adjacent properties and operational data. Where appropriate, such description may distinguish between elements of the development project which are proposed to be fixed under the development agreement, those which may vary and the standards and criteria pursuant to which the same may be reviewed; 
(4)  An identification of the approvals and permits for the development project enacted to the date of or contemplated by the development agreement; 
(5)  The proposed duration of the development agreement; 
(6)  The proposed site improvement and building improvement design standards which the applicant shall use and apply for guidance of city consideration of the applicant's development project; 
(7)  The proposed phasing of the construction, and any public improvements to be required; 
(8)  A program and criteria for regular periodic review under this division and chapter; 
(9)  Proposed provisions providing security for the performance of the qualified applicant under the development agreement; 
(10)  Any other relevant provisions which may be deemed necessary by the director pursuant to this division and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1459. - Review of application. 
(a)  Upon submission of an application for a development agreement, the director shall stamp on the application the date it is received. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of application the director shall review the application and accompanying documentation for legal sufficiency, compliance with technical requirements and may reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for processing. If the director finds that the application is complete for processing the director shall accept it for filing. The director shall cause a written notice of acceptance or rejection to be mailed or delivered to qualified applicant. If rejected, the notice must also give the reason for the rejection. If such notice is neither mailed nor delivered within 30 days following receipt of application for the development agreement, the application shall be deemed filed on the thirtieth day following its receipt by the director. 
(b)  After the application is accepted for filing or deemed filed, the director shall then review the application and determine any additional requirements necessary to complete the form of development agreement. After receiving the required information, the director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation and shall state whether or not the development agreement as proposed, or in an amended form (specifying the nature of the amendments), would implement, be consistent with and in compliance with, the adopted general plan. Any proposed specific plan, relevant city policies and guidelines for development, and the provisions of this division and chapter. The director shall, as part of the review of the application, circulate copies of the proposed development agreement to those city departments and other agencies having jurisdiction over the development project to be undertaken pursuant to the development agreement for review and comment by such city departments and agencies. The city attorney shall also review the proposed development agreement for legal form and sufficiency and shall approve and/or prepare a proposed ordinance authorizing the city to enter into the development agreement for action by the city council upon hearing thereof as specified by this division and chapter. The staff report and recommendation of the director shall include any appropriate recommendations received, and the proposed form of ordinance prepared by the director and approved by the city attorney. 
(c)  Upon the completion of such review, the director shall set the matter for a public hearing before the planning and preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1460. - Contents of development agreement. 
(a)  A development agreement shall specify its duration, the permitted uses of the property thereunder, the density and/or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings and improvements, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. A development agreement may include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions; provided, that such conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the property for the uses and to the density or intensity, height, and size of development set forth in the development agreement and phasing if and to the extent the development agreement so provides. Without limitation as to types of conditions, terms, and restrictions, the development agreement may provide for the phasing of construction of development projects and any improvements with respect thereto, and the development agreement may also provide that the construction shall be commenced and completed within specified times and that the development project, public improvements, or any phase thereof be commenced and completed within specified times. 
(b)  A development agreement shall include all conditions imposed by the city, and may also include conditions imposed by other agencies, and all obligations agreed to by the city and other parties to the development agreement with respect to the development project thereunder including those conditions authorized by law and/or required pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, or the National Environmental Protection Act, and the city's regulations with respect thereto in order to eliminate or mitigate environmental and traffic impacts caused by or aggravated as a result of the development project proposed under the development agreement. 
(c)  A development agreement shall contain an indemnity and insurance clause in form and substance acceptable to the city attorney, requiring the qualified applicant to protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city against claims arising out of the development process; provided, that such a provision does not violate applicable law or constitute a joint venture, partnership or other participation in the business affairs of qualified applicant by the city. 
(d)  A development agreement shall include appropriate provisions acceptable to the city attorney providing security for the performance under the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1461. - Public hearing (planning and preservation commission). 
On the date set for hearing or on the date or dates to which the hearing is scheduled, a development agreement shall be considered at a public hearing before the planning and preservation commission pursuant to the procedures described in this division and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1462. - Review—-Standard (planning and preservation commission). 
The planning and preservation commission may recommend adoption of a development agreement as a method of implementing or providing standards and criteria for any approval of the planning and preservation commission or permits or approvals issued or made by any other city agency, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Rezoning and/or conditions imposed upon approval of rezoning; 
(2)  Issuance of a conditional use permit; 
(3)  Conditions imposed upon approval of a permit after discretionary review; 
(4)  Conditions imposed in connection with the adoption of any general plan amendment or specific plan; 
(5)  Site-specific conditions imposed in any other district; 
(6)  Approval of and/or conditions imposed upon approval of a subdivision or parcel map or maps; 
(7)  The separate review and approval by the city attorney of conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) affecting the subject property where the development project affects, or is proposed to affect, more than one (1) legal parcel, which CC&Rs shall include enforcement provisions acceptable to the city including without limitation the grant of power to the city by the applicant to enforce the property maintenance standards set forth in such CC&Rs as if the city was a property owner party to such CC&Rs. Such CC&Rs shall be recorded against the lands included in the development project prior to issuance by the city of any certificate of occupancy. 
(8)  The formation of any assessment district, benefit district, maintenance district or special benefit district or any other procedure, for the installation of required or necessary on-site or off-site improvements or infrastructure; and/or 
(9)  Mitigation measures imposed upon a development project pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act or the National Environmental Protection Act. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1463. - Recommendation by planning and preservation commission. 
The planning and preservation commission shall make a report and recommendation in writing to the city council as follows: 
(a)  That the development agreement be adopted as proposed; 
(b)  That the development agreement be adopted with modifications, as proposed by the planning and preservation commission; or 
(c)  That the development agreement be denied. 
Any action taken by the planning and preservation commission shall include written findings specifying the facts and information relied upon by the planning and preservation commission in rendering its decision and recommendation. 
The planning and preservation commission shall make such report of its findings and recommendations to the city council within 35 days after the completion of said hearing. Failure of the planning and preservation commission to so report within said period shall be deemed to be a recommendation of denial by the planning and preservation commission of the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1464. - Setting hearing date by city council. 
Upon the filing of its report and recommendations on a development agreement by the planning and preservation commission or upon the expiration of said thirty-five (35) days provided for in section 106-1463, the city council shall, at its next regular meeting held at least three days thereafter on which the subject is agendized thereupon set the matter for public hearing before the city council, and the city clerk shall give required notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing in the same manner and in the same terms as provided in this division and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1465. - Ordinance public hearing (city council). 
A development agreement is a legislative act and it shall be enacted or amended by ordinance only after a public hearing before the city council. The ordinance shall be subject to referendum and refer to and incorporate by reference the text of the development agreement. The development agreement shall not be binding or enforceable prior to the effective date of the ordinance approving the development agreement and execution of the development agreement by all parties thereto. 
Because a development agreement is also a contract which requires the consent of each party in order to become binding, the city council reserves the right to disapprove entering into any development agreement, regardless of the provisions hereof, and the ordinance shall be advisory only and shall not require the acceptance of any development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1466. - Conduct of hearing by the city council. 
The city council shall consider the proposed development agreement and the planning and preservation commission's recommendation together with any additional public testimony at the public hearing on the date set for said hearing or on the date or dates to which such hearing may be continued from time to time by the city council. 
The city council may refer the issue back to the planning and preservation commission for further hearing and recommendation whereupon planning and preservation commission shall file its report on reconsideration of the referral from the city council within 30 days thereafter. The city council may also act on all or any such issue without reference back to the planning and preservation commission. The decision of the city council shall be rendered within 45 days after the hearing before the city council or within 45 days after the receipt of the final report from the planning and preservation commission, whichever is later, unless extended by mutual agreement of the qualified applicant and city council. Failure of the city council to act within the 45 days or extension shall be deemed a rejection of the development agreement. The city council may: 
(1)  Approve the development agreement as recommended by the planning and preservation commission; 
(2)  Approve the development agreement with or without modification; 
(3)  Reject the development agreement, in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1467. - Consistency with general plan and specific plans (city council). 
Before the city council may approve a development agreement with or without modification, it must find that its provisions are consistent with the city general plan and any applicable specific plan and relevant city policies and guidelines for development. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1468. - Notice. 
The director shall give notices of all required public hearings held before the planning and preservation commission under this division and chapter. The city clerk shall give notice of all required public hearings held before the city council under this division and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1469. - Form and time of notice. 
(a)  The notice referred to in section 106-1468 shall contain 
(1)  The date, time, and place of the hearing; 
(2)  The identity of the hearing body; 
(3)  A general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property, if any, that is the subject of the hearing; 
(4)  The location or locations where a copy of the proposed development agreement may be viewed or had; 
(5)  Other information required by specific provisions of this division and chapter or which the director considers necessary or desirable. 
(b)  The time and manner of giving notice is by: 
(1)  Publication at least ten days prior to the hearing at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or if there is none, posting at least ten days prior to the hearing in at least three public places in the city. 
(2)  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to the owner of the subject real property or the owner's duly authorized agent, and to the project applicant. 
(3)  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected. 
(4)  Mailing of the notice at least ten days prior to the hearing to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within 500 feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection (b)(4) or subsection (b)(2) is greater than 1,000, the director, or city clerk, as applicable, may, in lieu of mailed or written notice, provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(c)  The planning and preservation commission or city council, as the case may be, may direct that notice of the public hearing to be held before it shall be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by state law, but failure to comply with any excess notice procedure shall not invalidate a development agreement entered into by the city under this division and chapter. 
(d)  The notice requirements referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are declaratory of existing law. If and when state law prescribes a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1470. - Coordination of development agreement application with other discretionary approvals. 
It is the intent of this division and chapter that the application for a development agreement will be made and considered simultaneously with the review of other necessary applications, including, but not limited to rezoning, variance, planned commercial, or industrial development and conditional use permits. If combined with an application for rezoning, planned development or conditional use permit, the application for a development agreement shall be submitted with said application and shall be processed, to the maximum extent possible, jointly to avoid duplication of hearings and repetition of information. A development agreement is not a substitute for, nor an alternative to, any other required permit or approval, and the qualified applicant or developer must comply with all other required procedures for development approval. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1471. - Time for and initiation of review. 
(a)  Regular periodic review. The city shall review the performance of the developer under a development agreement periodically on a regular basis as determined in the development agreement or by this subsection at least once every 12 months for the term of the development agreement. Ninety days prior to the "established date or dates for regular periodic review" which shall be the anniversary of the effective date of the development agreement, or such other substitute date or dates, mutually agreed to by the qualified applicant or developer and city in writing for such regular periodic reviews, the developer shall submit to the director evidence of the good faith compliance with the development agreement. If the director determines that such evidence is insufficient for the director's regular periodic review, or if the developer fails to submit any evidence, then prior to 75 days of the established date or dates for regular periodic review the director shall deliver or mail written notice to the developer of the developer's failure to submit any evidence or specifying the additional information reasonably required by the director in order to review the developer's good faith compliance with the development agreement. The developer shall have 30 days after mailing or delivery of such written notice by the director in which to respond to the director. If the developer fails to provide such information to the director within the 30-day period, the director shall not find that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. 
(b)  Special review. 
(1)  Initiation of review. Reviews which are other than the regular periodic reviews provided for in subsection (a) of this section are defined as special reviews and may be had either by agreement between the developer and city or by initiation of the city by the affirmative vote of the city council, but in any event shall not be held more frequently than three times a year. 
(2)  Notice of special review. The director shall begin the special review proceeding by mailing or delivering written notice to the developer that the city intends to undertake a special review for the good faith compliance of developer with the development agreement. He shall mail or deliver to the developer a 30-day notice of intent to undertake such a special review within which 30 days developer shall provide to the director evidence of good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. If the director determines that such evidence is insufficient for the city's review, or if the developer fails to submit any evidence within the 30-day period, then within 45 days of giving the notice of intent to undertake a special review, the director shall deliver or mail written notice to the developer of the developer's failure to submit any evidence or additional information reasonably required by the director in order to review the developer's good faith compliance with the development agreement. As with the regular periodic review, the developer shall have 30 days after mailing or delivering of such written notice by the director in which to respond to the director. If the developer fails to provide such information to the director within the 30-day period, developer shall not be found by the director to have complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1472. - Finding of compliance. 
With respect to either a regular periodic review or a special review, if the director finds good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement for the period reviewed, the director, upon request of developer, shall issue a certificate of compliance for such period reviewed, which shall be in recordable form and may be recorded by the developer in the official records of Los Angeles County. The issuance of a certificate of compliance by the director shall conclude the review for the applicable period for which the finding was made and such determination shall be final in the absence of fraud. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1473. - Failure to find good faith compliance. 
If the director does not find, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement, he shall so notify the city council and the developer. The director shall specify the reasons for the director's determination, the information relied upon in making such decision and any findings made with respect thereto. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council on which the matter is agendized, or to which it is continued, the city council shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Compliance. Determine on the basis of evidence presented that there has been good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, in which event the director, upon request of the developer, shall issue a certificate of compliance in accordance with section 106-1472. 
(2)  Failure to find good faith compliance. If the city council is unable to determine on the basis of the evidence presented that there has been good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, the city council shall do one or more of the following: 
(i)  Additional time. Upon receipt of sufficient justification to city council, grant the developer additional time in which to establish good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement at a subsequent duly called city council meeting; or 
(ii)  Hearing. Set a date for a public hearing on the issue of compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement and the possible conditioning and/or termination or modification of the development agreement in accordance with state government code section 65865.1, which public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 106-1474. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1474. - Public hearing. 
The city council shall, within 90 days of the city council's setting a date for a public hearing in subsection 106-1473(2)(ii), conduct a public hearing at which the developer shall have the opportunity to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement on the basis of substantial evidence presented to the city council. The burden of proof of this issue is upon the developer. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1475. - Findings upon public hearing. 
The city council shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1476. - Procedure upon findings. 
(a)  Compliance. If the city council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded and such determination is final in absence of fraud. 
(b)  Noncompliance. If the city council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the developer has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the city council may allow the development agreement to be continued by imposition of new terms and conditions intended to remedy such noncompliance or to be otherwise modified, by the mutual consent of the developer and the city or the city council may unilaterally terminate the development agreement or take other action authorized by Government Code section 65865.1. The city council may impose such terms and conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the city. The decision of the city council shall be final. The rights of the parties after termination shall be as set forth in section 106-1486. 
(c)  Ordinance. Any termination, modification or imposition of new terms and conditions pursuant to this section shall be by ordinance. The ordinance shall recite the facts, findings, information relied on and/or the lack thereof, and the reasons which, in the opinion of the city council, make the termination or modifications or imposition of new terms and conditions of the development agreement necessary. The enactment of such an ordinance by the city council shall be final and conclusive as to its effect on the subject development agreement. Not later than ten days following the adoption of the ordinance, one copy thereof shall be forwarded to the developer. The development agreement shall be terminated, or the amendments to the development agreement shall become effective, on the effective date of the ordinance or as otherwise provided in such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1477. - Certificate of compliance. 
If the city council finds good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, the director upon request of the developer and subject to the written concerns of the city attorney shall issue a certificate of compliance, which shall be in recordable form and may be recorded by the developer in the official records of the County of Los Angeles. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1478. - Initiation of amendment or cancellation. 
A development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the parties to the development agreement or their successors in interest. Any such person may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1479. - Procedure. 
The procedure for amendment or cancellation in whole or in part of a development agreement by mutual consent shall be as follows: 
(a)  Upon receipt by the director of a proposal for an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, a public hearing thereon shall be set and conducted before the city council within 90 days of receipt of the proposal; 
(b)  As to prescribed notice of public hearing, where the city introduces the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the property owner of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least ten days in advance of the giving of notice of intention to consider the amendment or cancellation required by subsection 106-1469(b)(4); 
(c)  Any amendment, cancellation or imposition of new terms and conditions pursuant to this section shall be by ordinance. The ordinance shall recite the facts, findings, information relied on, and reasons which, in the opinion of the city council, make the amendments or cancellation of the development agreement necessary. Not later than ten days following the adoption of the ordinance, one copy thereof shall be forwarded to the developer. The development agreement shall become effective on the effective date of such ordinance unless otherwise indicated therein. 
(d)  Although approved by the city council, an amendment to or cancellation of a development agreement shall not be binding or enforceable prior to the effective date of the ordinance approving the amendment or cancellation of the development agreement and the execution of such amendment or a written consent to such cancellation by all parties to the development agreement or by their successors in interest. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1480. - Failure to receive notice. 
The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or this chapter to receive such notice shall not affect the authority of the city to enter into nor invalidate a development agreement entered into by the city or other action taken under this division and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1481. - Rules governing conduct of meeting. 
All the public hearings under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures and the time limits specified for the conduct of such hearings in this division and chapter. A copy of any relevant proposed or existing development agreement shall be made available for public review at the city clerk's office prior to the date of each hearing thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1482. - Irregularity in proceeding. 
Formal rules of evidence or procedure which must be followed in a court of law shall not be applied in the consideration of a proposed development agreement, its modification, cancellation, or termination under this chapter and the provisions of this chapter shall provide the procedure for such consideration. The qualified applicant or developer has the burden of presenting substantial evidence at each of the public hearings on the proposal and shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in support of the qualified applicant's or developer's position. No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement, its modification, cancellation, or termination shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court on the ground of the improper admission or rejection of evidence or by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect, or omission ("error") as to any matter pertaining to petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court finds that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury resulted if error is shown. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1483. - Subsequently adopted state and federal laws. 
All development agreements shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of the laws of the State of California, the Constitution of the United States and any codes, statutes or executive mandates and any court decisions, state or federal, thereunder. In the event that any such law, code, statute, or decision made or enacted after a development agreement has been entered into prevents or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement then such provisions of the development agreement shall be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with such law, code, statute, mandate or decision, and every such development agreement shall so provide. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1484. - Architectural review. 
Unless otherwise provided in a development agreement, the implementation and execution of all phases of a development agreement shall be subject to architectural (design) reviews pursuant to the applicable provisions of the San Fernando City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1485. - Governing rules, regulations, development policies and effect of development agreement. 
Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, or imposed for reasons of health or safety during the term of the development agreement, rules, regulations and official policies of the city governing permitted uses of the land, governing density and governing design, improvement, and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, shall be those rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the city, in subsequent actions applicable to the property or to the city in general, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property at the time of execution of the development agreement, nor shall a development agreement prevent the city from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations, and policies. Each development agreement shall provide, and it is provided in this section, that this section and the provisions thereof do not apply to taxes, imposts, assessments, fees, charges or other exactions imposed by or payable to city unless specifically and to the extent otherwise expressly agreed to by city in the development agreement, and that all of such shall be in amounts fixed at the time they are payable. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1486. - Rights of the parties after cancellation or termination. 
In the event that a development agreement is canceled, or otherwise terminated, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the city, all rights of the developer, property owner or successors in interest under the development agreement shall terminate and any and all benefits, including money or land, received by the city shall be retained by the city. Notwithstanding the above provision, any termination of the development agreement shall not prevent the developer from completing a building or other improvements authorized to be constructed pursuant to a valid operative building permit previously approved by the city and under construction at the time of termination, but the city may take any action permitted by law to prevent, stop, or correct any violation of law occurring during and after construction, and neither the developer nor any tenant shall occupy any portion of the project or any building not authorized by an occupancy permit. As used herein, "construction" shall mean work on site under a valid building permit and "completing" shall mean completion of construction for beneficial occupancy for developer's use, or if a portion of the project is intended for use by a lessee or tenant, then for such portion "completion" shall mean completion of construction except for interior improvements such as partitions, duct and electrical run outs, floor coverings, wall coverings, lighting, furniture, trade fixtures, finished ceilings, and other improvements typically constructed by or for tenants of similar buildings. All such uses shall, to the extent applicable, be deemed nonconforming uses and shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of the San Fernando City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1487. - Construction. 
This division and chapter, and any subsequent development agreement shall be read together. With respect to any development agreement enacted under this division and chapter, any provision of such a development agreement which is in conflict with this division and chapter shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1488. - Recordation of development agreement, ordinances and notices. 
(a)  Within ten days following complete execution of a development agreement and following effective date of enacting ordinance, the city clerk shall record with the county recorder, a fully executed copy of the development agreement and ordinance approving development agreement, which shall describe the land subject thereto. The development agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the development agreement shall inure to the parties and all successors in interest to the parties to the development agreement. 
(b)  If the parties to the development agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the development agreement as provided in government code section 65868 or this division and chapter, or if the city council terminates or modifies the development agreement as provided in government code section 65865.1 or this division and chapter for failure of the developer to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the city clerk shall, after such action takes effect, have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder of Los Angeles County. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1489. - Enforcement of development agreements. 
Except as provided herein below, a development agreement shall be enforceable by any party thereto notwithstanding any change in any applicable general or specific plan, zoning, subdivision, or building regulation adopted by the city which alters or amends the rules, regulations, or policies specified in section 106-1485 or in the development agreement itself. 
An exception to the certainty intended by execution of a development agreement as expressed in Section 106-1451 shall be when a change to the development agreement is imposed or required not by city initiated action, but rather BY City response to (i) federal or state court or administrative agency determination or (ii) federal or state legislative or administrative agency regulation requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1490. - Severability clause. 
Should any provision of this division and chapter or of a subsequent development agreement be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be either invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this chapter and the development agreement shall remain in full force and effect unimpaired by the holding, except as may otherwise be provided in a development agreement. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted and enacted this chapter and each provision thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the provisions, or the applications thereof to any person or place, be declared invalid or unconstitutional. For the purpose of this section, a "provision" is a section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of any thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1491. - Judicial review—Time limitation. 
(a)  Any judicial review of the initial approval by the city of a development agreement shall be by writ of mandate pursuant to section 1085 of the Code of Civil Procedure; and judicial review of any city action taken pursuant to this chapter, other than the initial approval of a development agreement, shall be writ of mandate pursuant to section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(b)  Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of the city taken pursuant to this chapter shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within 90 days after the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Sec. 106-1492. - Condemnation. 
All and every part of the development agreements is subject to condemnation proceedings and entering into such agreements is not intended to restrict the exercise of eminent domain by the city or any other public agency. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 3, 11-17-2014)  
Secs. 106-1493—106-1510. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 18. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA/CANNABIS PROHIBITIONS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1654, § 3, adopted May 16, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as Div. 18, §§ 106-1493—106-1497. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Div. 18, §§ 106-1511—106-1515. 
 
Sec. 106-1511. - Definitions. 
Cannabis shall have the same meaning as set forth in subdivision (f) of California Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Cannabis products shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.1, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Caregiver or primary caregiver shall have the same meaning as set forth in California subdivision (d) of Business and Professions Code Section 11362.7, as may be amended from time to time. 
Commercial cannabis activity shall have the same meaning as set forth in subdivision (k) of California Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time, and shall include, and not be limited to the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products. 
Cultivation or Cultivate shall have the same meaning as set forth in subdivision (l) of California Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Delivery shall have the same meaning as set forth in subdivision (p) of California Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Distribution shall have the same meaning as set forth in subdivision (r) of California Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Manufacture shall mean and refer to the activities as set forth in subdivision (ag) of California Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis product shall have the same meaning as set forth in subdivision (ai) of California Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act or MAUCRSA shall mean and refer to California Senate Bill 94, as may be amended from time to time. 
Qualifying patient or qualified patient shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 11362.7, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 3, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 1669, § 4, 9-18-2017)  
Sec. 106-1512. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  All adult-use and medicinal commercial cannabis activities, including, but not limited, to the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products, are expressly prohibited in all zones throughout the city. 
(b)  The prohibitions set forth in this section 106-1512 shall apply to all activities for which a commercial cannabis activity license is required by the State of California under MAUCRSA so that no local approval shall be given to any proposed state license issuance of any license listed under California Business and Professions Code Section 26050, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 3, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 1669, § 4, 9-18-2017)  
Sec. 106-1513. - Limited medicinal-only cannabis deliveries permitted to qualified patients or primary caregivers. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in section 106-1512, medicinal-only cannabis deliveries may be permitted only to a qualified patient or primary caregiver in possession of a valid physician's recommendation or county-issued identification card, issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.712, by a legally operating, retailer possessing a valid state-issued M-Type 10 license that is located outside of the city. Such retailers must possess a current and valid city permit issued in accordance with this section 106-1513, as specified below. 
(b)  Deliveries of adult-use cannabis is strictly prohibited. 
(c)  Application. The form and content of the application for a permit shall be approved by the chief of police. The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury, and the following standards constitute the minimum application standards to qualify for a permit to deliver medicinal cannabis pursuant to this section 106-1513: 
(1)  Name, address, and contact information of the applicant; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its directors; 
(2)  Name, address, and contact information of the applicant's business; 
(3)  Current and valid proof of their license(s) or permit(s) to conduct medicinal commercial cannabis deliveries from the outside licensing city and/or county in which such dispensary is located; 
(4)  Upon commencement of the State of California's issuance of licenses under the California Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, current and valid state-issued M-Type 10 license; 
(5)  Acord insurance forms indicating applicant's ability to comply with the insurance requirements set forth in this section 106-1513; 
(6)  Listing of all vehicles, devices, and platforms used by the applicant for delivery of medicinal cannabis, pursuant to this section 106-1513, including the vehicle's make, model, year, license plate number and vehicle identification number; 
(7)  Proof of current and valid California Department of Vehicle registration for all vehicles applicant shall use for delivery of medicinal cannabis, pursuant to this section 106-1513; 
(8)  Copies of a valid physician's recommendation or county-issued identification card, issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.712, for all persons that the applicant will use to delivery medicinal cannabis pursuant to this section 106-1513. All such persons much be at least 21 years of age at the time of submittal of the application for medicinal cannabis delivery. 
(d)  Review of the application. The chief of police shall consider the application, as well as the criminal records, if any, and personal references, if demanded by the chief of police, of individuals identified in the application, and any other results from investigation into the application, as deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(e)  Disapproval of the application. If the chief of police disapproves of an application sought under this section 106-1513, he or she shall notify the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for the disapproval. Notification of the disapproval shall be delivered by first class mail to the applicant. 
(f)  Appeal of disapproval. 
(1)  Within 15 calendar days of transmittal of the chief of police's notice of disapproval of an application, the applicant denied approval may appeal the disapproval by notifying the city clerk in writing of the appeal, the reasons for the appeal, and payment of any accompanying fees. 
(2)  The city clerk shall set a hearing on the appeal and shall fix a date and time certain, within 30 calendar days after the receipt of the applicant's appeal, unless the city and the applicant agree to a longer period of time to consider the appeal. The city clerk shall provide notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing, at least seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the appeal and determine the order of procedure, and rule on objections to the admissibility of evidence. The applicant and the chief of police shall each have the right to submit documents, call and examine witnesses, cross-examine witnesses, and argue their respective positions. The proceedings shall be informal, free of application of the strict rules of evidence. All evidence shall be admissible if it is of the and that a reasonably prudent person would rely upon in making a determination on the matter. 
(4)  The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within 15 days after the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(g)  Grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension of permit. The granting of a permit or a renewal thereof may be denied and an existing permit revoked or suspended if the applicant, permittee, or any individual employed or acting as an agent for an applicant or permittee to deliver cannabis in the city does any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly makes a false statement in the application or in any other reports or other documentation furnished to the city; 
(2)  Engages vehicles for delivery that are not maintained or operated in a manner and in a condition required by law and applicable regulations; 
(3)  Has been convicted of any offense relating to the use, sale, possession, or transportation of a controlled substance; 
(4)  Has been convicted of any felony, convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or does not possess a driver's license; 
(5)  Has been involved in three or more motor vehicle collisions within the year preceding the application; 
(6)  Utilizes vehicles or delivery personnel for deliveries, which are not identified to the city in its application; 
(7)  Fails to pay required city fees and taxes; or 
(8)  Violates any provision of this section 106-1513. 
(h)  Suspension and revocation. 
(1)  If the chief of police determines that the activities of a holder of a permit issued under this section 106-1513 are constituting a significant threat to the public health, safety, and/or welfare, the chief of police may suspend such permit and the rights and privileges thereunder until a hearing officer renders a written decision on the revocation of such permit. 
(2)  The chief of police shall give notice of his or her intent to revoke a permit in the same manner as a notice of disapproval and provide the city clerk with a copy of such notice. 
(3)  The hearing for the revocation of the permit shall be set and conducted in the same manner as an appeal of disapproval. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(i)  Permittee obligations. Individuals issued permits under this section 106-1513 shall have all of the following duties and obligations: 
(1)  Comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws; 
(2)  Obtain and maintain a business license from the city; 
(3)  Maintain, at all times, all licenses and permits required by state and local laws and provide immediate notification to the chief of police if any such state and/or local license and/or permit is revoked or suspended; 
(4)  All deliveries must be packaged in compliance with state law; 
(5)  Any person who delivers cannabis pursuant to a permit issued under this section 106-1513 shall keep a copy of such permit in his or her possession while effectuating any and all deliveries pursuant to such permit and shall make such permit copy available to law enforcement, upon request; 
(6)  Deliveries shall not advertise cannabis, the name of the permittee, nor any other commercial cannabis activities; 
(7)  Deliveries shall be made directly to the residence or business address of the qualified patient or the qualified patient's primary caregiver, upon proof of a valid physician's recommendation or county-issued identification card, issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.712. All other deliveries are prohibited; 
(8)  Deliveries shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; 
(9)  No permittee shall transport or cause to be transported cannabis in excess of the limits established by the state. Until such limits are established, the limit shall be two pounds of dried marijuana or its cannabis product equivalent; 
(10)  All orders to be delivered shall be packaged by the name of the qualified patient or qualified patient if the delivery is made directly to him or her or by the name of both the qualified patient and primary caregiver if the delivery is made to the primary caregiver. All orders shall include a copy of the request for delivery with each package; 
(11)  Maintain at all times comprehensive automobile liability (owned, non-owned, hired) providing coverage at least as broad as ISO Form CA 00 01 on an occurrence basis for bodily injury, including death, of one or more persons, property damage, and personal injury, with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00. Failure to maintain such insurance shall be a ground for denial of an application, suspension of a permit, and or revocation of a permit; and 
(12)  By accepting a permit issued under this section 106-1513, each permittee agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless to the fullest extent permitted by law, the city, its officers, agents and employees from and against any all actual and alleged damages, claims, liabilities, costs (including attorney's fees), suits or other expenses resulting from and arising out of or in connection with permittee's operations, except such liability causes by the active negligence, sole negligence of willful misconduct of city, its officers, agents and employees. 
(j)  Fees. Applicants and permittees shall pay all applicable fees as set forth by resolution of the city council. Applicants and permittees shall also pay the amount as prescribed by the department of justice of the State of California for the processing of fingerprinting. None of the above fees shall be prorated or refunded in the event of a denial, suspension, or revocation of the application or permit. 
(k)  Term. All permits issued pursuant to this section 106-1513 shall only be valid from the date of issuance through December 31 of the calendar year in which they are issued. The renewal process for the permit shall be processed in the same manner as the initial application. 
(l)  Chief of police or designee. Any action required by the chief of police under this section 106-1513 may be fulfilled by the chief of police's specified designee. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 3, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 1669, § 4, 9-18-2017)  
Sec. 106-1514. - Nuisance. 
Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this division 18 shall be, and is hereby declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 731, article V (nuisances) of chapter 1 (general provisions and penalties) of the San Fernando City Code, and/or any other remedy available at law. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 3, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 1669, § 4, 9-18-2017)  
Sec. 106-1515. - Civil penalties. 
In addition to any other enforcement remedies available under the San Fernando Municipal Code, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person who violates any provision of this division 18. In any civil action that is brought pursuant to this division 18, a court of competent jurisdiction may award civil penalties and costs to the prevailing party. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 3, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 1669, § 4, 9-18-2017) 
